 
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 27 JANUARY AND 14 MARCH 2017
Chairman: H.E. Mr. Christopher Onyanga Aparr (Uganda)  TOC \o \h \z \u 
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300634" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC485300634 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300635" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC485300635 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300636" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc485300636 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300637" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc485300637 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300638" C.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC485300638 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300639" -	WTO trade-related technical assistance external evaluation – final report (WT/COMTD/89)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300639 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300640" -	Management response to the external evaluation of the WTO technical assistance (WT/COMTD/90)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300640 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300641" D.	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC485300641 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300642" -	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO – proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300642 \h 9
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300643" -	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate – proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300643 \h 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300644" E.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC485300644 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300645" -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300645 \h 12
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300646" -	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc485300646 \h 14
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300647" -	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300647 \h 14
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300648" -	Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) – Agreements concluded by LAIA member countries under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, for the period 1 January 2015 – 31 December 2015 (WT/COMTD/93)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300648 \h 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300649" F.	communication from the chairman of the committee on trade and development to the latin american integration association (WT/COMTD/W/223)	 PAGEREF _TOC485300649 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300650" G.	work programme on electronic commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC485300650 \H 18
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300651" -	Aiming at the 11th Ministerial Conference – Communication from the People's Republic of China and Pakistan (JOB/GC/110/Rev.1 – JOB/CTG/2/REV.1 – JOB/SERV/243/Rev.1 – JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300651 \h 18
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300652" -	Electronic signatures – Communication from Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay (JOB/GC/115 – JOB/CTG/3 – JOB/SERV/247 – JOB/IP/20 – JOB/DEV/41)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300652 \h 18
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300653" -	Trade policy, the WTO and the digital economy – Communication from Canada, Chile, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, the European Union, the Republic of Korea, Mexico, Montenegro, Paraguay, Singapore and Turkey (JOB/GC/116 – JOB/CTG/4 – JOB/SERV/248 – JOB/IP/21 – JOB/DEV/42)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300653 \h 18
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc485300654" -	Electronic commerce and development – non-paper from Brunei Darussalam; Colombia; Costa Rica; Hong Kong, China; Israel; Malaysia; Mexico; Nigeria; Pakistan; Panama; Qatar; Seychelles; Singapore and Turkey (JOB/GC/117 – JOB/CTG/5 – JOB/SERV/249 – JOB/IP/22 – JOB/DEV/43)	 PAGEREF _Toc485300654 \h 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300655" H.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC485300655 \H 29
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300656" I.	Review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC485300656 \H 29
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300657" J.	election of the chairperson of the sub-committee on least developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC485300657 \H 30
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300658" K.	election of the chairperson of the committee on trade and development	 PAGEREF _TOC485300658 \H 30
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC485300659" L.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC485300659 \H 31

&&
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 101st Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/9/Rev.1 circulated on 3 March 2017. 
&& The representatives of Guatemala and Chile indicated that they wished to make interventions under "Other Business". The Chairman said that he would also make an intervention under "Other Business", concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS

&&
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
&&
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record. He indicated that, if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed.
&&
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	WTO trade-related technical assistance external evaluation – final report (WT/COMTD/89)
-	Management response to the external evaluation of the WTO technical assistance (WT/COMTD/90)

&&
The Chairman said that an external evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance (TA) was carried out in 2016, by Saana Consulting. During the evaluation process, regular updates were provided to the CTD by Norway, on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation. As per the terms of reference for the evaluation, the final evaluation report, together with the WTO management response, were to be presented and discussed in the CTD. The final report of the external evaluation was contained in document WT/COMTD/89, while the management response was contained in document WT/COMTD/90. He welcomed from Saana Consulting Mr. Bernard Wood, the Team Leader for the evaluation, and Mr. Jens Anderson, the Deputy Team Leader. He indicated that, after the presentation by Saana Consulting, the Director‑General would make an intervention. The floor would then be opened.
&& In their presentation, the representatives of Saana Consulting provided a broad overview of the evaluation, including with respect to the objectives, scope, findings and recommendations. It was noted, inter alia, that the objective of the evaluation was to provide an independent assessment of the functioning of the WTO's trade-related TA during the 2010-2015 period. The evaluation was managed by a Steering Committee, consisting of representatives from donor and beneficiary WTO Members. The evaluation team was comprised of consultants from seven countries. Over 2,000 TA activities were covered at the national, regional and global levels, involving about 80,000 participants. The coverage extended to all four TA delivery modes – which included face-to-face courses, e-learning, internships and academic partnerships. The internationally accepted evaluation criteria of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability were applied. The focus of the final report of the evaluation was on the management and delivery of the WTO's TA, best practices, lessons learned, and recommendations. The report contained a specific chapter on the contributions of the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF). The methodology used was centred on a structured and verifiable approach to answering 22 core evaluation questions that were designed to test the relevance, effectiveness, sustainability and impact of the programmes.  

&&
Members were informed that the results of the evaluation were based on four main types of evidence – namely, desk studies of relevant documentation, surveys, interviews, and field missions to a representative sample of beneficiary countries. The evaluation had found that, in the period under consideration, the WTO had made its TA activities more systematic, coordinated and results-oriented through the TA Plan and its support system. Most training components of the planned TA had been largely, and increasingly, effective in their intended results – which was to contribute to the capacities of developing Members to work with multilateral trade rules and negotiations. Internally, however, the planned assistance had not as yet been fully integrated into the wider culture and management practice of the WTO. Finally, as part of the WTO’s strategic vision for the future – with a majority of Members being developing countries – a systematic and professionalized TA programme needed to be valued as a major asset, and part of the core business of the Organization. With regard to the evaluation's specific assessment of the DDAGTF, the key financing role that the Trust Fund had played over the period was highlighted. An overview was provided of the 28 recommendations made by the evaluators. It was noted that six of the recommendations were directed to Members and senior management, while the remaining 22 were directed to the Secretariat. It was further noted that the 22 recommendations for the Secretariat were divided into four categories, which were: (i) participation in training; (ii) technical-assistance instruments; (iii) pedagogical quality; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation. 
&& The Director-General said that the WTO's TA was vital to ensure that developing countries received the necessary practical support to build capacity and skills, so that they could fully participate in the trading system and leverage the opportunities that trade provided. This was a priority for him. While TA was not mentioned as one of the main functions of the WTO in Article III of the Marrakesh Agreement, nor was it initially a major part of the Organization's work, it had over time become a central element of the WTO's activities. However, the way in which this work had evolved had not always been strategically planned. This was because most programmes had resulted from a combination of requests from Members, initiatives of the Secretariat and independent developments – rather than from the implementation of a pre-conceived strategic plan. In this light, the evaluation provided the opportunity for a broader and more strategic discussion about what the objectives of the WTO's TA should be, and the approach to be taken. He next turned to the results of the evaluation and noted, inter alia, that the WTO's TA activities had been found to be highly relevant and aligned to the needs and priorities of the beneficiaries, while also making an effective use of time and resources. Although the results were generally positive, he also indicated that there was always room for improvement. In this regard, he noted that the evaluation report offered some recommendations on areas where the TA work could be strengthened in order to improve the impact on the ground. He cited a number of examples, including with respect to improving communications between all the parties involved in TA activities, improving the effectiveness of the activities, incorporating gender issues, opening at least some training courses to wider audiences, and the need to take a more strategic review of the work. Members were invited to share their views on how to address the recommendations. 
He also noted that, given the size of the TA portfolio, the evaluation had not been able assess or provide conclusions on specific TA activities or programmes. Similarly, the evaluation had not looked into such non-training TA programmes as the Geneva Week, the WTO Chairs Programme, and other outreach activities, or the wider range of capacity-building activities that the WTO conducted. He therefore suggested that further work might be needed to look at the effectiveness of the individual programmes and activities, and to take a holistic look at coordination across all areas. In light of the likely future growth in importance of the WTO's TA, he believed that it was necessary to assess the role of TA going forward, and to explore what could be done better – including through improved coordination, and by working with partners in particular areas. He highlighted the importance of capacity building within the Trade Facilitation Agreement, and raised the question of whether this would be replicated in future agreements. In concluding, he emphasized the usefulness of the evaluation. He informed the Committee that the Secretariat would soon begin preparing the TA Plan for the 2018-2019 period, and urged Members to ensure that the present discussion on the evaluation would feed into that process.  

&& The representative of Norway, on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation, reminded Members that the evaluation had been undertaken independently, and that the findings and recommendations were those of the external consultants. The task of the Steering Committee had been to supervise the process. While individual members of the Steering Committee would make statements during the present discussion, the Steering Committee would refrain from commenting on the findings of the evaluation, or on the WTO management response. After expressing appreciation to those who had contributed to the evaluation process, she indicated that the Steering Committee was interested in hearing Members' views on how best to ensure that the evaluation and its findings would provide guidance for the WTO's work in this area, with a view to achieving even more targeted, results-oriented and efficient TA programmes. A possible course of action in this regard was for Members to form an implementation support group, consisting of donors and beneficiaries, so as to provide oversight in the follow-up to the evaluation.
&&  The representative of Norway stressed the importance of evaluations in assessing the effects of development assistance. For Norway, as a donor, it was crucial to know whether the public funding channelled into trade-related TA was contributing to the intended objective of integrating developing countries, and in particular the least developed countries (LDCs), into the multilateral trading system. Regular evaluations allowed more knowledge to be gained on how training programmes should be managed in order to have the best possible effect. However, evaluations were only one part of the results-based management (RBM) cycle, as continuous monitoring and feedback from beneficiaries was crucial in measuring short-term results. He noted in this regard that the Secretariat had encountered difficulties in getting feedback from participants, and therefore highlighted the need for Members to find a way to ensure that the requested questionnaires and reports were submitted to the WTO. Turning to the evaluation, he expressed satisfaction with the overall conclusion that the WTO's TA was relevant and largely effective. He highlighted in particular the recommendation that TA needed to be recognized as part of the core business of the WTO, and in this regard indicated that more funding needed to come from the regular budget. Norway also supported the recommendation to integrate gender equality into the TA programmes. Continuing the monitoring and reporting on the gender balance of participants was important, although this was only a first step. On the suggestion for a specifically designed course for the private sector, he believed that this needed to be explored further. An online course could be a realistic option to start with. Finally, he indicated that the possibility of developing new training options to follow up on the Trade Policy Reviews (TPRs) merited further discussion, particularly in the context of finding ways for the TPR process to provide additional benefits to developing countries.     
&& The representative of Nigeria welcomed the opportunity for Members to have a strategic discussion on the future of the WTO's TA, and suggested that further discussions would also be useful. He indicated that there were a number of areas in the report on which he was seeking clarification and further elaboration from the consultants. The first area concerned the mention in the report that some divisions within the Secretariat continued to implement informal and uncoordinated TA activities, which made the Organization's total effort less purposeful and accountable. The second area on which he sought clarification referred to the observation in the report that, while training and internship programmes were found to be highly relevant, the overall relevance of the WTO's TA activities beyond these programmes was far less clear. The third area concerned the issue of efficiency, and in particular the report's finding that the way TA was governed and managed within the Organization reduced its potential efficiency. The fourth area related to the issue of sustainability, and in particular the observation in the report that, if the main budgetary and extra-budgetary resources were seriously weakened or made less cohesive, the WTO's technical support capacity would no longer be sustainable. Finally, he expressed support for the suggestion by Norway, on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation, for the establishment of an implementation support group.  
&& The representative of Oman said that collaboration between the WTO and academia had been fruitful in Oman in recent years, in particular as the Regional Trade Policy Course (RTPC) for the Arab region had been hosted by Sultan Qaboos University since 2014. He indicated that the feedback received from the RTPCs had been positive. Oman had also been hosting the WTO Chairs since 2014. He went on to say that the provision of TA in Arabic was an important issue for the region. A solution needed to be found to the absence of Arabic in the WTO. In this context, he reiterated the request that e-learning be provided in Arabic, as a small step towards reaching out to Arab stakeholders. Finally, he highlighted his delegation's interest in the internship programmes offered by the WTO – and in particular the Young Professionals Programme – and expressed his hope that Omani nationals would be able to participate.    
&& The representative of Cameroon supported the view that Members needed to have further discussions on the evaluation and its recommendations. He stressed the importance of the sustainability of the WTO's TA, and the need for this matter to be discussed in more detail. Another specific area he believed required further discussion was with regard to the recommendation for training courses to be opened to wider audiences on a fee-paying basis. In addition, he wished to know what the legal value of the evaluation report was, and what the Secretariat intended to do in the coming years for areas not covered by the report. 
&& The representative of Guatemala believed that the present discussion served as a step towards improving the WTO's TA. With regard to the non-training TA programmes, she expressed concern that, for some of these programmes, the information gathered for the evaluation had not been substantial. She regretted in particular that a separate assessment had not been made of the effectiveness of the academic outreach programme, which her delegation believed was a valuable programme, with tangible effects. In this regard, she elaborated on the benefits of the WTO Chairs programme, as well as the European Law Students' Association (ELSA) Moot Court competitions. She asked whether the evaluators could share information on what their concrete recommendations would be, and their suggestions for gathering information on the impact of these programmes. Her delegation, as Coordinator of the Group of Small, Vulnerable Economies, had also seen the importance of the Geneva Week activity for delegations without representation in Geneva, and wished to know if the evaluators had any concrete recommendations for this activity as well. With regard to recommendation 7 in the report, she indicated that her delegation did not agree with the suggestion to have a coordinating centre for TA. Her delegation's experience was such that such centres often sent out communications in a disorganized manner, which resulted in confusion. During meetings with the evaluators, her delegation had highlighted the importance of improving communication by using the existing channels, including in particular the missions in Geneva. Finally, referring to recommendation 23, she recognized the problems faced by the Secretariat in filling the quotas for certain courses. In this regard, she suggested that, rather than increasing the number of courses offered in Spanish or French only, consideration could be given to providing translations of all the English courses – or at least those courses offered at the expert level.
&& The representative of the European Union outlined the importance his delegation attached to the external evaluation, and to the quality of the TA delivered by the WTO. He noted that, in addition to the significant contributions made by individual EU member States, the EU had donated approximately EUR 20 million – over CHF 21 million – to WTO trust funds over the past 15 years. Contributions by the EU and its member States represented more than two thirds of the contributions to the DDAGTF. Turning to the evaluation report and its recommendations, he expressed satisfaction that the WTO's TA had proven to be effective overall. He also noted that there were areas where the added value was not clear, or where the means used to achieve the end were possibly not the most effective ones. He believed that, when discussing the TA Plan for the 2018-2019 period, Members would need to consider the improvements that were needed, including in the context of how resources could be better targeted. With regard to the call from the evaluation team for TA to be better integrated into the culture and management practice of the WTO, he believed that the Director-General's presence provided a clear signal that this was also a high priority for WTO management. While appreciating the actions already undertaken by the Secretariat to respond to some of the recommendations, he stressed that the success of TA activities also depended on the efforts of Members, and in this regard called on beneficiaries to intensify their involvement. He also highlighted the importance that his delegation attached to gender equality. In this regard, he supported the management response to recommendation 19, and called upon Members to present concrete proposals to help address gender imbalances. In closing, he called for the implementation of the recommendations on the basis of the management response, in dialogue with Members, and for the preparation of regular progress reports. He also supported the suggestion by Norway, on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation, to put in place an implementation support group.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, appreciated that several recommendations from the evaluation had already been taken into account in the 2016‑2017 TA plan, and that others would be addressed in the TA Plan for the 2018‑2019 period. He also welcomed the Secretariat's efforts in reviewing the TA activities and working towards a language balance. Noting that a number of elements had not been addressed by Saana Consulting when preparing the evaluation, he suggested that the terms of reference for the evaluation needed to be updated. He also noted that there was a need for better financial allocation in connection with the identified activities, and that more time needed to be devoted to evaluation work. In this regard, he invited Members to ensure their availability during the preparation of the next evaluation.   
&& The representative of Bangladesh asked the consultants to elaborate on how they believed gender equality in TA activities could be ensured. He also asked for an elaboration of the rationale behind the recommendation to hold workshops on issues relating to which no agreement had been concluded. Noting that internet facilities in many developing countries had improved in recent years, he additionally wished to know how the consultants viewed the WTO reference centres. Finally, he shared his view that the opening up of e-learning courses to wider audiences could be useful.
&& The representative of Nepal expressed appreciation for the TA provided to LDCs, and called for a continued prioritization of LDCs in TA activities. She also emphasized the importance of integrating gender equality issues and the empowerment of women into TA activities. Noting that the current TA activities implemented by the WTO were not sufficient to meet the needs of the beneficiaries, in particular the LDCs, she called on donors to scale up their support.
&& The representative of Vanuatu highlighted the importance of Geneva Week to his delegation, as a non-resident Member. He recalled that, at the Geneva Week held in December 2016, the ITTC had presented some of the findings of the evaluation, and his delegation had expressed concern that Geneva Week beneficiaries had not been consulted during the evaluation process. Nevertheless, he was encouraged to note from paragraph 17 of the management response that further analysis was required on issues relating to Geneva Week. In closing, he shared his view that Members needed to consider how the recommendations from the evaluation would be implemented. 
&& The representative of the United States indicated her delegation's satisfaction with the overall assessment that the impact of the WTO's TA activities was positive. She noted from the WTO management response that action was already being taken to address a number of recommendations, including with respect to gender imbalances. However, in some areas, she believed that greater specificity in the management response would have been helpful. For example, in the case of recommendation 13, the WTO management had responded that the e‑learning staff capacity had been reinforced, but no further details were provided. Turning to recommendation 17, which proposed the consideration of alternative approaches to the WTO reference centres, she asked if the Secretariat could give a more concrete sense of the timelines for the reviews that were to be undertaken, and also provide information on any other planned actions. Highlighting the importance of an effective RBM system, she indicated that her delegation looked forward to updates on the Secretariat's progress in implementing the management response to recommendation 26, including in the context of a comprehensive evaluation of RBM tools and business processes. With regard to recommendation 5 and the importance of senior leadership engagement, her delegation believed that there was scope to strengthen the strategic management mechanism, and looked forward to learning more about the Director-General's vision for this. She also referred to recommendation 28, and encouraged the Secretariat to explore effective ways to increase Members' participation, particularly in the context of feedback from beneficiaries. In closing, she shared her delegation's view that the management response could have been strengthened by inserting boxes for each recommendation, which would help track progress with regard to the means of verification and the status of completion. Finally, she supported the recommendation made by Norway, on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation, for the establishment of an implementation support group. 
&& The representative of Japan emphasized the importance his delegation attached to human resource development in support of the multilateral trading system. He welcomed the positive impact of the WTO's TA activities, and also expressed appreciation for the Secretariat's efforts to improve the effectiveness and operation of these activities through an RBM approach. He took note of the areas identified in the evaluation report where further improvement would be needed, and encouraged open and frank discussions on the way forward. Turning to some specific areas of the WTO's TA, he indicated that careful consideration might be needed on the future of the reference centres, given the rapid and significant advance in TA delivery methods such as e-learning. In addition, while acknowledging the merit of regional or topic-oriented programmes, his delegation wished to know beneficiaries' views on activities such as the Advanced Trade Policy Course (ATPC), which was an effective approach to foster the skills of trade officials dealing with complex, cross‑cutting issues. He also indicated that his delegation welcomed further efforts by the Secretariat in terms of the expansion of self-funded participation and gender equality, but also expressed concern with regard to the high amount of carry-overs in the DDAGTF, and requested the Secretariat to make further efforts for the appropriate and efficient implementation of TA activities within available resources. Finally, he expressed his delegation's support for the proposal by Norway, on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation, for the establishment of an implementation support group.
&& The representative of Montenegro expressed particular appreciation for the gender dimension of the recommendations, and invited the Secretariat to use every opportunity to strengthen the gender balance in the WTO's TA activities. She indicated that the TA provided to Montenegro was in line with its priority areas, which included activities relating to the Government Procurement Agreement, the Trade Facilitation Agreement, e-commerce and notifications in agriculture, as well as participation in the Young Professionals Programme. Noting the importance of ensuring a more efficient and effective use of resources, she asked whether it would be possible for the Secretariat to develop a system to track all the TA provided annually by the WTO to each beneficiary. She believed that this would allow delegations from beneficiary countries to better demonstrate to their Governments the WTO's contribution to trade-related TA, and thereby ensure more effective collaboration with the Secretariat on TA issues. 
&& The representative of Papua New Guinea expressed appreciation for the TA provided to his delegation and other non-resident Members. He emphasized the importance of Geneva Week to non-residents, and indicated the need for caution in taking action on the evaluation's conclusions on this programme, since the beneficiaries had not been consulted. He called for further analysis by Members on the results of the evaluation. 
&& The representative of Senegal supported the intervention by Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group. He emphasized the importance of the WTO's TA, and elaborated in particular on the benefits of the assistance provided to the member countries of the Economic Community of West African States. He believed that, to the extent possible, courses needed to be organized in all WTO languages. The provision of simultaneous interpretation in French and Spanish could also be explored as an alternative. 
&& The representative of Sri Lanka stressed the value of the WTO's TA for small countries like his. He elaborated on the manner in which trade officials in Sri Lanka were able to benefit from the knowledge gained during WTO TA activities, and suggested that a record of participants in TA activities be maintained by the Secretariat, as this would help in determining which individuals were suitable for participation in more advanced activities. He also believed that it would be useful for TPRs to include a description of the benefits of TA to individual Members. 
&& The representative of Australia highlighted the importance of maximizing the impact of the WTO's TA, and ensuring that resources were appropriately allocated. In this regard, he called on beneficiaries to provide feedback on their TA experiences and needs – including by responding to surveys – as this information was particularly useful for donors. 
The response by Saana Consulting touched upon several points. The coverage of the evaluation was elaborated on, and it was observed in this regard that the implementation by some divisions of informal TA activities made it more difficult to have an overall strategic approach. On the question of efficiency, it was noted that this was also related to the need for management involvement, including through the provision of strategic direction. Furthermore, strengthened mechanisms at senior management level had to be backed up by an inter-divisional task force, as laid out in recommendation 5. On the issue of sustainability, Members were referred to recommendation 2. The view was reiterated that the WTO's TA capacity would not be sustainable if the main budgetary and extra-budgetary resources were seriously weakened. It was additionally clarified that the evaluators had been in a position to provide assessments not only of the training and internship programmes, but of the non-training activities as well. For example, paragraph 6 of the report noted with regard to awareness-raising that the evaluation had not been able to trace or measure significant evidence of effects. The evaluation had also found that the overall strategic objectives of academic support and the WTO Chairs programme were unclear, although there was some evidence of longer-term benefits from support to the ELSA Moot Court. No significant evidence on the role or effectiveness of outreach activities to parliamentarians, journalists and civil society had been found, and the evaluation had additionally suggested that alternative approaches to the WTO reference centres needed to be considered.  
In the context of non-training activities, questions relating to Geneva Week and the input of non-residents in the evaluation were addressed. It was clarified that, while the non-residents had not been consulted in Geneva – and were not among those selected for the field missions – questionnaires had been sent to all beneficiary countries, as well as to past participants in TA activities. That being said, the evaluation had found that the aims of Geneva Week were not clearly stated. Similarly, the role and effectiveness of the ATPCs was unclear. On the question of how to ensure gender balance when the proportion of men and women varied from country‑to‑country, it was explained that the evaluators had framed the question in terms of the available pool, which was a way to account for differences across countries. In spite of the Secretariat's efforts, there remained significant gaps in terms of gender participation in TA activities. Finally, it was explained that the recommendation to organize workshops on issues regarding which agreements were yet to be concluded had its roots in the suggestion that such workshops would help to prepare beneficiaries for multilateral discussions on these issues.  
&& Interventions by representatives of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation addressed several areas. Members were informed that a record of all participants in TA activities was maintained, and that the Secretariat's regular reports on TA implementation and monitoring included coverage of the activities which had not been fully addressed by the evaluation. With regard to the suggestion to form an implementation support group, it was indicated that such a mechanism could allow the Secretariat to report in more detail to Members, and would also help to take forward the recommendations from the evaluation. On the issue of gender balance, the need for beneficiary countries to nominate more female participants was highlighted. The request from some delegations for further opportunities to discuss the results of the evaluation was noted, although the presence of Saana Consulting at a future meeting would depend on the terms of its contract. It was observed that the way forward with respect to the evaluation and its findings was in Members' hands. With respect to the non-training activities, it was explained that these had been established in response to some Members' requests. The Secretariat was willing to consult with Members on these activities, including in the context of possibly defining clearer objectives. It was recalled that some TPRs had in the past included assessments of TA, and consideration could be given to restart that practice, if there was demand from Members. Finally, with regard to the requests for the provision of TA in Arabic, an overview was provided of some the issues involved, including with respect to resources, partnerships with other institutions, and the need to develop an agreed glossary of WTO terminology in Arabic. The Secretariat would continue its consultations with the Arab Group on this matter.    
&& The representative of Nigeria highlighted the benefits of the WTO's TA to his country, and repeated his view that Members needed to hold further discussions on the evaluation report. He explained in this regard that the report was still being considered in many capitals.  
&& The representative of Cameroon agreed that further discussions needed to take place on the evaluation report. Members needed to go through the recommendations to see which ones they could agree to.  
&& The representative of India expressed his support for the view that further discussions needed to take place on the evaluation report. He also indicated that the report was not legally binding, and Members did not necessarily agree on all the recommendations. The recommendations needed be reviewed in order to see which of them were agreeable to Members.   
&& The Committee took note of the external evaluation report and the management response, as well as of all interventions. 
The meeting was suspended.
The meeting was reconvened on 14 March 2017.     
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT – WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. On the agenda for the present meeting were two submissions containing proposals for work under the MC8 mandate. He recalled that, at the 100th Session, he had welcomed the indication that Members were holding informal discussions to try and make progress on these proposals, and he had encouraged further engagement. He hoped that some progress could be reported at the present meeting.
-	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO – proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)
&& The Chairman said that the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 had the aim for the CTD to report on development-related work taking place in the WTO. 
&& The representative of India recalled the mandate from MC8 and indicated that it was appropriate for the CTD to report regularly on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies, and to provide recommendations to the General Council on how to achieve better coordination within the WTO on development issues. He requested that the present sub-item remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of Cameroon, on behalf of the African Group, said that his intervention related to the two remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192. He informed the Committee that consultations on the proposals were still ongoing. It was hoped that convergence could be reached soon. He emphasized that the proponents did not have the objective of usurping the mandate of the General Council, as some delegations may have felt. Rather, the aim was to fulfil the instructions of Ministers at MC8 to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD. Recalling that the CTD had been established to serve as a focal point for the consideration and coordination of development-related work in the WTO, he noted that the current reporting structure between WTO bodies fell short of appropriately fulfilling the CTD's overarching mandate. He explained in this regard that relevant decisions taken by other WTO bodies were not being regularly reported to the CTD, nor had the CTD been consulted on a range of development-related issues that had been taken up by these bodies.
In order to operationalize the CTD's mandate, he suggested that other WTO bodies could submit a brief report on the development-related aspects of their work. He went on to provide some examples of the type of information that could be provided to the CTD, including with respect to S&D, the development impact of the elimination of trade-related investment measures, the development impact of the operationalization of the LDC services waiver, information relating to the implementation of Articles 66.1 and 66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement, and information relating to the work of negotiating bodies such as the Negotiating Group on Market Access and the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture. The Secretariat could then put the various reports together into a single document, which would be discussed in the Committee. The CTD would also be able to provide guidance and appropriate recommendations to the General Council and other WTO bodies on any development-related work. This would better link development to trade in a manner that would contribute to the economic development of the WTO’s developing, least developed, and small and vulnerable constituencies. The compilation document would additionally help to address the capacity constraints of many delegations that were not able to participate in all the meetings of WTO bodies. In closing, he emphasized once again the importance of improving intra-reporting procedures and operationalizing the CTD’s mandate by periodically reviewing the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies. 
&& The representative of South Africa supported the interventions by Cameroon and India. As work was ongoing on the two remaining proposals, she indicated that the submissions containing these proposals needed to remain on the CTD's agenda.  
&& The representative of Ecuador expressed support for the interventions by earlier speakers, and indicated her delegation's willingness to continue working with Members to make progress on the two remaining proposals. She also recalled that the latest Secretariat document on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions had been circulated in September 2016 in document WT/COMTD/W/219. The document had been prepared in response to a proposal from her delegation that the Committee had agreed to. She invited Members to make use of this document.
&& The representative of India supported the intervention by Cameroon, and said that he wished to say a few words about the remaining proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. He observed that the parties to Regional trade agreements (RTAs) had several requirements to fulfil under the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. In order to help ensure a timely consideration of RTAs and the smooth operation of the Transparency Mechanism, it was important for the parties to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. He requested that the sub-item relating to this proposal remain on the CTD's agenda.   
&& The representative of Cuba said that the proponents of the remaining proposals were holding consultations. She requested that the submissions containing these proposals remain on the CTD's agenda. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her intervention related to both the remaining proposals. She noted that her delegation had articulated its concerns with these proposals at length – in CTD meetings, as well as in informal discussions with the proponents. Her delegation had been encouraged to hear at the last CTD meeting that the proponents were undertaking some work to revise the proposals, and hoped that the revised proposals would be tabled soon. The view of her delegation was that the submissions containing the proposals should be removed from the CTD's agenda. Members could continue their discussion once the revised proposals were circulated.  
&& The representative of the European Union recalled her delegation's view that the CTD should further explore the positive link between trade and development in order to implement the MC8 mandate. This needed to be based on constructive exchanges on clearly identified topics, in line with the instructions from MC8 to carry out focused work. She recalled that the EU had engaged constructively in the discussion that had led to agreement on the proposal for the Secretariat to prepare an update of its document on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. The Secretariat update had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/219. Turning to the proposals under consideration at the present meeting, she reaffirmed her delegation's view that they did not correspond to the mandate from MC8. While taking note of the intervention by Cameroon, she indicated that it did not address the EU's concerns. Nevertheless, her delegation was willing to engage in informal discussions to make progress. With regard to the issues raised in the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192, she said that the EU was looking for a pragmatic solution. It could not support discussion on these issues in the CTD, as a discussion was already taking place in the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA).  
&& The representative of the Japan recalled that, before the 100th Session, a number of interested Members had had useful informal discussions on the way forward with regard to the two remaining proposals. His delegation was therefore disappointed that there had been no progress since then, and no revisions to the proposals had been circulated. He indicated that his delegation remained open to further discussions, and called for active engagement by the proponents.
&& The Chairman encouraged continued engagement among Members in order to make progress. He explained that the practice in the CTD was to maintain an item on the agenda if any member so requested. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate – proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
&& The Chairman said that, while there were three proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192, the first two proposals had already been addressed by the Committee. The first proposal, which was for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, had been agreed to by the Committee at its 87th Session. The updated Secretariat paper was circulated in June 2013 and had appeared on the CTD's agenda for a number of meetings. As for the second proposal, which was for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO, this idea was now being dealt with in the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 which had been addressed under the previous sub-item. The remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly.
&& The representative of China expressed support for the proposal under consideration, and requested that the present sub-item remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The Chairman once again encouraged further engagement among Members.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the Dedicated Sessions on RTAs of the Committee on Trade and Development. He indicated firstly that there had been one new notification under the Enabling Clause since his last report to the Committee in November 2016. This concerned Egypt's accession to the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, which was notified on 3 January 2017 in document WT/COMTD/N/51. The parties had been requested to provide the data for the preparation of the factual presentation by 6 June 2017. Turning to the agreement between the Dominican Republic and Panama, he informed the Committee that the Secretariat had begun drafting the factual presentation on this agreement. As for the South Asian Free Trade Agreement, he noted that the Secretariat had still not received the data from the parties, which was requested by 22 December 2016. 
Moving to the Arab Mediterranean Free Trade Agreement (Agadir Agreement) between Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia, he said that data had been received from Egypt, Jordan and Morocco. The Secretariat was still waiting to receive data from Tunisia, which was requested by 15 July 2016. In the case of the agreement between the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and Singapore, although a draft factual presentation had been sent to the parties, the Secretariat was still waiting to receive data from the GCC parties, which had been requested by 23 November 2015. The Secretariat was also still waiting to receive comments on the draft factual presentation relating to the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the East African Community, which was sent to the parties in 2014. For a number of other RTAs – namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, India and Bhutan, and Cuba and El Salvador – the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties. He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible. He went on to say that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the CRTA, a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update.
&& Turning to the listed sub-items under the present agenda item, the Chairman said that he wished to say a few words on the first three sub-items. He observed that these sub-items had been appearing on the CTD's agenda for several years. Many CTD Chairpersons had held consultations in order to try and find a way forward, but the situation remained essentially the same. He added that, during his tenure as CTD Chairman, these issues had come up in his conversations on RTA-related issues with the Chairman of the CRTA, and the Chairman of the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR). He had also had the opportunity to discuss the matter with several delegations. Among some of the possible suggestions on ways forward that he had heard – at least with respect to some of the RTAs in question – were suggestions relating to possible joint meetings of the CTD and the CRTA, or otherwise back-to-back meetings. It had also been suggested that discussions on a way forward be held in the context of paragraph 28 of the Nairobi Declaration. He invited Members to consider these observations, and encouraged continued engagement in order to find a way forward.
&&	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The representative of India indicated that his intervention related to the three sub-items under the present agenda item, since the three RTAs referenced in these sub-items had been "dually notified" under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. He noted that the systemic concerns that were raised by China, Egypt and India over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV were pertinent even now, but they remained unaddressed. Some Members had expressed the view that the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 were outside the scope of the CTD, and needed to be discussed in the NGR. The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification. Pointing to the terms of reference of the CTD contained in document WT/L/46, he noted that the CTD was designated to serve as a focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO and its relationship to development-related activities in other multilateral agencies. He added that the Committee could consult with other WTO bodies in addressing the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175. This was in keeping with paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference which entrusted the Committee to review periodically, in consultation as appropriate with the relevant bodies of the WTO, the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and in particular LDC Members, and report to the General Council for appropriate action. In concluding, he indicated that the three sub-items under the present agenda item needed to remain on the CTD's agenda until the systemic and specific concerns arising from "dually notified" RTAs were addressed.
&& The representative of the United States asked whether India was aware that the GCC Customs Union had been notified under GATT Article XXIV, and was on track to be reviewed in the CRTA. He added that the GCC Customs Union had never been a case of dual notification, and in this light asked India for clarification on its position. 
&& The representative of the European Union believed that the legal and procedural questions arising from RTAs being notified under different legal provisions needed to be clarified. She called for a pragmatic solution for the notifications in question, and indicated that any substantive discussion had to take place in the framework of the implementation of paragraph 28 of Nairobi Declaration. However, she noted that a clear distinction needed to be made between the ASEAN‑Korea and India-Korea agreements on the one hand, and the GCC Customs Union on the other. With regard to the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea agreements, she regretted that the parties had been unable to find a solution, although she appreciated the willingness demonstrated by Korea to make progress. She went on to say that the GCC Customs Union notification was a different case. As had been stated in previous meetings, the EU's position was that a custom union could not be notified under the Enabling Clause, and that GATT Article XXIV was the only legal basis for the notification of custom unions. She supported the US in noting that the GCC Customs Union had been notified under GATT Article XXIV, and was in the pipeline to be reviewed in the CRTA. Furthermore, the GCC Customs Union was not an issue of dual notification. The fact that the GCC parties had not as yet withdrawn their notification under the Enabling Clause created doubts regarding the possibility of maintaining notifications under two different legal provisions. Her delegation urged the GCC parties to withdraw their notification under the Enabling Clause. In closing, she reiterated her delegation’s willingness to find a solution.
&& The representative of India referred Members to document WT/COMTD/W/175, which reflected the proponents' position on this matter. 
&& The representative of the United States sought further clarification on the reason why India and a few other Members wished to maintain the GCC Customs Union notification on the CTD's agenda, when it was not an issue of dual notification, and was not relevant to the document that had been referred to. 
&& The representative of India requested that the US provide its comments to his delegation in writing, so that they could be forwarded to his capital.
&& The representative of the United States said that the comments provided by his delegation on this issue had been on the record for several years. He went on to say that he also wished to repeat the points made by his delegation in previous meetings with regard to the second and third sub-items under the present agenda item. These sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. With respect to the issue of dual notifications, he indicated that this was directly linked to the functioning of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs and went beyond the mandate of the CTD. The US was willing to discuss the functioning of the RTA Transparency Mechanism in the CRTA. He also indicated it was up to each individual member to decide how to notify its RTAs, and that a Member should not be pressured to notify its agreements in a particular way. 
&& The representative of Korea said that dual notifications could be addressed during discussions concerning the transformation of the current provisional Transparency Mechanism for RTAs into a permanent one, as well as in the context of discussions on other systemic issues.
&& The representative of China indicated that the CTD was the correct forum to discuss issues relating to RTAs with a dual notification. He invited the Chairman to work with Members to find a way forward.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea 
No Member took the floor under this sub-item.
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)
No Member took the floor under this sub-item.
-	Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) – Agreements concluded by LAIA member countries under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, for the period 1 January 2015 – 31 December 2015 (WT/COMTD/93)
&& The Chairman said that the submission contained in document WT/COMTD/93, which had been received from the delegation of Uruguay, concerned the instruments concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo (TM80) over the period 1 January 2015 to 31 December 2015. He noted that this submission was also referred to in his communication to LAIA, which would be considered under agenda item F. He invited Uruguay to introduce the submission.
&& The representative of Uruguay said that, pursuant to the individual obligation of WTO Members to notify instruments concluded under paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause, in compliance with sections D to G of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs – and without prejudice to notifications submitted individually by LAIA members to the CTD or the CRTA – the submission was an adaptation of the documents previously entitled "Report to the WTO on Instruments Concluded Under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo", which were notified to the GATT/WTO in a consistent and uniform manner. She added that 16 Individual Notification Datasheets were annexed to the document – one for each of the agreements concluded under the TM80 over the period 1 January 2015 – 31 December 2015. These Individual Notification Datasheets were drawn up and approved by the LAIA member countries that signed the concerned agreements, in accordance with the format provided in document WT/REG/16 of 23 November 2006. The signatories of these agreements were ready to supplement in a dedicated session of the CTD the information contained in the various Individual Notification Datasheets with respect to any particular aspect of the agreements, in accordance with paragraphs 16 and 18 of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.
&& The representative of Brazil expressed support for the document. He indicated that his delegation would make further comments on this matter under agenda item F.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation had concerns with the LAIA report being listed under the present agenda item. While some improvements had been made in the presentation of the latest report relative to previous ones, discussions needed to continue in order to determine whether the submission was intended to be a notification. He referred to a room document circulated by the Secretariat in the CRTA, which showed that there were 97 separate LAIA agreements in force. While some of these had been notified to the WTO, most had not. The notification of the TM80 was not sufficient, since the treaty itself made clear that the agreements entered into under it were not modifications to the umbrella agreement, but were separate agreements. The TM80 provided for regional and partial scope agreements, but did not say anything about the specific treatment to be given to a product or class of products by any signatory. In that respect, the new submission was not sufficient in terms of a notification, and could not fulfil the obligations of individual Members. Noting that the document contained information on an agreement to which Uruguay was not a party, he inquired whether Members' questions on this agreement should be directed to Uruguay, or to the parties to the agreement. He further noted that footnote 1 of the document made reference to notifications within previous LAIA reports, and sought clarification on which notifications were being referred to. He asked if Uruguay was making the claim that previous LAIA reports should be considered as notifications to the WTO for the purposes of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. In this regard, he stressed that no notifications of the agreements in question had been circulated. His delegation welcomed a discussion on how the information contained in the LAIA reports could be translated into WTO notifications. However, continued assertions that the LAIA reports had a status as an alternate form of notification was not a productive way forward. 
&& The representative of the European Union indicated that, while her delegation had taken note of the information contained in the LAIA submission, it was unclear at this stage whether the document was just a report, or whether it could be considered a set of notifications. She recalled that, in September 2016, her delegation had submitted written questions to the LAIA countries, which were circulated in the CRTA in document WT/REG/W/109. She urged the LAIA countries to provide responses as soon as possible, as this would facilitate a constructive dialogue. Until the replies were received, the EU would reserve its right to comment on the new LAIA report. 
&& The representative of Australia believed that the new LAIA submission was an encouraging and positive step. However, it still did not meet the expected standards for review, and as a result his delegation could not consider it a notification. He explained that his delegation wished to be able to review the underlying agreements, and not just information on amendments. He also called on the LAIA countries to provide responses to the questions submitted by the EU.
&& The representative of Uruguay said that it was indicated in the document that a notification was being submitted. She requested the US, the EU and Australia to provide their comments in writing, so that they could be transmitted to LAIA. She additionally informed the Committee that the LAIA countries would provide responses to the EU's questions as soon as possible.
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation looked forward to seeing the LAIA countries' responses to the EU's questions. He stressed that any substantive agreement concluded outside of the WTO framework needed be reviewed in an appropriate forum of the WTO, based on factual information and proper procedures.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT TO THE LATIN AMERICAN INTEGRATION ASSOCIATION (WT/COMTD/W/223)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the 100th Session, the Committee had considered a communication from Uruguay, on behalf of LAIA. This communication, from the Chairperson of the LAIA Committee of Representatives, was addressed to the CTD Chairman. He recalled that a lengthy discussion had taken place on the basis of the communication – which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/220 – and he had encouraged Members to continue to discuss the issues relating to the LAIA agreements, with a view to finding a way forward. He had also taken note of the request from several LAIA member countries for a written response. For transparency purposes, his response of 24 February 2017 to the Chairperson of the LAIA Committee of Representatives was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/223.  
&& The representative of Brazil regretted that the Chairman's response did not address the central issue of the notification of LAIA agreements to the CTD. These notifications had been submitted to the CTD on a biennial basis until 2012, and annually thereafter. He said that document WT/COMTD/W/217 included a complete notification list, with document symbols, of all LAIA agreements. He also expressed surprise with the Chairman's indication that, because there was no consensus, the latest LAIA submission could not be circulated as a notification document. His delegation believed that this was a misinterpretation of WTO disciplines which could have systemic consequences. In the whole WTO body of rules and regulations, there was no provision that indicated that consensus was needed for Members to notify elements of their trade policies and measures. While the content of a notification could be challenged, consensus was not required for a notification to be filed. He went on to say that neither the 1979 Understanding on Notifications, adopted at the end of the Tokyo Round, nor the Uruguay Round Decision on Notification Procedures adopted in 1994, contained a reference to a consensus requirement. Both stated clearly that a notification by a Member of a trade measure was without prejudice to views on the consistency of measures with, or their relevance to, rights and obligations under the concerned multilateral trade agreements. He indicated that his delegation was bringing the matter to the attention of the Development Division and the Legal Affairs Division. It was hoped that the Secretariat could confirm the points made by his delegation. If there was a misunderstanding by Members on the scope and requirements of notification procedures, it was important to clarify it once and for all.
He indicated that he wished to turn to the specific case of notifications under the TM80. In this regard, he said that LAIA countries had drafted, approved and submitted to the WTO the Individual Notification Datasheets contained in document WT/COMTD/93, and in previous reports to the CTD. Every datasheet contained the relevant information required in a notification, including the parties to the agreement, the date of signature and entry into force, the description of the instrument, and links to the relevant documents and schedules. The LAIA countries' right to notify agreements falling under the Enabling Clause to the CTD was unquestionable. The ability to do so under section D of the RTA Transparency Mechanism seemed well established. If, as it appeared, other Members saw the matter differently, then discussions could take place. However, it could not be said that the agreements concluded under the TM80 had not been notified, since all necessary information had been duly transmitted. He therefore reiterated the request that the LAIA document be recirculated with the symbol "WT/COMTD/N/--", in keeping with notifications made within the CTD framework. In addition, he indicated that the inclusion of these agreements in the list of non-notified RTAs, which was tabled in the CRTA, was objectionable on factual, legal and technical grounds. He explained that LAIA countries fulfilled their notification obligations under the Enabling Clause in the CTD, and not in the CRTA. The LAIA agreements should not be considered in the CRTA, unless there was a national decision by specific LAIA countries to notify their agreements to the CRTA under GATT Article XXIV.
&& The representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterated the request contained in document WT/COMTD/W/220 for all LAIA agreements to be removed from the list of non ‑ notified RTAs, since all these agreements were notified in an appropriate manner under the Enabling Clause. He also reiterated the request for the LAIA reports to be circulated as notification documents, and in this regard made particular reference to the latest submission contained in document WT/COMTD/93. Finally, he indicated that the issues relating to the notification of the LAIA agreements needed to be addressed within the framework of the CTD, and not in the CRTA. 
&& The representative of Argentina said that all WTO Members had rights and obligations regarding notifications within the framework of regular Committees. Consensus was not required to submit notifications, although discussions on these notifications could take place after they were circulated. A Committee, or the Secretariat, could not oppose the circulation of a notification. Accordingly, he joined Brazil in requesting that the latest LAIA submission contained in document WT/COMTD/93 be recirculated as a notification.     
&& The representative of Ecuador supported the requests by earlier speakers for the new LAIA submission contained in document WT/COMTD/93 to be recirculated as a notification, and for the LAIA agreements to be removed from the list of non-notified RTAs. She also believed that clarification was required on the issue of whether consensus was required before a notification could be circulated. 
&& The representative of the Unites States asked why the LAIA agreements could not be notified individually, according to the standard procedure for notifications that was used by all other WTO Members. He also pointed to the lack of a unified approach within LAIA, as some LAIA agreements had been notified, while others had not. As LAIA was not a WTO Member, there was no legal basis for a document from LAIA to be accepted as a notification. He stressed that it was the responsibility of each WTO Member to notify its agreements, and to answer questions relating to its agreements. By submitting reports by LAIA, rather than individual notifications, the LAIA countries were denying WTO Members the chance to review the agreements in question, and therefore to benefit from transparency in these agreements. 
&& The representative of Australia emphasized the importance of transparency in trade commitments made by individual Members outside of the multilateral trading system. Each individual Member’s RTAs needed to be duly notified and examined by the membership in the appropriate forum, ideally on the basis of factual presentations prepared by the Secretariat. Customs unions and RTAs in services needed to be notified to, and examined in, the CRTA. His delegation disagreed with the LAIA countries’ assertion that the LAIA agreements had been appropriately notified in a manner that fully complied with the objective and purpose of the RTA Transparency Mechanism. He added that the agreements concluded by the LAIA countries under the TM80 had important implications for regional and global trade, and therefore needed to be considered in detail in the relevant WTO bodies. As the TM80 was a political level agreement – and did not even contain a goods schedule – LAIA’s practice of submitting annual reports to the CTD was not sufficient, as this practice had not permitted the LAIA agreements to be reviewed up to the same standards as other agreements. He stressed the importance of conducting appropriate reviews of the LAIA agreements, and called for engagement from the LAIA countries in this regard. He also urged the LAIA countries to provided responses to the questions that the EU had submitted in the CRTA in September 2016.
&& The representative of Cuba expressed support for the interventions by other LAIA member countries. 
&& The representative of Argentina said that the TM80 was an umbrella agreement under which various types of agreements had been established. He indicated that it was the LAIA countries that notified these agreements to the WTO under the Enabling Clause, through Uruguay, and it was therefore for the LAIA countries to respond to any questions from Members.
&& The Chairman indicated that he wished to clarify elements of his communication to LAIA, as he did not want any misunderstanding. He said that the main point that he had wished to make in his letter was that there was no consensus among WTO Members for LAIA to make a notification to the WTO. He clarified that a WTO Member was certainly within its rights to submit and circulate any document as a notification. Other Members might not agree that this document constituted a correct notification, but that would be a different issue. However, it was for a WTO Member to submit a request for a document to be circulated as a notification. To this extent, a request in a letter from the Chairperson of the LAIA Committee of Representatives was not a sufficient basis to circulate the LAIA reports as notification documents. Turning specifically to the latest LAIA submission contained in document WT/COMTD/93, he explained that the cover letter from Uruguay to the WTO Secretariat referred to the submission as an annual report for 2015, sent by the Secretary General of LAIA. Accordingly, the existing practice with regard to the circulation of the LAIA reports was maintained, as was the existing practice with regard to the placement of these reports on the agenda. He noted however, that Uruguay, as a WTO Member – or indeed any concerned LAIA member country in its capacity as a WTO Member – could circulate any document it wished with a notification symbol, as long as it was made clear in the communication to the WTO Secretariat that a notification was being submitted. The Member or Members needed to also indicate the legal provision under which the notification was being made. He invited a representative of the Legal Affairs Division to make a few remarks.
&& The representative of the Legal Affairs Division said that, while a WTO Member could circulate any document it wished as a notification, the instructions to the Secretariat would need to be clear in specifying that the document was being submitted as a notification. The WTO Members which benefitted from the agreement being notified would also need to be specified, as well as the relevant WTO provision under which the notification was being made. She explained that, although the latest LAIA submission mentioned the word "notification", the Secretariat could not follow an instruction from LAIA – a non-WTO Member – to circulate the document as a notification. That being said, the same document could be circulated as the notification of any individual Member, if this was clearly specified to the Secretariat by that Member, and the required information for a notification was provided. She also indicated that the Secretariat had been informed in informal discussions that not all LAIA countries were ready to proceed in the same way with regard to notifications. If it was indeed the case that all the LAIA countries wished to circulate the latest submission as a joint notification, or that one LAIA country would make the notification on behalf of all LAIA countries, this needed to be made clear to the Secretariat.
&& The representative of Uruguay wished to know whether the latest LAIA submission would be circulated as a notification if it was specified to the Secretariat that a notification was being submitted.
&& The representative of Argentina said that he had not heard any LAIA country stating that it did not wish the latest LAIA submission to be circulated as a notification. He reiterated his delegation's request for the document to be recirculated as a notification. If the use of the word "report" created any problems, he indicated that consideration could be given to employing different terminology. 
&& The representative of Panama said that there were many previous examples of a Member making a notification on behalf of a number of Members. He did not see how the latest LAIA submission differed in this respect, since Uruguay had submitted what the LAIA countries considered to be a notification on their behalf. If it was a question of the terminology used, he indicated that this was something that could be looked into.  
&& The representative of Brazil supported Argentina in noting that no LAIA country had expressed a different view with respect to the LAIA submission. He also said that LAIA was a member-driven organization, and in this regard a document by LAIA should be considered a document by the LAIA member countries.
&& The representative of the United States asked why the LAIA member countries continued to make submissions in the form of reports, which created ambiguity, rather than circulating notifications like other Members did. He recalled that his delegation had in the past indicated its willingness to work with the LAIA countries to find a way forward on the notification of the LAIA agreements, and in this regard he expressed frustration that progress was not being made. He also recalled that his delegation had raised specific questions in both the CTD and the CRTA on the content of the reports, including with respect to the justification for including customs unions and services aspects under the Enabling Clause. On these questions, the LAIA countries had invited his delegation to contact the LAIA secretariat – a non-WTO Member – to obtain the answers, as it was the LAIA secretariat that drafted the reports. He stressed that it was for individual LAIA countries to take responsibility for the documents they submitted to the WTO, and to respond to questions on the RTAs to which they were party. 
&& The representative of Brazil observed that the first page of the new LAIA submission referred to Individual Notification Datasheets, prepared by the concerned countries. He believed that the discussion at the present meeting had not properly taken this into account.
&& The representative of Argentina said that his delegation was ready to provide any clarifications sought by Members on the agreements to which Argentina was a party under the TM80. He stressed that Argentina was responsible for the agreements it had entered into under the TM80.  
&& The Chairman expressed his hope that the discussion at the present meeting would help Members to make progress on issues relating to the LAIA agreements. He encouraged delegations to continue to discuss these issues with a view to finding a way forward.   
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
-	Aiming at the 11th Ministerial Conference – Communication from the People's Republic of China and Pakistan (JOB/GC/110/Rev.1 – JOB/CTG/2/REV.1 – JOB/SERV/243/Rev.1 – JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1)
-	Electronic signatures – Communication from Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay (JOB/GC/115 – JOB/CTG/3 – JOB/SERV/247 – JOB/IP/20 – JOB/DEV/41)
-	Trade policy, the WTO and the digital economy – Communication from Canada, Chile, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, the European Union, the Republic of Korea, Mexico, Montenegro, Paraguay, Singapore and Turkey (JOB/GC/116 – JOB/CTG/4 – JOB/SERV/248 – JOB/IP/21 – JOB/DEV/42)
-	Electronic commerce and development – non-paper from Brunei Darussalam; Colombia; Costa Rica; Hong Kong, China; Israel; Malaysia; Mexico; Nigeria; Pakistan; Panama; Qatar; Seychelles; Singapore and Turkey (JOB/GC/117 – JOB/CTG/5 – JOB/SERV/249 – JOB/IP/22 – JOB/DEV/43)
&& The Chairman said that there were four proposals relating to the 1998 Work Programme on E-Commerce that were reflected under the present agenda item. These proposals had been circulated not only in the CTD, but also in a number of other WTO bodies. The CTD document symbols were, respectively, JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1, JOB/DEV/41, JOB/DEV/42 and JOB/DEV/43. He invited the proponents of each proposal to take the floor in turn. 
&& The representative of China recalled that the communication contained in document JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1 had already been considered at the last CTD meeting. She believed that discussions on e-commerce needed to follow the current mandate and focus on the development dimension, so as to advance the common interests of developing Members. In addition, the WTO's work on e-commerce had to be inclusive, and should not involve new market access commitments. Discussions could focus on the promotion and facilitation of cross-border trade in goods enabled by the internet, together with the services that directly supported such trade. With regard to the development dimension of e-commerce, she indicated that her delegation had taken note of the interventions at the last CTD meeting by a number of developing Members. Furthermore, since the last meeting, China had reviewed its relevant domestic policies and regulatory framework. Her delegation intended to share detailed information at the upcoming meetings of the Council for Trade in Goods (CTG) and the Council for Trade in Services (CTS). She went on to provide information on China's experiences in using e-commerce as a means for poverty reduction. The Committee was informed, inter alia, of efforts by the Government to guide and encourage third ‑ party e-commerce business enterprises to establish e-commerce service platforms. Emphasis was placed on making e-commerce benefit the poor, including through encouraging the flow of goods in poor areas, encouraging the poor to establish start-up businesses and create jobs through e-commerce, and broadening sales channels for quality agricultural products from poor areas. She also outlined a number of specific measures being taken to benefit the poor, including with respect to developing infrastructure and industries, constructing a poverty reduction service system for e-commerce, and mobilizing the community. 
&& The representative of Brazil introduced the proposal contained in document JOB/DEV/41. He said that the e-signatures had been identified as relevant in the context of discussions under the 1998 Work Programme. E-signatures had the power to act as a digital identity for a user in the digital environment. Digital certificates produced by authorized and registered providers enabled third parties to ascertain the authenticity of an e-signature. He highlighted e-government as a relevant application of e-signatures. He also referred to India's proposal at the WTO for an Agreement on Trade Facilitation in Services, and explained how a number of concepts outlined in that proposal would benefit from e-signatures. In closing, he noted that the proposal in JOB/DEV/41 had been submitted in the form of a legal text, as it was the outcome of negotiations within MERCOSUR, and had been adopted as a resolution that would apply to the MERCOSUR parties.
&& The representative of the European Union said that the approach taken by the co-sponsors of JOB/DEV/42 was to list the trade policy-related elements that they believed were relevant for e ‑ commerce. The development dimension cut across the entire list of issues. He noted that the list was not exhaustive, and was without prejudice to elements that any of the co-sponsors might seek to address individually. The elements listed in the submission were grouped into four clusters. The first cluster related to regulatory frameworks, including in the context of enhanced transparency, measures to promote consumer confidence, and trade facilitating measures. The second cluster was concerned with open markets, which included issues relating to liberalization commitments in goods and services, as well as measures to ensure openness. The focus of the third cluster was on initiatives facilitating the development of e-commerce. Among the elements included under this heading were regulatory cooperation, customs facilitation measures and technical assistance. The fourth cluster focused on the multilateral trading system, and aimed to explore how the WTO could continue to play an important role in enhancing transparency in Members' policies relating to e-commerce. He invited Members to consider the elements that had been listed, and to share ideas on how the mapping exercise could be taken forward. 
&& The representative of Singapore said that the objective of the co-sponsors of document JOB/DEV/43 was to contribute to further discussions and reflections on e-commerce at the WTO, with a particular focus on the nexus between development and e-commerce. The proposal identified a few potential areas of interest and relevance to developing countries in the e ‑ commerce area. While the co-sponsors recognized the importance of e-commerce for both developed and developing countries, they also believed that the use of e-commerce in developing countries had certain unique characteristics. He invited Members to share their experiences in this regard, including with respect to any challenges faced in leveraging e-commerce for development. 
&& The Chairman opened the floor for comments and questions on the proposals.
&& The representative of Thailand, on behalf of ASEAN, expressed the interest of ASEAN to continue e-commerce discussions in the WTO under the 1998 Work Programme. Enhanced information and experience sharing would help gain a better understanding of how the WTO could help Members achieve their trade policy objectives in the area of e-commerce. In this regard, she expressed appreciation for the seminar on e-payments and financial inclusion that was organized on 13 March 2017 by the Friends of E-Commerce for Development (FED). She said that, for ASEAN, the benefits of e-commerce went beyond creating trade and business opportunities. E ‑ commerce also contributed to overall economic development, as well as to the promotion of cultural exchanges and social cohesion, which were critical for regional integration. Indicating that ASEAN had many e-commerce success stories, she went on to provide some examples of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) in the region that had been able to scale up their use of technology and e-commerce in order to compete effectively with global players. It was also noted that the rapidly evolving nature of e-commerce meant that policymakers had to constantly play catch-up in order to ensure a conducive regulatory environment for businesses to grow. 
She went on to provide an overview of how ASEAN had addressed e-commerce over the years in its FTAs, starting with the launch of the e-ASEAN Framework Agreement in 2000. The ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand FTA, which entered into force in 2010, contained an e-commerce chapter. An e-commerce chapter was also being negotiated in the context of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership. In 2012, ASEAN worked with UNCTAD to conduct a review of its e-commerce legislation. The review, which showed that ASEAN performed best in the area of electronic transaction laws, highlighted new regulatory issues arising from evolving technologies, and also made several recommendations. She added that, in the ASEAN Economic Community Blueprint 2025 – which was adopted at the 27th ASEAN Summit on 22 November 2015 – ASEAN leaders had agreed to intensify cooperation on e-commerce with a view to developing an ASEAN Agreement on E-Commerce to help facilitate cross-border e-commerce transactions in the region. An ASEAN Coordinating Committee on E-Commerce had also been created, and work was underway to establish an ASEAN E-Commerce Work Programme. It was expected that the initiatives within ASEAN would help all ASEAN countries be e-commerce ready, and would contribute to their development. In closing, she indicated that ASEAN welcomed the high level of interest in e-commerce at the WTO. As Members were at different levels of e-commerce readiness, it was important to maintain the momentum by continuing substantive discussions in the relevant Committees. 
&& The representative of Chile believed that document JOB/DEV/42, of which her delegation was a co-sponsor, provided a starting point for facilitating a discussion on possible areas of work on e-commerce at the WTO.  She drew the Committee’s attention to the questions that were raised at the end of the document, and in particular invited Members to consider which elements relating to e-commerce they wished to have focused discussions on in the CTD.
&& The representative of Costa Rica said that e-commerce brought the digital, development and trade agendas together. While e-commerce carried with it important challenges, it also provided many opportunities for developing countries. It was an instrument for inclusive development and economic growth. She elaborated on the potential benefits to MSMEs in particular, and noted that the WTO's engagement in e-commerce needed to focus on the development dimension, so as to allow a more inclusive and sustainable participation of all countries. 
&& The representative of Paraguay expressed her delegation’s support for a tangible outcome on e-commerce at MC11. She noted that Paraguay was a co-sponsor of the proposals contained in documents JOB/DEV/41 and JOB/DEV/42. With regard to document JOB/DEV/41, she said that e ‑ signatures could be used as a trade facilitation tool that would ensure the authenticity, integrity and privacy of cross-border internet transactions and communications, thus providing greater security and predictability. Members were encouraged to consider the matter further. With regard to the proposal contained in document JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1, she indicated that her delegation had previously made comments on the issue of transparency and notification of laws and regulations. 
&& The representative of the Republic of Korea said that discussions on e-commerce at the WTO had not progressed enough to keep pace with real-world developments. He suggested that the aim of future discussions should be on deepening Members' understanding of the implications of e ‑ commerce for trade and development. In this regard, he indicated that the 13 March 2017 seminar on e-payments and financial inclusion had been particularly useful. He hoped that other events on the development implications of e-commerce could be organized in the future.
&& The representative of Ecuador indicated that she wished to provide comments on some of the proposals under consideration. Starting with document JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1, she supported the view that discussions on e-commerce needed to take place within the context of the 1998 Work Programme, and should not entail new market access commitments. She also stressed that addressing the digital divide needed to be a priority for Members. Turning to document JOB/DEV/42, she shared her delegation's view that the proposal appeared to go beyond the mandate of the 1998 Work Programme. She explained that, although the proposal contained some elements that constituted topics for discussion, it also contained elements relating to an outcome based on market openings, which would necessarily involve a negotiating process. In this light, she suggested that the proposal would need to be adjusted in order to make it consistent with the 1998 Work Programme. Finally, with regard to document JOB/DEV/43, she observed that the elements addressed in the proposal focused on providing solutions to some of the problems faced by developing countries in using e-commerce, particularly for MSMEs. She believed that the issues raised in documents JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1 and JOB/DEV/43 could provide starting points for a much ‑ needed debate on the digital divide. 
&& The representative of Pakistan recognized the role that e-commerce could play in promoting inclusive trade and helping to achieve development goals. He pointed to the knowledge gap and digital divide that existed between developed and developing countries, and urged Members to engage constructively in discussions on e-commerce, focusing in particular on the development dimension. He recalled that the FED, of which his delegation was part, had organized a seminar on e-payments and financial inclusion on 13 March 2017. His delegation was also a co-sponsor of two of the proposals under consideration.
&& The representative of Cameroon said that Members’ priority had to be in addressing the digital divide. He elaborated on how many developing countries did not have the infrastructure to participate in e-commerce, and in this light indicated that discussions in the WTO at the present time should not be about new commitments. What was important was to ensure that all Members could benefit from e-commerce. He suggested that Members could consider how existing WTO rules, including with respect to S&D, could be used to make e-commerce more inclusive, while contributing to poverty reduction and development. 
&& The representative of India recognized that e-commerce had become a major driver of international economic activity and international trade. In India, e-commerce was transforming the way business was being conducted, and represented one of the fastest growing segments of the economy. However, as with any new and emerging area of technology, the regulatory frameworks and institutions to support e-commerce were still at an evolutionary stage. While there had been a significant evolution in the technology relating to e-commerce since the adoption of the 1998 Work Programme, there was little clarity on the trade-related dimensions of e-commerce and how to address them. For example, clarity was required on a host of technical issues, including the definition and scope of e-commerce, and the interface between e-commerce and digital trade. Other issues included the definition of electronic transmissions in the context of the moratorium on custom duties, the classification of e-commerce transactions as goods or services, and questions relating to the reporting of e-commerce transactions in national and international trade statistics. His delegation believed that the lack of credible and comparable statistics relating to e-commerce was a real challenge for evidence-based policy making. Furthermore, most developing countries were grappling with basic access and connectivity issues. It was noted, inter alia, in this regard that around 70% of the population in India did not have internet access, particularly in rural areas. At the same time, the global e-commerce market was highly asymmetrical and monopolistic, and was dominated by a few large technology firms. 
He added that the growth of e-commerce activities had given birth to new challenges, both for domestic and for cross-border trade. These included issues related to consumer protection and the sale of counterfeit goods and services, the safety of online payments, e-authentication procedures and digital signatures, and taxation. There were also challenges relating to shortages of skilled manpower, human resource development and logistics. In most developing countries, including in India, rules on these and related areas were still evolving. Therefore, the view of his delegation was that it was premature to discuss rule-making in the area of e-commerce. What would be appropriate was for e-commerce discussions to be limited to the non-negotiating mandate of the 1998 Work Programme. In the CTD, discussions on e-commerce needed to focus on addressing the development needs of developing countries. Given that the growth of digital trade and e-commerce were technology-dependent, a critical component of discussions had to be on ensuring an adequate transfer of technology. He believed that Members needed to consider ways of reducing the digital divide, promoting increased internet access and enhancing the mobilization of financial resources to develop the digital infrastructure in developing countries and LDCs. He also highlighted the importance of cooperation amongst Members, and the sharing of experiences in areas such as consumer protection, safety of online payments, taxation, human resource development and logistics. Cooperation in the area of cyber security, electronic signatures and electronic documents were also important. In closing, he stressed the need for greater efforts by national governments and the international community to enhance the readiness of countries to engage in, and benefit from, digital trade. 
&& The representative of Norway believed that it was useful to have a thorough discussion in the CTD on the development dimension of e-commerce. She said that a prerequisite for e ‑ commerce to flourish was a high degree of trust in the digital environment. In this regard, she pointed to the importance of supporting a good consumer environment online, and ensuring transparency. Turing to the proposal contained in document JOB/DEV/42, she indicated that the document provided a structured approach and a useful overview of a number of aspects that Members would need to address. However, the list was not exhaustive, and it was also important to take into consideration any specific aspects that could be relevant for developing Members and LDCs. She agreed with the proponents of document JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1 that Members needed to take the issue of e-commerce and digital trade step by step, and in this regard suggested that a good first step could be to look at improvements in technical conditions for cross-border e ‑ commerce, including with regard to e-signatures, authentication and certificates. She stressed the need to find elements of commonality in the various submissions, especially in the context of what would allow e-commerce to benefit all Members – and in particular developing Members. In addition, it was important to identify the areas in which WTO rules and guidelines could make a difference, and would thereby allow Members to put in place the necessary domestic rules that would enhance their capacity to participate in international trade through e-commerce. She concluded by highlighting the need for Members to discuss the extension of the moratorium on customs duties on electronic transmissions, which her delegation supported. 
&& The representative of South Africa, on behalf of the African Group indicated that the tabling of submissions in the CTD was in line with paragraph 1.1 of the 1998 Work Programme, and consistent with paragraph 1 of the Nairobi Decision on e-commerce. She said that continental integration, structural transformation and industrialization were the overriding priorities for Africa, as had been laid out by African Trade Ministers. She made reference in this regard to the Continental Free Trade Area, as well as to Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want, and emphasized the need for work undertaken at the multilateral level to support Africa’s continental integration agenda. With regard to e-commerce, she said that the African Group approached the exploratory discussions under the 1998 Work Programme from a perspective that gave paramount importance to the development implications of e-commerce, taking into account the economic, financial, and development needs of developing countries. In this light, she believed that several issues that were included in the proposals under consideration were better suited for discussion in the CTG, the CTS or the TRIPS Council. Furthermore, some of the issues fell outside the scope of the 1998 Work Programme, or were being taken up extensively in other international organizations. She urged the proponents to refine their proposals in order to make them specific to the body where discussions should take place, as per the Work Programme. 
She went on to say that the African Group wanted the CTD to take up issues that placed at their centre the needs of developing countries and LDCs. She highlighted in this regard the importance of addressing ways of enhancing the participation of developing countries in e ‑ commerce, and the associated challenges. A number of examples were provided, including with respect to infrastructure, industrialization and workforce skills. It was noted that the potential benefits of e-commerce for developing countries could not be assumed or asserted. It was pointed out, inter alia, in this regard that fixed broadband penetration remained at 0.7% in Africa and the LDCs, and Africa was the only region in the world where broadband penetration remained below 20%. Bringing about socially equalizing effects would not be possible when only some had access to digital technology – whilst others had partial or no access, and also had no rights over the technology. According to UNCTAD, four countries accounted for 80% of business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce, which was the largest form of e-trade. With regard to business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce, the Middle East and Africa together accounted for only 2.5%. Accordingly, discussions in the CTD had to address the asymmetrical nature of the existing global e-commerce space, in order to enable Africa to become e-commerce ready. One of the overriding questions of the African Group was how to build an inclusive growth and equitable development trajectory for all developing countries and LDCs. She encouraged Members to share their experiences on measures employed to develop capabilities in the digital economy. In closing, she expressed the commitment of the African Group to engage in a comprehensive discussion in the CTD on all issues relating to the development implications of e-commerce.
&& The representative of Canada said that the communication contained in document JOB/DEV/42 that her delegation had co-sponsored aimed to stimulate discussion on the elements of trade policy that could be addressed to promote inclusive economic growth through e ‑ commerce. Her delegation believed that the CTD was an important forum for this discussion. She went on to highlight some of the opportunities associated with e-commerce, while also recognizing that the digital divide prevented countries from tapping into these opportunities. She suggested that the CTD could explore how the WTO could contribute to efforts aiming to further facilitate e-commerce to the benefit of all Members. The trade policy elements contained in the communication could help to provide an enabling environment for the development of e-commerce in developing countries, and the CTD could examine the development dimension of many of these elements. The WTO could add value to the work being carried out in other international organizations – through its transparency function and its negotiating function, and through the provision of TA and capacity building. Other international agencies had to also be encouraged to continue to address barriers to the effective harnessing of e-commerce for sustainable development, and to coordinate on relevant issues. She gave the example in this regard of the establishment at UNCTAD of an Intergovernmental Group of Experts on E-Commerce. She further pointed to the importance of international cooperation on e-commerce, and noted that Canada sought to incorporate such articles in its trade agreements. A number of elements that could be included in articles of this nature were provided, including, inter alia, with respect to the exchange of information, collaboration to assist small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), and enhancing national regulatory capacity. 
&& The representative of Japan emphasized the importance that his delegation attached to e ‑ commerce, including in the context of enabling inclusive trade. Referring to the proposal contained in document JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1, he said that his delegation wished to hear more from the proponents on concrete measures that could be taken by the WTO to improve infrastructure and the technical conditions for the development of cross-border e-commerce. With regard to the MC11 and beyond, he believed that Members needed to consider the WTO's work on e-commerce in a pragmatic and focused way. His delegation looked forward to engaging in active discussions on e-commerce. 
&& The representative of Uganda, on behalf of the LDC Group, noted that the proponents of the various proposals had taken into account the process that had been earlier suggested to Members, which was that submissions relating to e-commerce needed to be first taken to the relevant bodies, as set out in paragraphs 2 to 5 of the 1998 Work Programme. Discussions would need to have matured in these bodies before being reported to the General Council. He recalled a number of elements from paragraphs 1.1 and 1.2 of the Work Programme, and emphasized that the non ‑ negotiating mandate of the Work Programme was exploratory in nature. He went on to say that, since the establishment of the Work Programme, the digital divide for LDCs had widened. In theory, e-commerce was supposed to help surmount the obstacles faced by weaker countries when competing with stronger players. However, in reality, most LDCs had to deal with a number of constraints – relating to insufficiencies in basic infrastructure, electricity and internet access, as well as to the high cost of broadband connectivity. LDCs also faced a number of bottlenecks that prevented them from taking advantage of the opportunities that were theoretically available through e-commerce platforms. The LDC Group believed that, in order for LDCs to be able to benefit from e-commerce, the three key issues were access, affordability and availability. He went on to provide some figures to put into context the present situation of the LDCs. He mentioned, inter alia, in this regard that only 15% of the population in LDCs used the internet. Fixed broadband penetration remained at below 1% in Africa and the LDCs. In light of the low penetration rate in internet use, LDCs were not in a position to take advantage of the benefits of e-commerce.      
He indicated that discussions under the Work Programme needed to focus on overcoming the challenges that were hindering LDCs from becoming e-commerce-ready. It was suggested that discussions could focus on a number of specific issues, including access to electricity, access to digital infrastructure and cheap and fast broadband, inadequate skills, and technology transfer. He went on to express support for the intervention by the African Group, and noted in particular that most of the proposals under consideration fell outside the scope and mandate of the 1998 Work Programme. He invited the proponents to narrow down their submissions to issues specific to the CTD, and to focus on the elements contained in paragraph 5.1 of the Work Programme, with a view to addressing the digital divide. He also highlighted the need to complement, and not undermine, initiatives within Africa, and in particular Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. He believed that it was important to examine the implications of e-commerce on the structural transformation and industrialization of Africa, and what the impact would be on domestic markets, domestic manufacturers and service suppliers. Finally, he outlined the plans of the International Telecommunications Union to connect 1.5 billion people to the internet, and regretted that funds were not being made available for this purpose. In this regard, he expressed concern with the downward trajectory in Aid for Trade, particularly for LDCs, and stressed the need for consistency in the message and practice of donors.   
&& The representative of Peru recognized the importance of e-commerce for economic growth and development, and noted that a chapter on e-commerce was included in most of the trade agreements to which Peru was party. Peru was also working actively in various agencies to encourage commitments on e-commerce and related matters, with a focus on development. He expressed interest in learning more about the technical details of the proposals under consideration, in order to identify specific ways for Members to move forward, including in the context of an outcome at MC11.
&& The representative of Colombia expressed support for the proposals contained in documents JOB/DEV/42 and JOB/DEV/43, of which his delegation was a co-sponsor. With regard to the proposal contained in document JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1, he indicated that his delegation was supportive of many of the ideas contained therein, including with regard to the recommendation to extend the moratorium on the imposition of customs duties on electronic transmissions. Colombia was particularly interested in the topics outlined in the first section of the proposal, in light of its successful experiences in areas such as streamlined procedures for customs clearance, inspection and quarantine, and the promotion of paperless trade, He also noted that the proposal encompassed elements which could have a favourable impact on the development of physical and legal infrastructure, which he believed was one of the main obstacles faced by developing countries in using e-commerce. In this regard, he made particular reference to the suggestion in the proposal to explore concrete measures to improve infrastructure and technical conditions, including in the context of Aid for Trade. The mention in paragraphs 1.3 and 3.1 of the need for information exchange was additionally welcomed, in particular in the context of the benefits this would bring to MSMEs. With regard to section 2, concerning transparency commitments, he invited the proponents to review their suggestions, as these were already part of existing commitments in goods and services. His delegation also wished to gain a better understanding from the proponents on paragraph 5.2, and in particular the role they envisaged for the Secretariat. It was additionally noted that the proposal covered only one of the dimensions of e-commerce, and in this regard he expressed hope that discussions on e-commerce could encompass other areas as well. 
He went on to say that he wished to share some of his country’s experiences in the context of infrastructure and connectivity development. He outlined in particular elements of Colombia’s Vive Digital Plan for the 2010-2014 period, which had the objective of developing the necessary infrastructure to enhance connectivity and internet access across the country. The success of the initiative could be attributed to the close partnership between the public and private sectors, and in particular the consultative approach which had allowed the needs of the private sector to be identified and incorporated into the programme. To ensure continuity, a further plan for the 2014‑2018 period had been established. Specific approaches were being implemented, including on a regional basis, and with a focus on education and employment. In closing, he stressed the importance of e-commerce in promoting development. He also expressed his delegation's willingness to discuss initiatives to facilitate trade in goods and services by electronic means.  
&& The representative of Australia highlighted the role of e-commerce as a driver of international trade, inclusive economic growth and development. She observed in particular that e ‑ commerce facilitated the participation of MSMEs in global trade. The view of her delegation was that the WTO could contribute to the trade-related aspects of e-commerce for the benefit of all Members. She noted that the proposal contained in document JOB/DEV/43 highlighted several aspects of e-commerce of particular relevance to developing countries, and went on to provide some comments on this proposal. With regard to trade facilitation and e-commerce, she agreed that taking steps in the WTO to facilitate cross-border e-commerce would contribute to development, and to the greater participation of MSMEs in global trade. In this context, she highlighted the certainty provided by the moratorium on customs duties, and encouraged Members to extend or make permanent the moratorium. She also welcomed the entry into force of the Trade Facilitation Agreement, and called for the full implementation of the Agreement to further enable cross-border e-commerce. On the issue of access to payment solutions, her delegation wished to hear more on how the WTO could contribute. With regard to infrastructure gaps, she recognized that addressing such gaps in developing countries and LDCs was a critical element in the creation of an enabling environment for e-commerce. Examples were provided of projects implemented by Australia, including the ASEAN-Australia Development Cooperation Programme Phase II, as well as projects relating to internet connectivity in Tonga and Fiji, telecommunications in Vanuatu, and mobile coverage in Kiribati and the Solomon Islands. In closing, she called for cooperation between relevant international agencies and others pursuing initiatives to close infrastructure gaps. 
&& The representative of Hong Kong, China noted the link between e-commerce and development, and indicated that her delegation was a co-sponsor of the proposal contained in document JOB/DEV/43. She stressed the need for the active participation of SMEs and MSMEs in global trade, but also recognized the difficulties they faced in terms of resources, technology and infrastructure. Her delegation therefore supported any initiative or discussion that could help create a reliable business environment, improve infrastructure, and build the capacity of SMEs and MSMEs to participate in e-commerce. 
&& The representative of Mexico said that his delegation was a co-sponsor of the proposals contained in documents JOB/DEV/42 and JOB/DEV/43. He noted that e-commerce offered additional ways to do business, which complemented the modalities already provided for by traditional trade. Furthermore, an appropriate legal and regulatory framework, covering aspects such as e-signatures and consumer protection, would ensure consumer confidence and make transactions more secure. He went on to highlight the potential of e-commerce in integrating SMEs into global value chains and promoting development. He noted that events such as the seminar organized on 13 March 2017 by the FED on e-payments and financial inclusion would help Members to make progress on issues such as the digital divide. 
&& The representative of Zimbabwe expressed support for the intervention by South Africa on behalf of the African Group. She recognized the importance of e-commerce and digital trade, and welcomed discussions in the context of the 1998 Work Programme. She went on to say that the economies that had advanced in terms of digital trade and e-commerce had done so by using all the policy space at their disposal, and without any of the multilateral trade rules or disciplines on e-commerce that some Members were proposing. Moreover, e-commerce continued to grow rapidly in these countries. She said that it was imperative to maintain the same policy space for other countries – particularly developing countries – that had not yet developed their e-commerce and digital trade. It was also important to desist from imposing rules or disciplines at a time when developing countries were not e-commerce ready. She believed that it was premature to consider rules or disciplines on e-commerce, as such rules would benefit Members which were already technologically advanced. Furthermore, rules on e-commerce would widen the digital divide, thereby further excluding developing countries and LDCs. 
She noted with concern that, while there was no mandate for work to be undertaken on e ‑ commerce rules or disciplines, some of the proposals under consideration had been drafted in these terms. Furthermore, there were elements that were outside the scope of the Marrakesh Agreement, some which went beyond the current mandate on e-commerce, and some which went beyond the mandate of the CTD. Those going beyond the CTD’s mandate needed to be considered in relevant bodies such as the CTS or the TRIPS Council. Furthermore, some proposals had overlooked the importance of consumer protection and privacy, whilst others had duplicated the work of other international organizations that had the full mandate over issues such as cybercrime and cyber security. Some proposals would affect Members’ schedules of goods and services commitments, while in a number of cases the objectives and the problems to be addressed were not clearly specified. She called on the proponents to revise their proposals so as to be in line with the 1998 Work Programme. She also stressed the need to continue discussions based on the current mandate, focusing on the development dimension. In addition to the exchange of information, she believed that Members needed to consider concrete ways to bridge the digital divide.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that the paradigm shift to e-commerce in business transactions provided significant benefits, including with respect to market expansion, customer services improvements, and productivity enhancement. He noted that e-commerce in Nigeria was growing at an estimated annual rate of 25%, and underscored the importance of digital technology for Nigeria’s economic diversification. His delegation, as part of the FED, was actively participating in a number of activities related to e-commerce. Nigeria was also a co-sponsor of document JOB/DEV/43. He went on to say that, according to various analyses, the most fundamental areas to address in order to unleash the potential of developing countries in digital trade concerned infrastructure, trade logistics and facilitation, and electronic payments. He believed that Members needed to address the bottlenecks that developing countries faced, including with regard to payment methods, financial technologies, trade finance, financial inclusion, logistics and customs requirements. In closing, he stressed the importance of examining the costs and benefits of both action and inaction on e-commerce at the WTO. He believed that Members needed to consider taking a forward-looking approach that could lead to a concrete outcome at MC11, beyond the 1998 Work Programme. He also drew Members' attention to UNCTAD's E-Commerce Week, which would he held on 24-28 April 2017.
&& The representative of Bangladesh observed that, while e-commerce could contribute to inclusive trade, it was essential for all countries to have the necessary internet facilities and other related infrastructure in place. His delegation looked forward to having discussions on the issues entrusted to the CTD under paragraph 5.1 of the 1998 Work Programme. 
&& The representative of Singapore said that the digital divide was a real and persisting problem. The lack of infrastructure and an enabling regulatory framework continued to impede the development of e-commerce in some countries. The view of his delegation was that the development dimension of e-commerce had to go beyond hard infrastructure. It was necessary to also address issues relating to soft infrastructure, such as regulatory frameworks, as this would also be conducive to the development of e-commerce, while generating inclusive economic growth. With regard to the way forward on e-commerce, he believed that the WTO might not be able to provide the hard infrastructure needed for basic internet connectivity, or access to power supply. However, it could serve as a platform to discuss best practices and encourage information exchange on enabling regulatory frameworks that could potentially narrow the digital divide and help enhance the participation of developing countries and LDCs in e-commerce. Much of this could take place through the regular work of the WTO, including discussions on e-commerce in Members' TPRs, transparency notifications on related-measures in the CTS, and discussions on e-commerce chapters on RTAs in the CRTA. He also encouraged Member-driven initiatives, such as the seminar on e-payments and financial inclusion that had been held on 13 March 2017. 
He went on to share some of Singapore's experiences with e-commerce, particularly with regard to MSMEs. He said that the approach taken by Singapore was to put in place the right legal and policy frameworks that would support the participation of MSMEs in e-commerce. He gave the example of MSMEs in the food manufacturing industry in Singapore. Thanks to e-commerce, this sector was thriving, and Singapore's MSMEs were selling to China and India, as well as to some African countries. This success was due in part to the use of trade policy, which ensured the predictability of trade rules and provided confidence to MSMEs wishing to venture into the overseas markets. A sound legal and policy framework had also played a key role in attracting foreign e-commerce players to provide services in Singapore. The synergies between Singapore's local MSMEs and bigger e-commerce players had facilitated the development of a vibrant e ‑ commerce environment, and had helped to foster innovation and growth. He also outlined a number of initiatives by the Government to help Singapore's MSMEs participate in e-commerce, including with regard to e-signatures, paperless trading, e-payments and transparency. In closing, he invited Members to explore in which areas the WTO could contribute to leveraging e-commerce as a tool for growth and development.  
&& The representative of Montenegro said that the expansion of the digital economy would foster new opportunities for the promotion of inclusive economic growth – for example by connecting rural and urban economies, opening new channels for landlocked countries' trade, and facilitating the participation of women and micro enterprises in the formal economy. She noted that her delegation was a co-sponsor of the proposal contained in document JOB/DEV/42. The development dimension of e-commerce cut across the entire list of issues outlined in the proposal, and many topics were directly or indirectly framed to contribute to the development of e ‑ commerce. She indicated a particular interest to discuss a limited set of concrete rules to facilitate electronic transactions, such as e-contracts, e-signatures and regulatory frameworks relating to consumer protection and unsolicited messages. She added that her delegation looked forward to drawing from the 13 March 2017 seminar on e-payments and financial inclusion, and to working towards a tangible result on e-commerce at MC11.  
&& The representative of China said that her delegation appreciated the constraints faced by developing Members and LDCs in the use of e-commerce. This was why China believed that the development dimension needed to be at the centre of discussions on e-commerce. She called for pragmatic progress at the WTO on e-commerce, with priority given to the most important issues. Her delegation would continue to engage on this matter. 
&& The representative of the European Union said that the proposal contained in document JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1 contained a number of interesting elements. He made reference to issues such as e-signatures, consumer protection, customs procedures and enhancing the participation of SMEs in e-commerce. He agreed with the proponents on the importance of providing greater clarity and certainty for the trading community, and in this regard highlighted the importance of the moratorium on imposing custom duties on electronic transmissions. He suggested that Members should focus on issues that would have the highest chance of being harvested, whilst avoiding contentious ones like those relating to taxation policy. Turning to document JOB/DEV/43, he agreed on the need to address the development aspects of e-commerce. He believed that further discussion was required in order to close the digital divide. The EU remained open to considering any mechanism that could support the development of the necessary enabling environment to enhance participation in e-commerce. With regard to document JOB/DEV/42, of which the EU was a co-sponsor, he indicated that the communication could be further refined to fit better with the CTD’s terms of reference, thereby taking into account some Members’ concerns. While the communication was not a negotiating proposal, it nevertheless contained a mapping of relevant issues at the intersection of trade and e-commerce. The objective was to allow Members to decide collectively which of these issues should be discussed. He went on to say that his delegation was interested in discussing concrete rules that would facilitate electronic transactions, including rules that would help create an environment favourable to SMEs. These discussions could cover issues such as e-contract, e-signature, and regulatory frameworks relating to consumer protection and spam. He concluded by indicating his delegation’s interest to participate in follow‑up discussions on the issues raised at the 13 March 2017 seminar on e-payments and financial inclusion. 
&& The representative of South Africa expressed support for the intervention by the African Group. She noted that the proposals under consideration had been submitted in line with paragraph 1.1. of the 1998 Work Programme and paragraph 1 of the Nairobi Decision on e ‑ commerce. She also recalled that, according to the Work Programme, the CTD was to examine and report on the development implications of electronic commerce, taking into account the economic, financial and development needs of developing countries. Pointing to the digital divide and the uneven growth of e-commerce, she believed that the proposals needed to be refined and narrowed down in order to ensure a pertinent discussion in the CTD, as per the Work Programme. Her delegation believed that a number of specific issues needed to be taken up for further examination. These included: (i) the challenges that developing countries faced in becoming e ‑ commerce ready; (ii) measurement challenges relating to e-commerce and the need for accurate data to engage in evidence-based policymaking; (iii) building the capabilities of developing countries and LDCs to participate in cross-border e-commerce; and (iv) the impact of e-commerce on Africa’s developmental objectives of industrial development, structural transformation and employment – with a view to promoting trade, development, and inclusive and equitable growth in the digital economy. She believed that South Africa could learn from other Members that had successfully developed their capabilities in the digital economy. Her delegation was particularly interested in specific government measures that had been used to support the development of e-commerce and the digital economy, and in this regard believed that there was potential in establishing strong links between industrial policy, infrastructure and skills development. Her delegation also wished to learn more about issues such as tax avoidance, market concentration, anti-competitive practices and the possible impact on labour conditions, employment and industrial development. 
&& The representative of Egypt supported the intervention by South Africa, on behalf of the African Group. While noting the interest of many Members to move forward with discussions on e ‑ commerce, his delegation believed that it was premature to draw conclusions on the implications of e-commerce for development and poverty alleviation. His delegation also wished to see engagement by Members in other areas of work in the WTO, including with respect to S&D and agriculture. He went on to outline four main challenges facing developing countries and LDCs in the e-commerce area, which were: (i) insufficient infrastructure; (ii) the lack of technology transfer; (iii) the lack of regulatory frameworks; and (iv) the absence of a multilateral understanding on e-commerce. He noted that the CTD's mandate under the 1998 Work Programme was to examine and report on the development implications of e-commerce, taking into account the economic, financial and development needs of developing countries. In this regard, he suggested that the best way to proceed with discussions on e-commerce would be to tackle the most important problems first, including with respect to issues relating to infrastructure and technology transfer. In closing, he noted that some of the proposals under consideration included elements which were outside the scope of the 1998 Work Programme, for example with regard to e-procurement. He invited the proponents to refine their proposals in order to make them compatible with the Work Programme.
&& The representative of Rwanda expressed support for the interventions by a number of previous speakers, including South Africa, Cameroon, Uganda, Egypt and India. He said that, although e-commerce was on a rising trend across the world, the evidence showed that the big players were located in Europe, North America and in the Asia-Pacific region. This meant that e ‑ commerce had grown unevenly across the world. He elaborated on several challenges that developing countries faced in making use of e-commerce, including with respect to connectivity, manufacturing capacity and the development of the services sector.  He also outlined the problems associated with defining what was an electronic transmission, and in this regard indicated that, until a clear definition was found, it would be difficult to consider making permanent the moratorium on customs duties. He also believed that it was premature to consider developing new rules on e-commerce, given that there were still many issues relating to e-commerce that needed to be clarified.  
&& The representative of Cameroon supported the intervention by South Africa on behalf of the African Group, as well as the intervention by Rwanda. He emphasized the need for future discussions on e-commerce to be focused and informed. In this regard, he believed that it was important to make clear the boundaries of the WTOs' work on e-commerce relative to the work of other organizations, and to ensure that discussions in the WTO took place within the framework of the 1998 Work Programme. He also stressed the importance of ensuring that all Members could benefit from e-commerce.       
&& The Chairman encouraged further engagement among Members in order to explore possible ways forward on e-commerce. He proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions, and also suggested that the item relating to the Work Programme on E-Commerce be reflected on the agenda of the next CTD meeting.
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in Dedicated Sessions of the CTD. He firstly informed the Committee that a new notification had been made under the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs since the last CTD meeting. This concerned the US' trade preferences for Nepal. The notification, of 20 January 2017, was circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/52. The Secretariat would be able to begin the preparation of the factual presentation on this PTA after the US submitted its 2017 tariff schedule for integration into the Integrated Database. Turning to the other PTAs to be considered in Dedicated Sessions, he said that the Secretariat had still not received the full set of data or information required for the preparation of the factual presentations on the PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation, Chinese Taipei and Thailand. He urged these Members to provide the necessary data and information as soon as possible.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation attached great importance to the implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs. He informed the Committee in this regard that China, as a developing Member, had been providing 97% DFQF access since 2015. It was hoped that this would help LDCs to fully achieve their trade potential, while promoting economic growth and sustainable development. With a view to increasing transparency in China's DFQF scheme, his delegation had circulated a notification in November 2016, providing updated information on the scheme. His delegation was also working to provide to the Secretariat the required data relating to scheme. In closing, he urged Members, and especially developed Members, to fulfil their obligations by providing increasingly greater DFQF market access to LDCs. 
&& The Committee took note of the interventions. 
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered.
&& The representative of Cambodia, on behalf of the LDC Group, recalled that the Group had circulated in November 2016 a revised proposal containing the draft terms of reference for a clinical examination of DFQF implementation. The revised proposal, which was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/218/Rev.1, had been introduced by the delegation of Benin at the last CTD meeting. Although the LDC Group had since held consultations with the key delegations that had expressed concerns, some Members were still sceptical about the clinical examination. With regard to the first section of the proposal, one Member had observed that the reference to the Hong Kong DFQF Decision was prejudicial to its position on the Doha Development Agenda (DDA), and had suggested that the reference could be omitted. This suggestion posed difficulties for the LDC Group, as it eroded the foundational basis of the proposal. Furthermore, it had systemic implications for everything anchored in the DDA architecture that the LDCs had pursued, and continued to pursue. She explained that the reference to the Hong Kong Decision provided a historical background, and had not been made in relation to future work on DFQF. With regard to the second section of the proposal, which addressed the scope and parameters of the clinical examination, she said that one Member had felt affected. After several consultations with this Member, the LDC Group had decided to make the parameters neutral, as laid out in the revised proposal. She additionally informed the Committee that no comments had been made on the third section of the proposal, concerning the approach, while the timetable for the study – contained in the fourth section – had been rearranged. She went on to say that the LDC Group had demonstrated flexibility, and urged Members to show similar flexibility. It was observed in this regard that the Group was asking for a study, and not a decision. Furthermore, any recommendations from the study would need to be agreed to by consensus. In this light, she called on Members to agree to the terms of reference for the clinical examination.
&& The representative of Uganda expressed support for the intervention by Cambodia on behalf of the LDC Group. With respect to the revised proposal, he explained that it had not been possible to accommodate all the requests made by delegations during the consultations. In particular, the Group had decided to maintain the reference to the Hong Kong Decision, as it was felt that this Decision provided the appropriate background and mandate. Furthermore, it had systemic implications for all LDC specific issues, including cotton, preferential rules of origin and the services waiver. He questioned the suggestion that no references could be made to the DDA, noting in particular that this had further implications, for example with respect to the implementation of the Ministerial Decisions from the Bali and Nairobi Ministerial Conferences. He also observed that the proposed clinical examination was not about the future, but rather about how DFQF had been implemented in the past. Any recommendations resulting from the study would have to be agreed to by consensus in the CTD.
&& The representative of the United States recalled that, in past meetings, her delegation had reported the expansion of DFQF benefits for LDCs under the US' Generalized System of Preferences scheme, as well as under the African Growth and Opportunity Act. She also informed the Committee that, on 30 December 2016, the US had begun implementing a new set of preferential trade benefits for Nepal. These benefits were in addition to the benefits already provided under the GSP scheme. The preferences, which were developed in response to the devastating earthquake in 2015, provided duty-free treatment for 66 tariff lines. The covered goods were classified in Chapters 42, 57, 61, 62, 63, and 65 of the Harmonized System.  A link to the full list of covered products could be found in the US' notification of the preference programme. These improvements demonstrated that the US had faithfully implemented the Bali Decision to improve existing DFQF coverage for products originating from LDCs, so as to provide increasingly greater market access to LDCs. As Members were aware, the US' preference programmes for LDCs were authorized by the US Congress. She additionally noted that reference had been made at the present meeting to the LDC Group's proposal on the terms of reference for a clinical examination of DFQF implementation. In this regard, she recalled that her delegation had previously raised concerns on the proposal, including the revised version considered at the last CTD meeting. In closing, she indicated that her delegation looked forward to continuing to work with the LDCs to determine whether a way forward on this issue might be possible.
&& The representative of Canada recalled some of the points that her delegation had previously made with respect to the proposal from the LDC Group. She said that any terms of reference for a Secretariat study needed to be objective and allow for a factual examination of DFQF market access for LDCs. In this regard, she noted that the revised submission continued to include some subjective elements. She also emphasized that the content of the proposed study should not duplicate information that was already available in existing Secretariat documents.
&& The representative of Cambodia, on behalf of the LDC Group, welcomed the update provided by China on its DFQF scheme for LDCs. He also indicated that the LDC Group would work to address Members' concerns regarding the proposal for a clinical examination.
&& The Chairman encouraged continued engagement among Members in order to find a way forward on the issues raised. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
&& The Chairman indicated that he wished to address agenda items J and K together. He said that, further to the General Council meeting of 27 February 2017, consensus had still not been reached on the slate of names to serve as Chairpersons of WTO bodies. In light of this situation, it was not possible for the Committee to formally elect the new Chairperson of the CTD at the present meeting, as was normally the case at the first meeting of the year. When consensus emerged on the slate of names, the CTD would be convened with the purpose of formally electing its new Chairperson. He next turned to the matter of the election of the Chairperson of the Sub ‑ Committee on LDCs, which he recalled traditionally fell within the purview of the CTD. He informed the Committee that some consultations had been held in this regard, and the name that had emerged was that of the incoming Ambassador of the Netherlands, Ms. Monique van Daalen. However, given the current situation regarding the slate of names, it was his understanding that a number of delegations preferred waiting for the overall situation to be unblocked before the CTD formally elected the new Chairperson of the Sub-Committee. Therefore, when the Committee met to elect the new CTD Chairperson, the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee would be elected at the same meeting.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's intervention.  
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The representative of Guatemala recalled that, at the 101st Session on 27 January 2017, Members had considered the external evaluation of the WTO's TA, as well as the WTO management response. After that meeting, several Members had discussed possible ways forward, and had agreed to set up an informal group to work with the Secretariat in its efforts to implement the recommendations from the evaluation. She said that the group was open to all Members. Delegations interested in participating in the group were invited to contact either her delegation or the Secretariat.
&& The representative of Japan expressed his delegation's interest to participate in the informal group. He also informed the Committee that Japan had recently contributed CHF 200,000 to the DDAGTF. 
&& The representative of Cameroon said that, during the discussion on the external evaluation on 27 January, his delegation was among those that had indicated an interest to have further discussions on the matter. He believed that the establishment of the informal group would be useful in this regard.
&& The representative of the European Union welcomed the initiative by Guatemala, and indicated her delegation's willingness to participate in the informal group. She encouraged other Members to participate as well. 
&& The representative of Nigeria indicated that his delegation remained interested in the follow ‑ up to the external evaluation, and therefore wished to be part of the informal group. 
&& The representative of Chile said that the President of Chile would visit the WTO on 29 March 2017. A special meeting was being held for this purpose, at which the President would address the theme of multilateralism, free trade and the role of the WTO. He invited all delegations to attend. 
&& The Chairman said that he wished to raise a matter concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system. It had been the CTD's practice to hold a discussion on this subject every two years or so. On previous occasions when this item was placed on the CTD's agenda, the Secretariat had updated its statistical background paper on the participation of developing economies in global trade, in order to assist Members in their discussion. The last such paper by the Secretariat was circulated in November 2015, in document WT/COMTD/W/212. He proposed that the Secretariat begin preparation of an update to this document, which would be discussed in the CTD after it was finalized in the second half of the year.
It was so agreed. 
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
&&
 Agenda items B and C were considered on 27 January. Items D through L were considered on 14 March.  
 In the absence of the Chairman on 27 January, the Committee elected H.E. Mr. Juan Esteban Aguirre Martínez (Paraguay) as interim Chairman for that part of the meeting.  
 The discussion reflected under this agenda item took place on 14 March. When meeting on 27 January, the Committee adopted the agenda as contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/9. 
 The points in this paragraph, relating to the revised proposal by the LDC Group, were made by Uganda at the 100th Session. They are reflected once again in the minutes of this meeting at the request of the delegation of Uganda.









WT/COMTD/M/97

-  PAGE 1 -


WT/COMTD/M/101

-  PAGE 19 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/101


15 June 2017
(17-3193)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/ NUMPAGES  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 31
Committee on Trade and Development
101st Session
 




