
Committee on Trade and Development
Eighteenth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 17 NOVEMBER 1997 

Chairman: H.E. Mr. D. Baichoo (Mauritius)

A. Adoption of the Agenda

1.&&  The Committee on Trade and Development adopted the agenda as contained in WTO/AIR/714,
with under "Other Business" two items: Electronic trade in goods and services, and proposed dates
for the Committee Meetings in 1998.

B. WTO Technical Cooperation and Training Activities as they relate to Developing Country
Members

(i) Implementation Modalities (WT/COMTD/W/29/Rev. 1)

2: &&The Chairman said that he had held informal consultations on the note prepared by the Secretariat
on Implementation Modalities, which had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/29. This
document had been revised in light of suggestions made by delegations and had been circulated for
the Committee on Trade and Development's consideration in document WT/COMTD/W/29/Rev. 1.
He proposed that the document be adopted by the Committee.

3.&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation did not wish to change the current text
of the document but suggested that an addition to the document be made to the effect that an Integrated
Framework for Trade-Related Technical Cooperation had been endorsed by the High-Level Meeting
on Least-Developed Countries.

4.&& The representative of Morocco said that the Integrated Framework for Trade-Related Technical
Cooperation should not be mentioned in the Implementation Modalities as it was not mentioned in the
Guidelines for Technical Cooperation which was the basis for the Implementation Modalities.

5. && The representative of Japan agreed with the representative of Morocco and said his delegation
could accept the current version of the document.

6. && The Committee adopted document WT/COMTD/W/29/Rev. 1 on Implementation Modalities.
(ii) Manual on Technical Cooperation and Training
Ts The Chairman said that, pursuant to the outcome of the Committee on Trade and Development’ s
discussion at its last meeting, he had held informal consultations to discuss possible changes in the
Manual on Technical Cooperation and Training (document WT/COMTD/W/26/Rev. 1). The suggestions
for modifications had been incorporated in a new document which had been circulated as Revision 2.

In addition, a new Box 3 on page 9 of the document, entitled "Specific Activities for Least-Developed
Countries”, had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/26/Rev.2/Suppl. 1 to reflect the outcome
of the High-Level Meeting for Least-Developed Countries. He proposed that the document be adopted,
keeping in mind that the Manual would be updated regularly.

8.&& The representative of Morocco said that in his view the document was still too long. For
example, he suggested deleting the section on page 20 on "Cooperation with other International
Organizations”, as well as Box 18. Once it had been mentioned that extra-budgetary resources existed
and that some Members participated in trust funds it was not useful to mention how much they each
provided. Those interested by the figures could get them from the Budget Committee. The section
on "Coordination of Technical Cooperation within the WTO" on page 9 was too long. Box 3, as
amended, needed to be shortened as well. He suggested that a communication specialist edit the text
of the Manual to make it easier to read.

9. && The representative of the European Communities said that it would be useful to include some
references to the High-Level Meeting in the Manual. Her delegation noted with pleasure that Box 3
had been revised to include a reference to the Integrated WTO/UNCTAD/ITC Technical Assistance
Programme for Selected Least-Developed and Other African Countries which, for the four least-developed
countries included, would be subsumed by the Integrated Framework endorsed at the High-Level Meeting.
Other updates could be made in a similar vein, for instance on page 17 where regular courses for
developing countries were mentioned. She did not agree to delete the section on "Cooperation with
other International Organizations", since her delegation attached much importance to such cooperation
and preferred to strengthen that part of the document and include a reference to the conclusions of
the High-Level Meeting. In referring to page 24 in the Box relating to "Coordination with Other
International Organizations” she said that most, rather than some, activities called for coordination
between international organizations.

10. &&The representative of Korea said that his delegation wished to keep Box 18 on page 22 as
the information contained in that Box was relevant for activities and for the sake of transparency,
providing information on the resources available.

11. && The representative of Canada welcomed further clarifications on how the Integrated
WTO/UNCTAD/ITC Technical Assistance Programme for Selected Least-Developed and Other African
Countries would be reconciled with the outcome of the High-Level Meeting in the cases of certain
countries addressed in both processes. As the overall programme of activities was expensive the question
arose of available resources to respond to all requests. In follow-up to the High-Level Meeting it was
also important to determine whether there was overlap or duplication. Her delegation wished to assure
that the preoccupations expressed at the High-Level Meeting were reflected in the document. Finally,
she asked the Secretariat how it saw the role of the Committee on Trade and Development in WTO's
cooperation with UNCTAD and ITC so as to ensure that each organization was working in the areas
where it had a comparative advantage.

12. && The representative of Norway referred to the revised version of Box 3 and said that it would
be useful to make a reference, under the subtitle "High-level Meeting”, to the follow-up mechanism
interms of UNDP's Round-Tables and the World Bank's Consultative Group Meetings. He suggested
making a brief reference to the thematic round-tables on capacity-building and investment held at the
High-Level Meeting, in the middle of the second paragraph of the same section. His delegation agreed
with the European Commission to insert a reference to the High-Level Meeting.

13. && The representative of the United States considered the manual acceptable and stressed that its
specific purpose should be kept in mind. Some prudence was required in terms of reflecting all aspects
of the decisions taken and the suggestions made at the High-Level Meeting. The document should
reflect WTO Technical Cooperation. On a more general point his delegation requested that documents
be issued three-weeks prior to any Committee on Trade and Development meeting.

14.&& The representative of Morocco recalled that the purpose of the Manual was to inform officials
in capitals about modalities to utilize WTO technical assistance. The Committee on Trade and
Development should not try to make any points in it or to reflect the outcome of the High-Level Meeting.
The High-Level Meeting was not that important for the purpose of the Manual, other than that it was
a historical fact. In that light, most of the comments seemed irrelevant. A concise, short document
was needed on WTO technical cooperation.

15. && The representative of Switzerland cautioned that the text of the document should not be negotiated
in every detail. He suggested that the Manual could have several versions according to its use. For
example, the document as it was could be considered as the full version, a shorter version could be
distributed as a leaflet, and there could be a third version on the Internet with several levels to be opened
up according to the depth of information sought.

16.&& The representative of the International Trade Centre (ITC) explained that ITC's objective
in producing its manual on technical cooperation had been to produce a short document to explain
to its clients and partners what the ITC was all about as distinct from an annual report where ITC
reported at length on what had happened throughout the year. The objective had been to spell out
in as brief, as clear, and as business-like a manner as possible what ITC's areas of specialization were,
how to go about requesting assistance from ITC, how ITC worked with its partners and ITC's own
approach to technical assistance.

17.&& The representative of Morocco said that his delegation had also requested UNCTAD to produce
a manual on technical cooperation. There was merit in streamlining the format of the three Manuals.

18. && The Chairman noted that almost all delegations had agreed that the document was useful. While
some delegations had mentioned that the document was lengthy and should be shortened and made
more reader-friendly, other delegates had mentioned the need for updating, taking into consideration
various suggestions that had been made and for maintaining certain sections. It was important to keep
in mind the purpose of the Manual and he took it that the document could be adopted, taking into
consideration the possibility to update it regularly.

19. && The Secretariat said that if delegations would want a description of the comparative advantages
of the WTO and other institutions, this could of course be prepared. As regards the relationship between
the Integrated WTO/UNCTAD/ITC Technical Assistance Programme for Selected Least-Developed
and Other African Countries and the Integrated Framework on Trade Related Technical Assistance,
endorsed at the High-Level Meeting, this was explained in Supplement 1 to the Manual. It stated that
the Africa Programme would be subsumed into the follow-up of the High-Level Meeting as far as the
least-developed countries were concerned.
The Secretariat continued by explaining that the Integrated WTO/UNCTAD/ITC Technical
Assistance Programme for Selected Least-Developed and Other African Countries was a programme
for eight countries out of which four were least-developed and four developing countries. When the
Integrated Framework for Trade Related Technical Assistance for the least-developed countries had
been drawn up, it had been agreed to subsume the former programme into the latter, but only with
respect to the least-developed countries, as there was no use in having two programmes in parallel
for the same countries.

21. && The Committee took note of the statements made, requested the Secretariat to come forward
with an amended version of the Manual to take into account the suggestions made, and agreed to revert
to this issue at its next meeting.

(ili) Three Year Plan for Technical Cooperation: 1998 - 2000

22. && The Chairman recalled that the Secretariat had prepared the Three Year Plan for technical
cooperation activities for 1998 - 2000, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/32 with a revision
circulated shortly before the meeting in document WT/COMTD/W/32/Rev. 1 to incorporate additional
activities deriving from the follow-up to the High-Level Meeting on the Least-Developed Countries
and to include in more precise terms their estimated financial implications.

23. && The Secretariat introduced the document by saying that it had been prepared pursuant to the
Guidelines for Technical Cooperation adopted by the Committee on Trade and Development last year.
Revision 1 affected the figures quoted in paragraph 13 and incorporated into Annex 1A a number of
new activities as follow-up to the High-Level Meeting and certain revisions on sources of funding.
The short time available since the High-Level Meeting had made it possible to circulate document
WT/COMTD/W/32/Rev.1 only in english for the meeting. French and spanish versions would be
circulated as soon as possible. As Members might recall, the present plan was only the second triennial
plan prepared under the Committee's procedures, and the first one that was actually presented to the
Committee prior to the initiation of an annual programme. The 1997 - 1999 plan had been presented
in May 1997, and an addendum on 1997 activities had been provided to the Committee last August.
He mentioned this only to highlight the very dynamic nature of technical cooperation activities and
the need for the Secretariat to always be ready to respond in a flexible manner to requests for technical
cooperation activities which it received on a continuous basis.
The Secretariat further said that some changes had been made in the presentation of the Three
Year Plan, both in form and in substance. These changes endeavoured to respond to comments made
by Members on the previous plan and to improve the document and the planning process describing
the broad framework within which activities were designed and planned. Thus, document
WT/COMTD/W/32/Rev.1 contained an introductory section (paragraphs 1 through 17) which illustrated
some of the lessons learned through the experience of the previous plan, and described the process
of preparation of the document, detailed its structure, provided some preliminary rough budgetary
estimates, and summarized, along broad lines, the global objective of the Secretariat's technical
cooperation activities. That objective was always evolving.
The Secretariat continued by saying that the document indicated the broad lines of action for
the Secretariat's technical cooperation activities on different WTO subjects for 1998 and 1999 which,
for 1998, had been complemented with the detailed list of activities in Annex 1. In response to comments
by delegations, Annex 1 had been split into three categories: 1A contained activities fully organized
and financed by the WTO; 1B listed activities organized jointly with other organizations, or activities
organized by other organizations in which the WTO had a major role; and 1C contained activities to
which the WTO had been invited to participate by others. For the year 2000, a brief statement was
made, indicating likely future priorities. Many delegations had responded to an invitation by the
Secretariat to send in requests for technical cooperation activities by 15 October 1997. It was clear
that this target date did not prejudge the presentation of requests at a future time, nor the continuous
efforts to respond to them, as was the customary practice. Among the delegations that had responded
to the invitation were Bangladesh, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Guatemala, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Korea,
Moldova, Mongolia, Pakistan, Qatar, and regional organizations such as the Forum Secretariat for
the Pacific Island Countries and the Commonwealth Secretariat. Where these requests had been precise
enough, some concrete activities had been included in Annex 1; in other cases, further consultations
with the delegations concerned were needed to define the concrete activities to be undertaken. The
plan also incorporated programmes being developed with the World Bank and regional development
banks such as the Asian Development Bank, the Islamic Development Bank and the Inter-American
Development Bank.

26. && The Secretariat viewed the Three Year Plan as its main programming instrument, which would
facilitate both the task of the Secretariat and that of the Committee in relation to technical cooperation
activities. It had already proven to be a useful tool in the Secretariat's own internal process for the
management of technical cooperation activities. With assistance from Members, the Secretariat would
continue to improve it and develop it into its’ main programming tool. For these purposes, the
Secretariat was in the process of designing an improved data base which would include a mission
management system. He expected this data base to be ready in a few months. In that manner, the
Secretariat expected to continue providing its Members with the best technical cooperation services
possible.

27. && The Chairman highlighted a few items mentioned. First, the flexibility with which the Secretariat
responded to needs for technical cooperation. Second, that changes had been made to the document
in response to comments by Members on the previous Plan. Third, the format had also been changed
as aresult of comments by Members. Last, that preliminary rough budget estimates were important.
In that respect he had consulted the Secretariat prior to the Meeting and it had become clear that a
word about financial implications was called for. Paragraph 13 of document WT/COMTD/W/32/Rev. 1
contained preliminary estimates on the basis of rough calculations, as stated therein. These estimates
included those related to the agreed follow-up to the High-Level Meeting for the Least-Developed
Countries. Whereas the WTO Trust Fund for technical cooperation would have a substantive balance
at the end of this year, and a new contribution had been announced at the High-Level Meeting itself,
it was clear that the utilization of these funds had to be staggered, as a minimum, over the next two
years - 1998 and 1999 - and that not all of them could be exclusively used for the High-Level Meeting
follow-up. In that context, the Secretariat's preliminary estimate of the possible shortfall in 1998 for
High-Level Meeting follow-up purposes, as mentioned in paragraph 14, was in the order of approximately
SwF 1 million. Moreover, the estimates in the Three Year Plan did not include the financial implications
of activities that might have to be undertaken in relation to the least-developed countries which had
not been the subject of Round Tables during the High-Level Meeting, and where needs assessments
and other activities at the national level might be required. He was not suggesting to initiate a debate
on that issue at the current Committee on Trade and Development meeting, but only to flag the point
to stress the need for consultations, in an appropriate framework, between the Secretariat and the
delegations mainly concerned.

28.&& The representative of the European Communities welcomed paragraph 13 which gave a detailed
idea of the budget situation. She asked the Secretariat whether it would be feasible to add yet another
column to the tables in the document which would indicate, in a preliminary way, the cost of the
individual programmes mentioned.

29.&& The representative of Guatemala said that the document reflected the objectives and the needs
for technical cooperation within the WTO while maintaining the flexibility required to face an evolution
of needs and to best achieve the objectives. A new format had been put before delegations which
facilitated the organization of activities. The increased number of requests for technical cooperation
showed the growing interest of developing Members to integrate into the multilateral trading system
and constituted a recognition of the benefit that those countries derived from that system. Her
government had given priority to integrate its economy into the multilateral trading system and recently
decided to strengthen the necessary structures for dealing with the matters within the remit of the WTO.
This included the setting up of a mission to the WTO which would become operational in 1998. Within
the effort to accelerate the adaptation of Guatemala's policies, rules and regulations to WTO standards
technical cooperation was indispensable, including joint inter-organizational cooperation. She hoped
that her country's efforts would meet with the necessary feed-back so that her country could more
effectively contribute to strengthening the multilateral trading system. Her delegation was of the view
that the national seminar requested in Annex 1A, item 17 by the government of Guatemala would have
a great impact as it would permit her country to define a national programme.

30.&& The representative of Bangladesh said that his delegations comments related to document
WT/COMTD/W/32 as his delegation had not had sufficient time to consider Revision 1. of the document.
Paragraph 5 of document WT/COMTD/W/32 gave an encouraging picture as it showed a sharp rise
in the number of technical cooperation activities undertaken. Four categories of consumers of technical
cooperation were identified; LDCs, developing countries, transition economies and acceding countries.
His delegation would appreciate receiving information about the distribution of activities among those
four categories. Paragraph 7 mentioned increasing trends towards activities at the regional level; in
this context his delegation wished to know how much of the available resources went to each region.
His delegation urged the Secretariat to give delegations more lead-time in the future to consider
documents as delegations needed to consult capitals. Paragraph 16 provided the global objectives and
mentioned the priority placed by Members to integrate the LDCs into the multilateral trading system
as well as the High-Level Meeting. However, when the activities in Annex 1A were counted, only
sixteen of the ninety-two activities related to the High-Level Meeting, a figure that, in his view, did
not reflect a very high level of attention to LDCs. Although he did not deny that LDCs were involved
in other activities as well, sixteen out of ninety-two was not a very encouraging figure. In 1B, only
one activity out of sixteen emanated from the LDC needs. His delegation also felt that information
technology was an important issue where more resources should be invested than could be understood
from the poor attention it had been given in the document. The document stated that technical cooperation
was demand driven. His delegation questioned whether it was really demand-driven when the table
already was laid out for three years with times, schedules, venues and subjects already in place. Until
the consumers were fully integrated in the preparation of this menu, the claim of demand-driven did
not stand on solid ground. However, he realized the difficulties involved and was convinced that at
least Geneva-based delegations could be more actively involved. Last, regarding the management of
the process, there had been information gaps between missions, capitals and the WTO and his delegation
found itself mid-stream between the two, not knowing what either one was doing. He was convinced
that it would be possible to find a well-functioning institutional system of communication between these
three entities.

31. && The representative of Switzerland said that the new document was a clear improvement over
the first Three Year Plan. His delegation particularly appreciated the information given in the
introductory paragraphs. Paragraph 6 to 13 mentioned, in general terms and in different places, that
the Secretariat was put under a lot of pressure from the increased demand for technical assistance.
His delegation was of the view that no particular activity should hinder the regular work of the
Secretariat. If that should be the case his delegation expected the Secretariat to report such problems
to the Committee on Trade and Development or to the relevant body of the WTO. Given the shortage
of resources, it might be important to prioritize the activities at some stage. The Secretariat could
for example give priority to those activities which corresponded most narrowly to the objectives and
principles stated in the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation. Concerning paragraph 13, he noted that
several trust-funds were mentioned while in his delegation’ s understanding there was only one WTO
trust-fund for technical cooperation activities which had been established under paragraph b of the
Decision of the General Council of 18 July 1996 and which had followed the rules contained in that
Decision. Those rules were essential for ensuring transparency and efficiency of WTO technical
cooperation activities. With respect to the 1998 activities, he said that it would be useful to explicitly
enumerate those activities which related to every section of activities. It would be helpful to relate
every particular activity to the section in the main part. For example, section 1.1 on the Agreement
on Agriculture, in its third paragraph stated that "The Annex shows, in particular, two regional seminars
on the Agreement on Agriculture...". It would be useful if these two regional seminars referred to
would be mentioned by number. With respect to Annex | he said that the paper could be improved
upon along the lines suggested by other delegations. First, section 4.1(d) of the Implementation
Modalities stated that "...the Three-Year Plan shall indicate for every proposed activity ... (iv) the
executing unit and human resource utilisation...". His delegation suggested that an indication of the
human resource utilization be given, as well as the financial implications in a separate column. Another
useful improvement would be to have a more detailed description of the project in connection to column
two, containing the description and mode of delivery for each activity. This would be particularly
appreciated by the sponsoring bodies in capitals in order to determine their priorities.

32. && The Secretariat said that it would respond to the requests for additional information in the next
revision of the document. He said that the sharp expansion of technical cooperation activities affected
not only the Technical Cooperation Division, but also the operational divisions. After reviewing the
latest plan, a number of operational division directors felt that the set of activities programmed for 1998
went beyond the capacity of the resources available. They had pointed out that the same staff were
used for dispute settlement, and that if there were an increase in dispute settlement cases it would not
be possible to give all the technical assistance requested. The Secretariat was therefore considering
engaging consultants in a limited number of cases where it could be assured that they were able to
do the job. He added that in the past six months three of the nine staff members in the Technical
Cooperation and Training Division had been locked up in preparing several versions of the Three Year
Plan and other work related to documents which had been asked for by the Committee on Trade and
Development. The more details delegations asked for, the more time his staff would have to spend
on preparing documents instead of being in the field and actually delivering technical assistance. He
requested delegations to bear this in mind when requesting greater detail. This applied for example
to the request for including financial information. The Secretariat was currently not certain of the
venue for various regional activities and the amount spent on each activity depended, among other
things, on the venue. Also, exchange rates varied every day and it was therefore difficult to give exact
financial requirements for each specific activity. He suggested that delegations contact the Secretariat
directly if they wish to have an indication of the financial requirement of a particular project.
The Secretariat further said that regarding the allocation of resources to LDCs, the latest budget
showed that the allocation to LDCs was SwF 1.9 million out of a total of SwF 4.8 million, which gave
a more accurate picture of the activities focused on LDCs. It was not accurate to go by the number
of activities since for example two items for LDCs were special training programmes that had been
introduced for the LDCs, one for the French-speaking and one for the English-speaking countries.
Those programmes were not just two programmes like the other ones as they related to 40 countries.
Intensive training would be given to officials from these countries and a considerable amount of the
Secretariat's financial and personnel resources would be absorbed by those programmes. Should one
still wish to count the activities, the right figure of activities relating to LDCs would amount to 25 out
of 94. In response to the question of whether the activities were being truly demand-driven in
establishing a three year plan, he recalled that the three year plan was arequirement from the Committee
on Trade and Development. In planning the current Three Year Plan, the Secretariat had been guided
by the type of requests it received from Members. The specific programmes were established just
before the beginning of each year and were almost entirely demand-driven. Demand-driven meant that
the Secretariat would not impose a programme on the country concerned. If in a region there was
ademand from four to five countries, regional activities would be planned without waiting for a request
from all others in that region. The activity would then be proposed and it would be up to each country
to participate or not. Demand-driven had to be given a realistic meaning.

34.&& The Committee took note of the Three Year Plan 1998 - 2000 for WTO technical cooperation
activities and of the statements made.

35.&& The representative of Switzerland recalled that the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation,
section 4(a) stated that the "Three Year Plan adjusted on an annual basis, including budgetary
implications, to be approved by the Committee on Trade and Development and to be submitted to the
appropriate bodies of WTO, according to agreed procedures and decisions of the General Council".
He was aware of the fact that the Budget Committee and the General Council had already approved
the budget for 1998. There was thus no point in setting up a procedure at this stage. However, his
delegation requested that in subsequent years the Committee have its discussions on this item at an
early date for adoption and subsequent submission to the Budget Committee and other relevant Bodies.

36.&& The Secretariat said that the Guidelines envisaged approval of the Three Year Plan. However,
in earlier discussions of the Three Year Plan in the Committee on Trade and Development, several
delegations had expressed a preference for taking note rather than approving it, as they felt that an
approval of expenditure in the Committee on Trade and Development would imply certain budgetary
commitments. Moreover, the Three Year Plan had been turned into a rolling plan. A certain amount
of information on what was going to be included in the technical cooperation activities in 1998 was
available at the present stage. However, he hoped that many more requests were going to be received,
and unfortunately, some requests which had already been made might be taken out for various reasons.
The Secretariat therefore felt that the best way to proceed was for the Committee to review the Three
Year Plan appropriately revised in successive meetings, although not in every meeting, and take note
of it at each stage. This line of procedure seemed to have been confirmed by earlier Committee meetings.

37. && The representative of Switzerland said that if it was an issue of principle, which meant that
by taking note the Committee on Trade and Development had somehow sanctioned the procedure of
taking note regularly of the Three Year Plan, then his delegation had to reserve its position for the
moment. There was also a question of credibility involved. It was the role of the Committee to judge
first the content of the activities in the Three Year Plan, subject to which the Budget Committee would
then be asked to approve budgetary appropriations. Even ifthe Three Year Plan only contained estimates
and predictions about projects and contained a measure of uncertainty, a procedure ensuring credibility
of WTO activities was called for. His delegation could therefore not accept the procedure to take note
of the Three Year Plan as a regular procedure.

38.&& The representative of Morocco noted that other organizations like UNCTAD did not adopt,
but took note, of their technical cooperation plans. This was done to avoid creating sensitivities among
governments as regards the level of assistance received or earmarked. He suggested that WTO continue
its practice of taking note of its Three Year Plans for Technical Cooperation.

39. && The representative of Switzerland clarified that it had not been his delegation's intention to
adopt the current Three Year Plan, but rather to agree on a procedure for subsequent Plans in line
with the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation. If there was asubstantial disagreement among Members,
his delegation suggested that informal consultations be held to resolve the issue.

40. && The Committee agreed to revert to this issue at a later stage.
Cc. Review of the application of special provisions in the multilateral trading agreements and related

Ministerial decisions in favour of developing country members, in particular. least-developed
country members

41. &&The Chairman said that following statements made at the meetings of the Committee on Trade
and Development earlier in the year and following his informal consultations with delegations, it had
been decided at the Committee's September Meeting to include this item on the agenda of its next
meeting. The Secretariat had prepared a Note as background for the discussion, which had been
circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/33. The document contained a compilation of information
provided by the Secretariat on the implementation of the Uruguay Round results during 1997.
Information received at a later stage, such as that related to GATS, would be circulated in an addendum
to this document. The debate should allow the Committee to evaluate to what extent and how the
different provisions were applied or used by developing countries since the Committee's review last
year. He also wished to encourage delegations to provide the Committee with information as to their
experience with the implementation of provisions since some of the provisions in favour of LDCs were
triggered only if specific requests were made.

42.&& The representative of Pakistan noted that the Committee on Trade and Development was the
forum to deliberate upon all the aspects of the issue and that Items three and four of the Committee’ s
terms of reference were relevant for that purpose. Specifically, Item four of the Committee's terms
of reference mandated the Committee to consider any question that might arise with regard to the
application of special provisions in the multilateral trading agreements and related ministerial decisions
in favour of developing countries and to report to the General Council for appropriate action. The
experience of developing countries in the multilateral trading agreements and related ministerial decisions
in the past two years had raised certain questions which had to be discussed in the Committee.
The representative of Pakistan continued and said that, for a proper perspective it was important
to note that special and differential treatment for developing countries constituted an integral part of
Members’ contractual obligations. Part [V of GATT 1947 had been negotiated in recognition of special
conditions and needs for developing countries in view of their level of development. Part IV was still
relevant as it had been incorporated into GATT 1994 by inference. Many other specific provisions
for special and differential treatment of developing countries were also included in different WTO
Agreements under the Uruguay Round. It should also be noted that these provisions aimed at creating
a balance as developing countries had accepted wider and more strenuous obligations in many areas
during the Uruguay Round. It was therefore imperative that the provisions for special and differential
treatment of developing countries, as embodied in WTO Agreements, were fully implemented so that
the balance of rights and obligations would be maintained.
The representative of Pakistan went on to say that the information contained in document
WT/COMTD/W/33 needed to be supplemented in several areas and, in addition, certain questions
needed to be addressed. Those concerned some of his delegation's specific concerns. First, the
Secretariat not did not provide information with regard to all the provisions in favour of developing
countries in the multilateral agreements and ministerial decisions. A complete compilation of all the
provisions had been prepared in document WT/COMTD/W/510 in November 1994. A comparison
of the present document with the 1994 compilation showed that almost half the provisions had not been
reported upon. Second, even in the present document, many provisions had been mentioned without
any information regarding their implementation. Some of these provisions were Articles 10:1 and 10:2
and Annex B, paragraph 2 of the SPS Agreement, Articles 12:2, 12:3, 12:5, 12:6, 12:9 of the TBT
Agreement, Annex III, paragraph 5 of the Agreement on Customs Valuation, Articles 1:2 and 3:5()
of the Agreement on Import Licensing Procedures, Articles 27:7, 27:8, 27:9 and 27:15 of the Agreement
on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, Articles 66:2 of the TRIPS Agreement, etc. Third, there
was a number of provisions in the present document where the information given in the column for
implementation was not complete. Most of the responses on provisions in the dispute settlement
understanding fell into that category. It was, for those reasons, difficult to obtain a complete and
satisfactory understanding of the status of the implementation and use of special provisions in favour
of developing countries.
The representative of Pakistan further said that after careful reading of the document, his
impression was that most of the provisions were yet to be properly operationalized. Keeping in mind
the importance of the issue for developing countries and the mandate of the Committee on Trade and Development in this regard, his delegation suggested that the Committee should arrange for an in-depth
consideration of the issue in order to ensure that all the provisions in favour of developing countries
were implemented. To facilitate such a consideration by the Committee his delegation requested the
Secretariat to update the document WT/COMTD/W/33 by seeking full and complete information
regarding all the provisions in favour of developing countries from the relevant divisions of the WTO.
These could also provide, where appropriate, the reasons for non-implementation. That information
would help the Committee in identifying clearly the provisions that had not been operationalized so
far, and, at least in some cases, the reasons for such non-implementation. His delegation proposed
that the information should be collected before the next meeting of the Committee and that the item
be placed on the Agenda of the Committee's next meeting. The Committee would then be in a position
to hold in-depth discussions and report to the General Council for appropriate action. His delegation
would, for its part, be working to identify some important provisions that needed to be operationalized
and might present, in an informal paper, suggestions on ways to operationalize those provisions.

46. && The representative of Egypt said that his delegation supported the gist of the intervention made
by the representative of Pakistan. His delegation attached great importance to the issue of special and
differential treatment for developing countries. It was an integral part of the balance of rights and
obligations in various Agreements. He realized that it was sometimes difficult for the Secretariat to
evaluate and pronounce itself on the effectiveness of the implementation of various provisions. His
delegation was aware of the fact that some of the provisions were of a general nature and needed to
be made operational. It was working on some specific ideas in that respect which it hoped to present
to the Committee on Trade and Development shortly. He suggested keeping the item on the Agenda.
and reiterated that proper implementation of the special and differential treatment to developing countries
would send a positive signal for future anticipated negotiations on the built-in agenda. If developing
countries felt that those provisions were being faithfully implemented, it would facilitate their approach
to future negotiations.

47.&& The representative of India said that his delegation fully supported the statement made by the
representative of Pakistan. Since document WT/COMTD/W/33 was rather incomplete he suggested
that it be completed incorporating all points made by the delegation of Pakistan. Only a few of the
special and differential provisions in favour of developing countries had been implemented. He stressed
the need for the implementation of those provisions and strongly supported that the document be updated.
and presented to the Committee on Trade and Development at its next Meeting.

48.&& The representative of Morocco said that his delegation supported the intervention made by
the representative of Pakistan. According to its mandate, the Committee on Trade and Development
was the appropriate body for discussing special and differential measures in favour of developing
countries. The special and differential measures in favour of developing countries constituted the
development dimension of international trade and were an integral part of the obligations that WTO
Members had committed themselves to in the GATT 47, the GATT 94, and in the WTO Agreements.
The Committee should examine the implementation of those provisions and, with the help of the
Secretariat, examine what the problems were; first for the developed countries to implement certain
provisions, and second for developing countries as regards provisions that had not been used. The
Committee should particularly examine the difficulties of non-implementation in order to arrive at the
implementation of a large part of the provisions which were of great importance to developing countries.
The document was a step towards full application of all special and differential provisions in favour
of developing countries. The Item should remain on the agenda of the Committee. It was only in
that way that developing countries could be encouraged to participate fully in an equal manner in the
international trading system.

49. &&The representative of the United States noted that document WT/COMTD/W/33 needed to
be updated in terms of the information provided. However, the data that was available generally showed
that the provisions with respect to developing countries were on track which was an encouraging sign
in terms of the obligations that all Members had taken. His delegation looked forward to discussions
regarding specific measures. In terms of obligations by developed countries his delegation was of the
view that one measure that should be taken into account in terms of the special treatment developed
countries provided to developing countries was the growth in exports of developing countries since
the Uruguay Round. Developing countries in general, excluding anumber of least-developed countries,
had improved their exports and that was related to the commitments in the Uruguay Round. He also
noted that part of the progress of the many provisions in favour of developing countries had been that
they allowed those countries to modify regimes and implement trade-creating liberalizing policies during
the transition periods that were provided. This would benefit developing countries in the longer term.
Those particular provisions could always be seen as a double-edged sword, but nonetheless, his delegation
was of the opinion that the process was healthy and deserved the sort of review that had been initially
suggested by the representative of Pakistan.

50.&& The representative of Myanmar, speaking on behalf of ASEAN, said that document
WT/COMTD/W/33 updated information on about half ofthe Agreements and Decisions. His delegation
therefore supported the request made by the representative of Pakistan and other developing countries
to update comprehensive information regarding the implementation of all special provisions relating
to developing countries in the Uruguay Round Agreements, legal instruments and ministerial decisions.
Regarding the provisions which had not yet been operationalized, as they did not provide for action
per se, his delegation suggested that they should be further explored by the Committee on Trade and
Development at a subsequent meeting and that appropriate action should be taken for full implementation.

51.&& The representative of the European Communities said that her delegation was committed to
the better integration of the least-developed countries into the world trading system. The High-Level
Meeting was not a one-off event but a starting point of a process and her delegation intended to build
upon it. However, special efforts directed towards the least-developed countries should not allow
Members to neglect all the other developing countries and the specific commitments that had been entered
into in that regard, and which had been included in the conclusions of the Uruguay Round. The regular
monitoring of the implementation of the special provisions in favour of developing countries was
necessary to keep the focus and to put pressure on their implementation. Document WT/COMTD/W/33
showed that the Committee on Trade and Development was on the right track. Her delegation welcomed
the announcement by the delegation of Pakistan that it would present an informal paper on ways to
operationalize certain provisions. The debate on these matters could be used as an occasion to capture
useful hints on what the actual concerns of developing countries were so that delegations could work
together in a constructive spirit.

52.&& The representative of Canada requested that a change be made on page 17 in the text referring
to Canada. The text should read: ..., Canada, in the context of the simplification of its tariff, intends
to accelerate to 1998, most of its Uruguay Round Tariff reduction currently scheduled for implementation
on 1 January 1999.

53. && The Committee took note of the statements made, requested the Secretariat to update document
WT/COMTD/W/33 in line with suggestions made by delegations and agreed to revert to this item at
its next meeting.

D. Annual Report for 1997

54.&&  The Chairman said that at the Committee on Trade and Development's last meeting, he had
noted that the General Council would undertake an annual overview of WTO activities at its last meeting
of the year, scheduled for 10 December. For the purpose of this overview, the General Council would
need the Committee's Annual Report for 1997. The form that the Report should take was indicated
in the General Council's Decision on Reporting Procedures in document WT/L/105. It should be brief,
factual in nature and provide an indication of the actions and decisions taken by the Committee
during 1997. The Secretariat had prepared a draft Report along those lines, circulated in document
WT/COMTD/W/34, which was before the Committee for its consideration and adoption. The current
meeting’ s discussion should, of course, also be reflected in the Report. In order to avoid meeting again,
and in conformity with the wish of many delegations to reduce the number of meetings, he would ask
the Committee after the discussion to mandate the Secretariat to complete the Report, taking into account
the current discussion.

55. After some discussion in which several delegations suggested that the Report be as factual as
possible, the Chairman noted that there was agreement to delete certain lines in paragraphs 7 and 4
and that a reference to follow-up activities should be added to paragraphs 7 and 13. He prosed that
the Committee on Trade and Development adopt the Report on that basis and request the Secretariat
to amend and complete the Report taking into account the Committee's discussion.

56. The Committee so agreed.

E. Review of Participation of Developing Country Members in the Multilateral Trading System

57.&& The Chairman said that at its Meeting in September, the Committee on Trade and Development
had had a preliminary discussion on the item, based on a Note prepared by the Secretariat (document
WT/COMTD/W/31). At that meeting, delegations had expressed the wish that the subject become a
standing item on the agenda of the Committee. The view had also been expressed that the intention
of a further discussion on this item in the Committee should not be to revise the document as the purpose
of the document had only been to provide elements for delegations to react to.

58. && The representative of Egypt said that the issue of the review of participation of developing
country members in the multilateral trading system was an issue of importance to developing countries.
His delegation was of the view that consideration of this issue could be done in a much more effective
way. The terms of reference of the Committee on Trade and Development indicated that the Committee
should keep under review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading
system and consider measures and initiatives to assist developing country Members, in particular the
least-developed country Members, in the expansion of their trade and investment opportunities. He
was of the view that the way in which the issue had been dealt with could be strengthened in order
to satisfy the terms of reference. He hoped that this would be achieved when considering the item
during the coming year as it was too late for the approach to be adopted for the current year. He then
turned to the document itself and said that his delegation welcomed a reference to developing countries
with successful trade performances. However, this had to be put into its context as had been done
in paragraph two which indicated that, in 1996, the trade share of developing countries had, for the
first time, risen above its 1985 level. That was the context in which the discussion should take place
and it showed that much remained to be done. The trade performance of African and the Middle Eastern
countries three years after the entry into force of the WTO Agreements remained disappointing. As
was mentioned in paragraph 8, the share of world exports accounted for by developing countries in
Africa and in the Middle East had declined over the past decade. Paragraph 8 only indicated that there
had been a decline, without further analysing its reasons. His delegation considered it necessary to
analyze why the trade share of these developing countries had been declining. The difficulties should
be identified and analyzed in order to assist those countries to design and implement the necessary
measures. The kind of assistance required to help those countries enhance their trade performance
was to be analyzed as well. A more detailed analysis, on a less aggregated level, should be undertaken
with regard to the issue. Whether the analysis should be limited to trade in goods or whether it should
also include trade in services was another issue to consider. Consideration of this item should help
developing countries address issues relating to their share of world trade and their participation in the
multilateral trading system. He proposed that the Secretariat prepare an outline of a study for the
Committee to assess and to indicate its desired direction. The inclusion of trade in services was one
of the elements his delegation was willing to consider. An analysis of the participation of developing
countries in world trade would require something more elaborate than the eight pages provided in
document WT/COMTD/W/31. Some conclusion were called for, especially indicating areas where
technical assistance was needed.

59.&& The Committee took note of the statement made and agreed to revert to this item at a later
stage.
F. Other Business
(i) Electronic Trade
60.&& The representative of Egypt said that the international community was witnessing recent
developments of the Internet and the technology associated with it that provided new opportunities
for the expansion of trade in both goods and services in developed and developing countries alike.
There was no doubt that electronic trade would increase significantly in the years to come. A number
of international or ganizations had started to address issues related to electronic trade in an active manner, like UNCTAD, and UNCITRAL. WTO was in the process of creating a trade database and cooperated
with the World Bank in a project related to information technology. Furthermore, the High-Level
Meeting for Least-Developed Countries had addressed the issue of the use of Information Technology
as a means to enhance exports from LDCs. It would therefore be appropriate to discuss the issue of
electronic-trade in goods and services in the Committee on Trade and Development and his delegation
intended to present an informal paper to the Committee. He suggested that an item be added to the
agenda of the next Committee meeting relating to electronic trade in goods and services.

(ii) Proposed dates for the Committee meetings in 1998

61.&& The Chairman proposed the following tentative dates for the Committee on Trade and
Development's meetings in 1998: 9 March, 22 June, 21 September and 16 November 1998.

62. && The representative of Morocco said that his delegation had no problem in accepting these dates
on a tentative basis, but urged the Secretariat to consult with other trade-related organizations, such
as UNCTAD, with a view to avoiding situations where more than one meeting took place at the same
time.

63.&& The Committee took note of the statements made.
