RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/10

25 November 1996

ORGANIZATION

(96-4991)

 

Committee on Trade and Development
Tenth (Special) Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 23 SEPTEMBER 1996

Chairman: Mr. Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)

A. Adoption of the Agenda

1.&& The Committee adopted the following agenda:
A. Adoption of the Agenda
B. Trade and Development Activities of Intergovernmental Organizations
C. Other Business:

- Continuation of the discussion on the review of the participation of developing
countries in the multilateral trading system including the impact of the results
of the Uruguay Round on developing countries.

- Guidelines for technical assistance and CTD's report to the General Council.

B. Trade and Development Activities of Intergovernmental Organizations

2s &&The Chairman recalled that the main purpose of this meeting was to have an exchange of views
with the Chairman of the Joint IMF/World Bank Development Committee, Mr. El Kabbaj and the
Director-General of the WTO, Mr. Renato Ruggiero, who would both address the Committee. As
such, the meeting was yet another symbol of the growing cooperation between the WTO and other
international organizations, and an expression of the CTD's mandate to serve as a focal point for
consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO and its relationship with development
related activities in other multilateral agencies. In that context, he recalled that, at the Committee's
meeting of 18 June, the Secretary-General of UNCTAD, the Chairman of the General Council, the
head of the ITC, and the Director-General of the WTO each had addressed the Members. He
furthermore recalled that the Ministerial Declaration on the WTO's contribution to achieving greater
coherence in global economic policy-making called for cooperation with international organization
responsible for monetary and financial matters. This meeting presented a concrete example of such
cooperation.

3. && Mr. El Kabbaj, Chairman of the Joint IMF/World Bank Development Committee, welcomed
the opportunity which had been given to him to address the Committee and said that the CTD, under
the vigorous efforts of its Chairman, had initiated an active and substantial programme aimed at
strengthening the positive impact of the WTO on the developing countries. He would describe the
joint IMF/World Bank Development Committee's scope of activity and the way in which it operated;
its long-standing interest in trade problems; and its future work. Turning to the Committee's scope
of activity, he explained that, in 1974, the Governors of the IMF and the World Bank had created
two Ministerial Committees. One was the Interim Committee which, despite its name, was in fact
a permanent committee which dealt with international monetary problems, and specifically with matters
relating to the International Monetary Fund; the second committee was officially named the Joint
Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Governors of the Bank and the Fund on the Transfer of Real
Resources to the Developing Countries. For obvious reasons, this Committee tended to be referred
to as the Development Committee. Since its terms of reference consisted of examining the question
of the transfer of resources to the developing countries, it was appropriate that the Development
Committee should be a joint committee of the Bretton Woods institutions. Unlike the Interim Committee,
which was specifically linked to the IMF, the Development Committee was a joint committee of the
two institutions. It was important to point out however, that it was officially a consultative body of
the Boards of Governors of the World Bank and the IMF, and not a decision-making body. However,
since the Ministers for Finance and, in certain cases, the Ministers for Development who were members
of the Committee, were also the Governors of the World Bank and the IMF, their suggestions carried
considerable weight in the political discussions of the two institutions. The Development Committee
comprised 24 members as well as 20 observers including, ofcourse, the WTO. Its membership reflected
the structure of the Boards of the World Bank and the IMF. This meant that some members represented
only one country, while others represented well over 20, depending on their size. The Chairman was
chosen by the Committee from among its members. The Committee had an Executive Secretary who
coordinated the work ofits Secretariat and prepared the conference-room papers. It essentially depended
for its documentation on the highly-qualified staff of the Fund and the Bank, and occasionally on studies
from other organizations if necessary. The Committee met twice a year, often for a half day. These
meetings were traditionally followed by a private lunch organized at the initiative of the Chairman,
bringing together the members of the Committee, the member States, the President of the World Bank
and the Managing Director of the IMF. The discussions had often been informative and useful, covering
a whole range of issues relating to the problems of development. However, it was widely felt that
the action of the Committee had not always produced significant and lasting results. Indeed, the
Committee had launched a number of important initiatives, for example the creation of an Interest Subsidy
Fund at the World Bank in 1974, the Special Assistance Facility for Sub-Saharan Africa in 1985, and
more recently, the Environmental Facility. However, for a variety of reasons, including the fact that
its role was only consultative and that the Directors and Boards hesitated to entrust it with particularly
sensitive matters, the Committee had not really established a reputation for accomplishing what it set
out to do. While it was too soon to say that the Committee had clearly taken on a new role, it was
certainly moving in that direction. Ever since he had taken over the Chairmanship 18 months ago,
he had been convinced that its role had to change. That conviction was shared by Mr. Wolfensohn
and Mr. Camdessus. With the support of the other members, they had done their utmost to strengthen
the Committee, and concrete results were showing.
 Mr. El Kabbaj went on to say that the most important of those concrete results involved the
problem of the external debt of the heavily indebted poor countries for whom current mechanisms did
not suffice to reduce the burden to a level they could support. Estimates suggested that future progress
towards development of some 20 of those countries depended on their external debt being brought
back down to a level they could handle. This initiative, which had been discussed in various fora,
in particular at the G7 summit, had received considerable support, and he was hopeful that it would
be adopted at the next meeting of the Committee. It would concern all of the members of the financial
institutions: creditors, debtors, donors, etc. The Committee also intended to address another central
issue next April, namely the prospects for the future replenishment of the resources of the International
Development Association IDA), which was the central body dealing with international aid to the poorest
of the developing countries. He recalled that the replenishment of the IDA's resources was directly
linked to the broader issue of the prospects for all forms of concessional aid required to help the poor
countries become active participants in the global economy. The transfer of resources was the main
purpose underlying the creation of the Development Committee 22 years ago, and its founders no doubt
had the increase of the flows of official development assistance in mind. He noted that, with the
increasing inter-dependence of the international economy and the growing diversity among the developing
countries over the past few years, the Committee had grown conscious of the importance of addressing
issues such as private funding, investment, trade, and the soundness of multilateral development
institutions, and last year, in particular, it had examined the question of coordination between the different
financial aid institutions and the regional banks. In this connection, the Committee had developed
or studied a new way of coordinating those different institutions and had drawn up a report commonly
known as the Task Force report on the coordination of all regional bank institutions, the World Bank
and all of the finance institutions.
Mr. El Kabbaj pointed out that efforts were also made to enhance the efficiency of the
Development Committee by revising the way in which it operated. The traditional approach of the
Development Committee consisted of holding a long plenary meeting during which the 24 Ministers
and five or six observers would make statements which took up the morning. This left little time for
the Ministers to consider the basic problems in any depth, and indeed, some Ministers preferred simply
to make their statements and leave the meeting. In agreement with Mr. Wolfensohn and Mr. Camdessus,
the Committee had taken the initiative of proposing that the statements should be dropped, which the
Ministers unanimously adopted. He was now responsible for summarizing before the Committee all
of the contributions by the Ministers in one statement to the plenary. As a result, the Committee now
spent most of the time available on the fundamental problems in restricted meetings of the 24 Ministers.
The discussions would then be summarized in a short communiqué reflecting the Committee's consensus.
The luncheon was now devoted more specifically to subjects relating to the general strategic orientations
of the World Bank itself. He had been pleased to see that this progress was highlighted at the last
G7 summit, in Lyon, which issued a communiqué stating that "the reform of the Development Committee
had made it possible for Ministers from developed and the developing countries to consider issues
together and provide guidance to the institutions". The Committee expected to work along the lines
described in the communiqué. There was still a long way to go, but some encouraging progress had
been made and efforts were being pursued to turn the Committee into a true forum for political decision-
makers throughout the world.
Turning to the trade aspects of the Development Committee, Mr. El Kabbaj said that, with
the increasing interdependence of global economies, the links between trade and development had
acquired great importance within the Development Committee in the middle of the 1980s. The
Committee had first addressed the issue in 1983, and had recognized that free market access for
developing country exports was an essential element of support in their adjustment efforts in connection
with their search for a long-term solution to the debt problem. The Committee had also welcomed
GATT's efforts to liberalize and reinforce the international trade system, including the promotion of
anew round of negotiations in which both the developed and the developing countries could participate
actively together. At the start of the Uruguay Round, the Ministers for finance considered that it was
important for them to follow the development of the negotiations closely. Thus, the Committee had
become a forum to focus its attention on the importance of the trade aspects. He recalled that some
Ministers for finance, including several from the developing countries, had not always been involved
in these aspects, in spite of the significant impact of trade policy on the generation of resources for
development. During the Uruguay Round, the Director-General of GATT had reported to the Committee
every six months on the progress of the negotiations. The Ministers had repeatedly expressed their
hope that the Uruguay Round would be completed rapidly and achieve positive results. On several
occasions, moreover, trade aspects had headed the Committee's agenda. On the basis of studies by
the Bank and the Fund and the opinions of the GATT Council, the Ministers had examined the
implications of the regional trade agreements, the impact of industrial, trade and agricultural policies
on development, and the need for the World Bank and the IMF to join GATT in supporting the
developing countries in their efforts to liberalize trade. The potential impact of the conclusions of
the Uruguay Round on the developing countries and other trade-related matters had also been considered.
Over the past few years, many developing countries had become much more aware of the potential
benefits of trade liberalization. At the same time, several industrialized countries had shown a greater
understanding of the problems experienced by the developing countries in integrating into the global
economy. In that respect the Development Committee had played a useful role in harmonizing the
different viewpoints. The Committee had welcomed the Marrakesh Agreements in 1994, and given
considerable attention to encouraging the effective implementation of the conclusions of the Uruguay
Round. At the same time, he, as its Chairman, had strongly recommended increased liberalization
of the agricultural and service sectors in order to ensure tangible benefits for the developing countries,
and had requested the Bank and the Fund to assist the developing countries, including the transition
economies, to accede to the WTO. The Committee had welcomed the establishment of the new
Organization and had encouraged close cooperation between the WTO and the Bretton Woods institutions.
Mr. El Kabbaj noted that, thus, over the past decade the members of the Development Committee
and the Bretton Woods institutions had given special attention to the convergence of the work of the
GATT/WTO and of the two international financial institutions. This convergence had become more
and more necessary in view of the increasing globalization of markets and the interdependence of the
commercial and financial spheres in international trade. The trend towards globalization and liberalization
of trade posed two major types of challenge. First, the events of 1994, in particular the Mexican crisis -
the significant fluctuations in exchange rates between the principal currencies and the repercussions
of those fluctuations on other currencies - had underscored the increasingly decisive influence of the
globalization of financial markets on the world economy as a whole, and the risk that if their disciplines
were ignored, they might shed doubt on the stabilization and liberalization programmes of the developing
countries in particular. This had led him to conclude that globalization had to be coupled with a
strengthening of multilateral disciplines with respect to both trade and financing, and that those disciplines
should serve to maintain an international environment which was permanently both stable and secure.
The trade policy review mechanism had to be accompanied by a similar mechanism in the financial
area. Second, globalization of the economy called for increased dialogue between the different
multilateral institutions and an effort towards international solidarity if it was to contribute to the
integration of the developing countries into the global economy rather than to their exclusion. These
were the principal challenges facing the international community in its effort to ensure that globalization
and the increasing interdependence of trade and finance would develop into an irreversible process
benefiting everyone. A quote from the speech of His Majesty King Hassan II at the closing ceremony
of the Ministerial Meeting of the Uruguay Round, held in Marrakesh in April 1994, provided a perfect
illustration of these challenges: "This globalization could lead to greater inequalities between countries
and aggravate the symptoms of social exclusion that are just as prevalent in the affluent countries as
in the less-affluent countries. In other words, it calls for the creation and implementation of new
collective solidarity mechanisms and demands a new approach to the problems of economic and social
development. The reason why a good number of developing countries boldly restructure their economies
in order to integrate them more easily into the international economy is that they are convinced of the
virtues of financial austerity and of the need to limit the social cost which they will temporarily have
tosupport. The developed countries must offset this cost with symmetric adjustments designed to favour
market access and transparency in the conditions of fair competition, in particular through greater
monetary stability.”
8. Turning to the outlook and relations between the Development Committee and the WTO,
Mr. El Kabbaj said that he had been impressed throughout his chairmanship by the frequent contacts
between representatives of the WTO, the IMF and the World Bank. Their regular meetings and the
support of the United Nations Secretary-General were important in strengthening cooperation among
those key bodies. He was looking forward to hearing WTO's Director-General address the Development
Committee in the context of that cooperation. Indeed, Mr. Ruggiero had been invited to hold discussions
with the Ministers on the issues - and particularly those concerning the developing countries - which
were likely to be discussed during the first WTO Ministerial Conference in Singapore next December.
He acknowledged that the agenda of that important meeting had not yet been precisely defined, and
that WTO's Committee on Trade and Development had an important role in its preparation. Ministers
members of the Development Committee were eager to learn more about the progress made since the
conclusion of the Uruguay Round and developments in other fields in which a more active follow-up
was required and where much remained to be done. He was also aware that the WTO, the Bank and
the Fund were working together on the development of cooperation agreements. He was hopeful that
the rapid and successful conclusion of these agreements would further strengthen the constructive
cooperation that was already operating at several levels between the WTO and the Bretton Woods
institutions, in keeping with their respective mandates. These institutions had complementary functions,
and had all contributed since their creation to the development and maintenance of an open international
trade system. The agenda of the Development Committee would continue to develop. Though he
was not in a position to tell delegations what that agenda would contain beyond next April, he assured
them that the IMF/World Bank Development Committee would continue to examine issues which were
truly meaningful and had significant implications for the member countries. In any case, he was hopeful
that the issues directly linked to trade would appear on the Committee’ s future agenda and that wherever
they did, the WTO would participate actively in the IMF/World Bank Development Committee’ s
discussions.

9. Mr. El Kabbaj concluded by saying that, while the Development Committee was active and
useful, he was determined to continue, throughout his term as Chairman, to work closely with the
representatives of the Bank and the Fund and with his colleagues to turn the Committee into an even
more useful forum in which the variety of viewpoints on major political issues in those institutions
could be heard.

10.&& The Chairman thanked Mr. El Kabbaj for a clear and complete statement on the historical
background, role and future outlook for the CTD. He then invited Mr. Ruggiero to address the meeting.

11. &&The Director-General of the WTO said that he considered the participation of the Chairman
of the Joint IMF/World Bank Development Committee in the WTO's Committee on Trade and
Development not only a sign of closer coordination but also yet another sign of the growing importance
of trade for economic development. Ahead were many challenges, and many unprecedented
opportunities. The growing interdependence of countries could not be stopped. One quarter of world
trade today was on account of developing countries; one-third of the most important importers and
exporters were developing countries. Twenty years ago, 5 per cent of developed country imports came
from developing countries; this figure grew to 15 per cent in 1990. Today it was 20 per cent and
was projected to increase to 25 per cent in the years ahead. In 1995, annual sales of foreign affiliates
of multinational corporations were estimated to exceed the value of traded goods and services which
were over 6,000 billion dollars. Foreign direct investment inflows had increased to over 300 billion
dollars, about one-third of it to developing countries with 10 countries absorbing about 80 per cent
of the total. Once the Uruguay Round Results would be fully implemented, 40 per cent of industrialized
countries’ imports would be duty free. This was the perspective of the growing interdependence between
developed and developing countries. In its recent report, UNCTAD had pointed out that once again
growth in developing countries exceeded that in developed countries, and for the first time served as
the motor for growth. Of real significance was that the outlook for growth in African countries was
positive and that in the past two years, some had achieved growth rates of 5 per cent or more. This
showed that it was possible to change even the most difficult reality. The relationship was changing
between developed and developing countries, with both becoming increasingly interdependent.
Developing country markets were important for industrialized countries. Economic growth in developing
countries was important for the industrialized countries’ own growth and, hence, it was in their own
interest to ensure continued market access into their markets for exports from developing countries.
At the same time, developed countries would be faced with the need for structural adjustment. A recent
report of UNCTAD projected that in the next ten years 12 per cent of manufacturing employment in
developed countries would be affected by imports from developing countries. Growth in developing
countries had thus an impact on growth in developed countries, and the relationship was no longer
one between donor and beneficiary. Trade was an important element in the growth strategy, more
than aid: as the prospects for aid weakened, the importance of trade increased. Interdependence cannot
just be trade. It covers also investment. Important interlinkages between trade and investment would
be analysed in the annual report of the WTO this year. Investment policy was very important for a
development strategy. Investment flows brought transfer of technology, management capacity and
know-how, particularly for the poorest countries. Liberalization was not a concession, regardless of
whether it was undertaken by developed or developing countries; the logic of change required countries
to go forward in partnership. The telecommunications sector was a clear example. Liberalization in
this sector would be in the common interest: no economic future was possible without the technological
advances in telecommunications. The Director-General emphasized once again the common interest
of countries as reflected in the interdependent relationship, and said that it would be reinforced by
work in this Committee to further the integration of developing countries in the multilateral trading
system.

12. && The Director-General went on to say that the problems faced by least-developed countries
represented a failure on the part of the international community and posed a big challenge. He recalled
his proposals to the G7 countries gathered at Lyon earlier this year, in particular, first, to extend duty
free access for all products exported by least-developed; second, to implement measures to improve
the investment flows to the poorest countries; third, to improve coordination, not only with UNCTAD
and ITC, but also with multilateral financial institutions, using new technologies to increase technical
assistance with a view to strengthening LLDCs' human and institutional capacity. He hoped that these
three points could be included in the discussions in Singapore. He noted that the Singapore Ministerial
Conference represented only one step, albeit an important one, in the process of building a world trading
system. He hoped that the Ministers would send a strong and united message.

13;&& The representative of the European Communities congratulated the Chairman for his dynamic
role in trying to achieve a large degree of consensus on questions to be submitted to Ministers at
Singapore. The integration into the world economy and into the multilateral trading system of, in
particular, the least-developed countries was of concern not only to this Committee but also to his
delegation. The Member States of the European Communities had been clear at their recent Council
in Dublin, held in preparation of the Singapore meeting. There were various ways to help the least
developed countries. While debt-related issues were outside the mandate of the WTO, its technical
assistance activities clearly were a means of assisting least-developed countries in efforts to implement
their obligations resulting from the Uruguay Round. His delegation intended to enhance the WTO
technical assistance activities through bilateral and multilateral initiatives. He said that the role of foreign
direct investment in least-developed countries should not be underestimated and his delegation hoped
that this matter would be addressed by Ministers in the Singapore in a satisfying manner. His delegation
had taken note of the DG's proposal to the G7 countries in Lyon and was considering it carefully,
in particular the proposal relating to tariffs. His delegation considered cooperation between the WTO,
IMF and World Bank, to which Mr. El Kabbaj had alluded, indispensable and fully supported efforts
to strengthen it.

14.&& The representative of Tanzania thanked the Chairman for his role in ensuring the presence
at this meeting of Mr. El Kabbaj, who played an important role in the international financial system.
The Minister's address had enhanced his delegation's understanding of the role of the Development
Committee, as well as the possible role of the Bretton Woods institutions in assisting countries which
remained on the periphery of the multilateral system. As a result of the Chairman's initiative to invite
the Heads of the WTO, UNCTAD and ITC to address the Seventh Session of the Committee, last June,
a national seminar would be held shortly in Tanzania. He drew the attention to the role of institutions
other than the WTO in implementing the results of the Uruguay Round and the Ministerial Declarations,
such as the one concerning net-food importing countries, and the Decision calling for greater coherence
in global economic policy. He had often stressed the need for capacity building in the least-developed
countries, which also entailed the involvement of institutions other than the WTO. He welcomed the
reference made by Mr. E] Kabbaj to the need to address the debt problem of the least-developed
countries, as this was the problem which most undermined the possibility of any progress. Multilateral
debt constituted a sizeable proportion of the total debt and he was encouraged by the prospect that new
initiatives would be taken by the IMF/World Bank Development Committee. He hoped that such
initiatives would be broad-based and comprehensive. Investments in infrastructure projects by institution
such as the IDA were necessary to create an investment-friendly environment. He was concerned about
the decrease in resources at IDA's disposal and stressed the importance of their replenishment at an
adequate level, and in aconsistent and predictable manner. According to an UNCTAD report, a decline
in flows to least-developed countries of 1.2 billion dollars had occurred; African countries had received
only 1.6 per cent of the flows to developing countries. He welcomed the Director-General’ s commitment
to least-developed countries and his initiative to propose a zero tariff applicable to exports from
least-developed countries. He stressed however, that, in order to benefit from such initiatives, they
should go hand in hand with efforts to enhance human and institutional capacity building in least-
developed countries.

15. && The representative of Egypt stressed the significance of the presence of the Chairman of the
IMF/World Bank Development Committee and thanked the Chairman for revitalising the CTD. Her
government fully supported the WTO Director-General's efforts to achieve a closer cooperation with
the IMF and the World Bank, as such cooperation was essential for a greater coherence in global
economic policy-making. Fluctuations in world interest rates and exchange rates, their frequency and
magnitude, as well as their outstanding debt burden, depressed the volume and value of exports from
developing countries. She recalled that developing countries had hoped that such issues would have
been dealt with more comprehensively in the Marrakesh Declaration. She looked forward to support
from the Joint IMF/World Bank Development Committee in achieving greater cooperation between
the Bretton Woods institutions and the WTO, with a view to ensuring the monetary and financial stability
necessary for a stable trade flow. A link between the international financial institutions and the WTO's
Trade Policy Review Mechanism should lead to strengthened multilateral surveillance, in particular
of the major economies. She furthermore noted that, even though the joint IMF/World Bank Committee
was a consultative body, it could use its weight in the decision-making process. She agreed with the
representative of the European Communities, that coordination between institutions was indispensable.

16. && The representative of Paraguay thanked the Chairman for his initiative in holding this session,
and Mr. El Kabbaj for his overview of the role of the Development Committee. He recalled the Director-
General's intervention with respect to the interlinkages in the world economy and agreed that, as
globalization and liberalization led to greater integration, they also led to greater imbalances. Technical
assistance was one way of coping with the challenges presented by such imbalances. Increased
coordination among international institutions could rationalize and optimize technical assistance. He
hoped that the priority given to the neediest countries in delivering such assistance would not be at
the expense of countries such as his to meet growing challenges.

17. && The representative of Pakistan thanked the Chairman for inviting Mr. El Kabbaj and
Mr. Ruggiero. He noted that despite impressive macroeconomic indicators in the past decade, there
had been little impact on the level of poverty. Perhaps this was an indication that the development
recipes traditionally prescribed for developing countries needed to be revisited.

18. && The representative of Peru said that the presence of Mr. El Kabbaj and Mr. Ruggiero in the
Committees’ meeting was important in view of the necessary dynamic link between trade, money and
finance, something to which both the Chairman and the Director-General were committed. Achieving
greater coherence between the WTO and the Bretton Woods institutions should have priority for all
three institutions. The problems faced by net food-importing countries and the close links between
trade and investment were among the issues which required close cooperation.

19.&& The representative of India thanked the Director-General for his presence and the Chairman
for convening this meeting. He welcomed the thought-provoking ideas of Mr. E] Kabbaj, particularly
with regard to the need for improved market access for developing countries and least-developed countries
as a means of greater integration. His government had a profound interest in the role and functioning
of the Joint IMF/World Bank Development Committee and he stressed the importance of maintaining
flexibility in the exercise of national sovereignty in foreign policy formulation as developing and least-
developed countries faced greater globalization. In this context he suggested that the conclusions of
the recent UNDP World Development Report, in particular to the effect that globalization had resulted
in greater marginalization of least-developed and developing countries, be discussed in the CTD.

20. && The representative of Cote d' Ivoire enquired as to the role of the financial institutions in helping
developing countries fulfil their WTO commitments. In countries such as hers, the World Bank linked
its assistance to observance of the WTO requirements. She would also appreciate more information
on the IMF and World Bank's activities to assist developing countries in building production capacity.

21. The representative of Kenya joined other delegations in thanking the Chairman. She expressed
her appreciated for the participation of Mr. El Kabbaj in his capacity as Chairman of the IMF/World
Bank Development Committee. She also noted the Director-General’ s untiring efforts to increase the
influence of developing countries on issues related to world trade. Increased linkages between trade
policy and economic policy required greater coherence in global economic policy making and called
for closer cooperation and consultation between these institutions. She referred to the WTO agreements
with linkages to IMF programmes, in particular the Agreements on Customs Valuation, Subsidies,
Safeguards, Anti-dumping, Trade-Related Investment Measures and the GATS. Her government was
in the process of bringing its national legislation into conformity with WTO obligations as well as
developing the necessary institutional framework to implement the WTO agreements. She wondered
how developing countries could reconcile their obligations under the WTO agreements which called
for freer market access with their obligations under IMF/World Bank supported programmes calling
for increased revenue collection.

22:&&  Mr. El Kabbaj said that he was confident that the Director-General s initiatives on market access
and foreign direct investment would be welcomed by the IMF/World Bank Development Committee,
even though the international community had yet to come forward with a positive response. He was
certain that, in collaboration with the heads of the IMF and of the World Bank, genuine efforts would
be forthcoming to give these proposals a concrete content. Cooperation between the institutions had
become a necessity, since economic and social development did not come about simply through a one-way
transfer of resources but called for a global approach, linking various elements such as trade, investment
and transfer of technology and know-how. He assured the representative of Tanzania that the
Development Committee had fully recognized the problems created by a heavy debt-burden particularly
on the poorest countries. This was borne out by its latest debt-initiative from which Tanzania would
be benefitting: modalities for this initiative should be in place after the forthcoming joint IMF/World
Bank meeting. While the Development Committee recognized the problems resulting from inadequate
resources, neither the tenth nor the eleventh replenishment of IDA funds had come to a level necessary
to cover all programmes. In June of this year, IDA had received pledges for 14.5 billion SDR's over
a three-year period, and he was hopeful that a special effort would get underway to restructure and
reinforce the economies of least-developed countries and to increase their production capacity. Along
with IDA resources, investment flows were important, not only for balance of payment reasons but
also because such flow enhanced possibilities to become more integrated in the global economy. The
Development Committee straddled both Bretton Woods institutions and counted ministers of both
developing and developed countries among its members. Their presence would ensure that decisions
were translated into action. Alleviation of poverty was at the heart of the IMF and the World Bank’
activities. This had been highlighted in the latest World Bank Report and had prompted the debt-initiative
and the initiative to increase resources available to IDA. The programmes supported by the financial
institution encouraged the establishment of efficient institutions capable of meeting the challenges of
globalization. The apparent conflict referred to by the representative of Kenya was something of real
concern; he suggested that countries use the expertise available in the institutions concerned to avoid
the conflicts referred to.

23. && The Director-General thanked the Chairman for his role in revitalizing an essential part of the
WTO system. Due to this renewed vitality he was now addressing the Committee on Trade and
Development for the third time this year. He also thanked Mr. El Kabbaj for supporting his initiative
to establish duty free access for exports of the least-developed countries. He recalled that the G7 had
requested that he pursue this proposal and, along with other initiatives for strengthened technical
assistance, bring it to the Singapore Ministerial Meeting. In that context, he underlined the importance
of support from the Development Committee. Further, he said that trade was an engine of economic
growth and as such, in its efforts to achieve the greatest possible degree of trade liberalization, the
WTO was contributing to such growth. While he recognized the unequal distribution of wealth and
immobility of the poorer sections of society, he noted that this was not the consequence of trade, greater
liberalization or of increasing globalization. He did not agree that market opening resulted in the
marginalization of developing and least-developed countries. Distribution of wealth needed positive
action at the national level and, as referred to by the Chairman, action by other international agencies.
While the solutions to these issues fell outside the field of responsibility of the WTO, it was nevertheless
a matter of great concern and the WTO was making every effort to improve coordination in this regard
with other major international agencies such as the IMF, the World Bank and UNCTAD. The latest
report by the UNDP had drawn attention to the fact that the living standards of 3,000 million people
had improved beyond levels ever experienced before. But several had become worse off. He said
that the problem was one of distribution, and noted that the same report also concluded that the human
development index had gone up in most regions over the past three decades. The Director-General
re-emphasized that distribution policies, rather than globalization, had led to marginalization. He then
noted that progress in information technology was an important element in the globalization process.
In this context he said that the WTO and the World Bank were jointly exploring concrete possibilities
to cooperate in the area of technical assistance, in particular on modalities to make full use of new
technological tools.

24.&& The Committee took note of the statements made.

C. && Other Business
- Continuation of the discussion on the review of the participation of developing countries
in the multilateral trading system including the impact of the results of the Uruguay
Round on developing countries
25. The Chairman recalled that the Committee had its first discussion on this item at its last session,

based on a note by the Secretariat, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/15.

26.&& The representative of Egypt said that she would like to make some comments on the study
contained in document WT/COMTD/W/15, in view of its relevance as an input into the preparatory
process for Singapore, in terms of the assessment of the implementation of Uruguay Round results
and their impact on developing countries, in particular the least-developed, and African countries.
While she appreciated the note especially for its scope and wide range of issues it covered, it nevertheless
needed careful consideration in view of her delegation’ views on its use. Certain conclusions could
be called into doubt, due to the highly aggregate level of its analysis, which did not allow for more
accurate conclusions. In particular conclusions on the extent of the erosion of preferential margins
for African countries, on tariff escalation and on peak tariffs. Furthermore, it was unclear whether
the paper referred to simple or weighted tariff averages. The note was factual rather than analytical,
focused more on trends without analysing underlying factors and causes. Her delegation had cautioned
on anumber of occasions against increased marginalization of the more vulnerable developing countries.
Some aspects of the results of the Uruguay Round ran the risk of being at the basis of an accelerated
marginalization of the vulnerable economies, if not addressed carefully to mitigate their negative effects.
For example, as a result of erosion of preferential tariff margins, some of these countries would not
be able to compete, hence would loose market share and overall export earnings. As some of these
countries were also net importers of foodstuff, higher food prices would swell their import bills. A
combination of these factors would worsen their situation dramatically. In addition to further
marginalization, they would also run the risk of seeing their economic growth prospects severely affected.
These factors should be adequately analysed in the framework of the overall implementation of the
Uruguay Round results and submitted to Ministers in Singapore. Turning to more specific parts of
the note, she said that the observation that in some instances the countries with a poor export performance
had better access to industrial country markets than those countries whose exports expanded rapidly,
failed to take into account different levels of development, the rapid growing rates of investment in
some countries compared to others, the effective utilization of GSP by the more advanced developing
countries, in short did not analyse underlying factors for their weak export performance. She noted
a lack of in-depth analysis of the concept of "other external factors", as cause for poor economic
performance. Such factors should be at the basis of the upcoming coordination with the Bretton woods
institutions on global coherence. The CTD should study more in depth the cause and the effect of
factors such as fluctuations in world interest rates and exchange rates on volumes and values of
developing countries’ exports, the impact of commodity prices and the cyclical change in demand in
industrialized countries for their exports, and the impact of outstanding debt on their trade performance.
She recalled that these were among the issues developing countries had hoped to include in the Marrakesh
declaration. She expressed surprise at the fact that some of the more important issues, such as the
effects of anti-dumping investigations, were relegated to footnotes rather than being among the main
factors analysed; there was also no identification of sectors most affected. The optimistic evaluation
of the advantages flowing from the full implementation of the tariff commitments made by developed
countries in the Uruguay Round failed to take into account that new non-tariff measures, and new
conditionalities on preferences, often practically impaired and nullified Uruguay Round benefits.
Although a rise in the level of bindings was a positive outcome, it was misleading to suggest that, once
a tariff reduction was fully implemented, benefits were assured for developing country exporters. The
security of bound MFN tariffs was not always a compensation for loss in preferential margins. She
would appreciate more analysis of the impact of the Agreement on Agriculture on Non-food importing
Countries. Statistical models including one developed by UNCTAD (and used for a joint
WTO/UNCTAD study) could be used for such an analysis. She found it surprising that the prerequisites
for a more effective integration enumerated in the paper related exclusively to what could be done
by developing countries themselves. It failed to mention factors such as new disguised protectionist
measures, the necessity to adhere strictly to the implementation of the Agreements and the inadequate
implementation of the various provisions stipulating technical and financial assistance. A more
comprehensive assessment of the prerequisites for a more effective integration should be taken up,
in the light of the replies to the Chairman's request for information on the implementation of provisions
in favour of developing countries from the Chairpersons of the relevant Committees and Councils.
She thanked the Secretariat for the study and said that her delegation would look into ways how best
to prepare for the necessary follow-up and recommendations in this regard for the Ministerial Conference
in Singapore.

27. && The representative of India drew attention to a previous intervention and specifically recalled
his request that a future version of the paper give sufficient prominence to the role of domestic
investment. Notwithstanding the clarification that the apparent lack of prominence in the paper given
to the relevance of domestic savings ratios resulted from the fact that its importance was a basic
assumption and thus self-evident, he was of the view that the report should deal with it adequately
in the body of the report, rather than in a footnote. He also said that the paragraph describing the
positive interlinkages between foreign direct investment, export performance and other economic factors,
was rather unbalanced. The recent UNCTAD report on Trade and Development contained sufficient
material to put into question statements in that paragraph and he suggested that the Secretariat reconsider
that paragraph in the light of the UNCTAD report.

28.&& The Chairman said that the study was intended to engender discussion which it had obviously
accomplished. Despite the difficulties to generate unanimous acceptance for such a study, he hoped
that it would be possible to agree to certain guideposts for future action.

29.&& The Committee took note of the statements made and agreed to revert to this item at its next
session.

- Draft guidelines for technical cooperation

30.&& The Chairman said that the comprehensive comments by delegations at the last session on the
draft guidelines for technical cooperation and the written submissions had been the basis of a revised
version. He suggested to annex the guidelines, after their adoption, to the CTD's report to the General
Council. A political statement on the importance of technical cooperation, on which many delegations
had placed importance, would be part of the report to the General Council.

31.&& The Committee took note of the statement made and agreed to revert to this item at its next
session.
