WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/82
19 October 2011


(11-5190)


Committee on Trade and Development
Eighty-Second Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 21 JUNE AND 5 JULY 2011

Chairman:  H. E. Dr. Anthony Mothae Maruping (Lesotho)


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608984" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC306608984 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608985" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC306608985 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc306608986" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc306608986 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc306608987" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc306608987 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608988" C.	report of the 44th session of the joint advisory group on the international trade centre unctad/wto (ITC/AG(XLIV)/238)	 PAGEREF _TOC306608988 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608989" D.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC306608989 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608990" -	gulf cooperation council (gcc) notification of customs union – communication from china, egypt and india (wt/comtd/w/175)	 PAGEREF _TOC306608990 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608991" -	notification of the agreement on trade in goods between the association of southeast asian nations (asean) and korea	 PAGEREF _TOC306608991 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608992" -	notification of the comprehensive economic partnership agreement between india and korea (goods)	 PAGEREF _TOC306608992 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608993" -	generalized system of preferences - notification by the european union (wt/comtd/n/4/add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC306608993 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608994" -	generalized system of preferences - notification by japan (wt/comtd/n/2/add.15)	 PAGEREF _TOC306608994 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608995" E.	systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the gulf cooperation council customs union - communication from China, Egypt and India (wt/comtd/w/175)	 PAGEREF _TOC306608995 \H 18
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608996" F.	modalities to implement the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements - statement by the chairman	 PAGEREF _TOC306608996 \H 21
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608997" G.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC306608997 \H 23
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306608998" H.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC306608998 \H 25
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc306608999" (i)	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2010 (WT/COMTD/W/178)	 PAGEREF _Toc306608999 \h 25
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc306609000" (ii)	Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2010 (WT/COMTD/W/177 and Corr.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc306609000 \h 25
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306609001" I.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC306609001 \H 30
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC306609002" annex	 PAGEREF _TOC306609002 \H 31



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the agenda for the 82nd Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in Airgram WTO/AIR/3764 circulated on 10 June 2011. 
He said that, as was the case for the 81st Session of the CTD, the agenda for the present meeting reflected two written requests that the Secretariat had received for the same communication from China, Egypt and India on "Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council Customs Union" to appear on the agenda.  The first request, which was reflected under agenda item D, came from China, Egypt and India.  These Members had asked that the sub-agenda items pertaining to the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union notification and the other two dual notifications – which concerned the regional trade agreements (RTAs) between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea, and between India and Korea – be retained on the CTD's agenda.  The second request came from the European Union (EU) and the United States (US).  These Members had requested a discussion of the same paper – the one submitted by China, Egypt and India on "Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council Customs Union" – but under a separate agenda item.  Accordingly, this was reflected on the agenda as item E.  He understood that his predecessor had held consultations with the two groups of Members before the 81st Session of the CTD, in an endeavour to have a single agenda item on the issue.  This had not proved possible at the time, but he wished to inform Members that he intended to continue holding Chair-led informal consultations after the present meeting, so that the matter could be resolved as soon as possible. 
He also recalled the fax that he had sent to Members on 15 June 2011, in which he had indicated that he intended to hold an informal discussion under agenda item F on the modalities to implement the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for Preferential Trade Arrangements (PTAs).  The objective was to allow the Committee to consider the informal document on this subject as well as the possible standard format for the notification of PTAs.  These had been sent to Members, and copies were also available at the back of the meeting room. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that, before the adoption of the agenda of the 81st Session of the CTD, his delegation had sought clarification on a number of procedural aspects and had questioned the reasons that had instigated the US to introduce a second item on the CTD's agenda to address the GCC Customs Union notification.  This was in addition to the sub-item that the US had introduced regarding the same notification, and which had continued to appear on the CTD's agenda since the 73rd Session under the heading "Notifications under the Enabling Clause".  His delegation continued to caution against establishing procedural precedence, and against the attempts to overstretch the interpretation of rule 4 of the CTD's rules of procedure.  Egypt did not believe that the issue of contention would be resolved by having redundant or repetitive items on the agenda, and maintained the view that it was highly irregular to see one Member requesting the inclusion of two separate and distinct items on the agenda to address the same issue.  More awkward was the fact that the newly-introduced item E on the agenda related to the communication submitted by China, Egypt and India that was already under consideration within the ambit of the heading "Notifications under the Enabling Clause".  Egypt was concerned that such an anomaly had been further entertained and had been brought forward onto the agenda of the present meeting. 
His delegation was willing to show flexibility and adopt the agenda for the present meeting, but on the basis of a number of understandings.  He noted firstly in this regard that the deliberations taking place under the sub-item pertaining to the GCC Customs Union notification under the heading "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" were not taking place merely for transparency purposes. Rather, they constituted an integral part of the substantive process for the consideration of the RTA since the time that the sub-item had been placed on the agenda of the CTD at its 73rd Session in order to question the legality of notifying the Agreement exclusively on the basis of the Enabling Clause. 
Second, he observed that, during the previous CTD meeting, the former Chairman of the CTD had indicated that no consensus was reached with respect to the consideration of the GCC Customs Union, and that the issue of consideration had not been resolved.  The deliberations under item D had, therefore, not been exhausted.  In this regard, he recalled the numerous questions and arguments that his delegation had raised during the previous meeting in connection to RTAs with a dual notification status, and specifically with respect to the GCC Customs Union.  Finally, he noted that the joint communication submitted by China, India and Egypt on the "Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union" had been formally introduced at the 80th Session in connection with the consideration process of that Agreement, and at the request of the US and the EU during consultations held in September 2010.  In other words, the consideration of this communication remained intrinsically related to the consideration of the GCC dual notification and was not a stand-alone item on the agenda.
&& The representative of India supported the intervention by Egypt.  He was pleased to note that the Chairman had rightly maintained the sub-agenda item regarding the GCC Customs Union notification.  He wished to clarify, however, that China, Egypt and India had not requested the insertion of an agenda item, but rather had asserted that the GCC sub-item needed to be retained.  This was in keeping with past practice that an agenda item was retained till the time that discussions were exhausted and Members decided by consensus to drop the agenda item.  He sincerely hoped that during discussions under this sub-item at the present meeting, there would be substantive engagement from some delegations which had so far avoided discussions on issues of serious concern to developing countries.  His delegation was also quite surprised that, as was the case at the last CTD meeting, there was duplication on the agenda for the present meeting by the inclusion of item E.  India failed to understand why a duplicate agenda item was required when an item concerning the GCC Customs Union already appeared on the agenda and had been appearing on the CTD's agenda since the 73rd Session.
&& The representative of China recalled that, at the beginning of the 81st Session of the CTD, his delegation, along with Egypt and India, had raised serious concerns on the irregularity of having two separate agenda items dealing with the same issue and the same document.  Although it was understood that the agenda was proposed by the Chairman to strike a delicate balance, the three delegations wished to emphasize once again that, since the discussion on the GCC Customs Union and the other two "dually-notified" RTAs had not been exhausted - and since Members had not reached consensus on how to proceed with them - the original sub-items listed under item D were the most appropriate venues to conduct further discussion at the present meeting and future meetings.  He added that the CTD should avoid creating a precedent of having redundant agenda items for the same issue, even upon the request of the same Member.  He expressed his support for the requests made by Egypt seeking the Chairman's confirmation on the relevant points.  His delegation looked forward to engaging in discussions during the informal consultations that the Chairman would be holding. 
&& The representative of the United States thanked the Chairman for having clarified which delegations had requested which agenda items.  He believed that this was helpful for Members.  With respect to the agenda for the present meeting, his delegation continued to have concerns with agenda item D, specifically the sub-items addressing the notifications of the GCC Customs Union, the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement.  Each of these sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and should be removed from the agenda.  However, in an effort to facilitate the formal CTD meeting, his delegation had demonstrated flexibility in consultations with the Chairman, despite the substantive concerns.  Given that the three sub-items listed under agenda item D were unnecessary, he said that he would only be providing comments under agenda item E, which correctly listed the title of the paper submitted by China, Egypt and India.  If some Members called for the continued listing of the specific sub-items under agenda item D for the next CTD meeting, his delegation wished to register at this point its objection to that course of action.  A better course of action would be for the Chairman to continue informal consultations before setting the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  
He expressed regret that this issue had taken so much of the Committee’s time over the last two years, and that past CTD meetings had been delayed.  The CTD's annual report for 2010 had also been affected, as some Members could not agree to a factual representation of the Committee's discussions on RTA notifications.  The US had worked diligently in an effort to resolve this issue, and was willing to continue to do so under the Chairman's leadership in informal consultations.  In closing, he said that he wished to be very clear upfront that the US had no concern with any developing country notifying a qualifying agreement under the Enabling Clause.   
&& The representative of Australia said that her delegation shared the view that discussions on the first three sub-items under agenda item D had been exhausted.  Australia did not support maintaining these sub-items on the agenda, as systemic issues relating to dual notifications were more appropriately addressed in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR).  However, if it was necessary for such issues to be addressed in the CTD, Australia believed that they were better addressed under agenda item E.  This was in order to avoid the creation of de facto standing items on notifications which had already fulfilled their original purpose.  She expressed disappointment that Members were still unable to bridge differences with respect to procedural issues and continued to utilize the valuable time of the Committee.  Australia looked forward to participating in the Chairman's consultations, and hoped that it would be possible the resolve the matter informally before the circulation of the agenda for the next CTD meeting.
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation was also of the view that discussions on the first three sub-items under item D had been exhausted.  In this light, he did not see the need to repeat the three sub-items on the agenda for the present meeting.  He noted that some delegations had mentioned that the first three sub-items under item D dealt substantively with the same issues as those to be addressed under item E.  However, Japan believed that the issues were different.  In particular, it was only under item E that systemic issues should be discussed.  He also expressed regret that the matter had still not been resolved.  Japan looked forward to participating in the informal consultations that the Chairman would be holding, and to finding a solution soon.
&& The Chairman reiterated his intention to hold informal consultations in order to try and resolve the matter.  He asked whether the agenda for the present meeting could be adopted.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation could show flexibility in terms of adopting the agenda, but nevertheless wished to make a few points at this stage.  He noted that a number of delegations had mentioned that discussions on the GCC Customs Union notification had been exhausted.  In previous meetings, it had been suggested that the item "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" appeared on the CTD's agenda for transparency purposes only.  His delegation did not understand this, since a look at past CTD meetings showed that substantive discussions had taken place under this agenda item.  He gave the example of the EU's GSP scheme, which had appeared on the CTD's agenda for a number of years.  In that context, a large range of issues had been discussed under the "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" item.  The discussion had certainly gone well beyond matters relating to transparency. 
He went on to say that, when the sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification was first introduced by the US under the "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" agenda item, serious concerns were raised on a number of issues including breach of tariff bindings and accession commitments.  These were not transparency issues, but were substantive and legal in nature.  He added that his delegation was not aware of any rules of procedure or terms of reference that stated that the "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" agenda item existed only for transparency purposes.  Furthermore, India believed that the sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification was the appropriate heading under which Members should continue their discussions.  Substantive discussions under this sub-item had, in fact, already been held. 
He said that the issue at hand was an issue related to a notification.  In this regard, he recalled that the US had stated that it did not have any problems with developing countries notifying a qualifying RTA under the Enabling Clause.  This was a confusing statement to his delegation. While the US position appeared to be that customs unions did not qualify for notification under the Enabling Clause, he indicated that it remained unclear what was meant by a "qualifying RTA".  These points demonstrated the necessity of discussing all issues pertaining to the GCC Customs Union notification only under the "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" heading.
&& The Chairman said that the points raised in the various interventions demonstrated the need for informal consultations to be held.  He proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions.
It was so agreed.
The agenda was adopted.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that these organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record.  He asked whether there was any change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants.
&& The representative of Egypt said that the League of Arab States (LAS) had submitted since 1999 numerous requests to become a permanent observer in several WTO bodies, including the CTD.  Similar requests had been submitted by the LAS to participate in a number of WTO Ministerial Conferences including in Seattle in 1999, Doha in 2001, Cancún in 2003 and Hong Kong in 2005.  Regrettably, however, due to the reservations of two Members - and in a clear case of abuse to the rule of consensus - all efforts exerted to secure observer status for the LAS had come to no avail.  More worrisome was the fact that the reservations were politically motivated and had somehow lingered over the years and been accepted ipso facto in what should have been a non-political multilateral trading environment. 
The consideration of requests made by inter-governmental organizations (IGOs) for permanent observer status had become - as a result of that situation, and for more than a decade now - a politicized issue that was in direct contradiction to the guidelines for granting IGOs observer status, as stipulated in Annex 3 of the rules of procedure of the CTD which followed mutatis mutandis the rules established by the General Council.  His delegation noted with a sense of irony and disappointment that, while the LAS had maintained observer status under GATT 1947, the League continued to be barred from being granted similar status in the WTO.  Evidently, such a position again ran inconsistent with the procedures established by the WTO, wherein favourable consideration was to be given to requests for observership submitted by IGOs that had in the past been associated with the work of the GATT CONTRACTING PARTIES.  He noted that the LAS played a mandatory role in coordinating Arab positions on trade and trade-related matters and was important in harmonizing economic and trade policies among its members.  The League, therefore, satisfied the condition of having the competence and oversight over trade policy formulation, as prescribed by the relevant WTO rules of procedure. 
He went on to say that IGOs had been knocking on the WTO's door for more than a decade.  If Members continued to ignore the relevance of IGOs and the added value that might result from coordinating their work with the CTD, this would only inflict harm on the role of this important Committee, which was to serve as the focal point for the integrated treatment of all development issues within the multilateral trading system.  According to the rules of procedure, requests for observer status should be considered by each WTO body.  The rules also stipulated that an IGO's request for observer status in a particular WTO body did not automatically imply that such status would be accorded in other WTO bodies.  The rules provided ample manoeuvre and prerogatives for each body to decide how to process requests for observership.  Egypt, therefore, believed that it was high time that the CTD reverted to the extensive list of organizations seeking observer status in the Committee.  The CTD needed to take action to resolve the issue and pave the way for IGOs to contribute to, and complement, its activities.  He noted that this was becoming even more crucial given the apparent erosion of the development dimension of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).  Furthermore, it was necessary to put an end to the controversial suggestions that had been made regarding the capacity of the CTD to deal with development issues in the multilateral trading system. 
Egypt's concrete suggestion was that work should proceed in the CTD in order to further clarify the guidelines for granting observer status to IGOs.  His delegation believed that an integral set of transparent, objective, horizontal, technical and non-politicized criteria should be devised by the CTD according to which requests for granting observer status - including the request of the LAS - would be gauged. Criteria needed to be put in place in order to avoid risking any further the politicization of observership requests.  Criteria were also needed to circumvent the unclear positions that had been maintained concerning the LAS, which continued to jeopardize the credibility of the WTO as a rules-based multilateral trading system.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation was also concerned with the continued deadlock on the issue of observership in WTO bodies, including in the CTD.  He agreed with Egypt that the issue had become politicized and was in direct contradiction to the guidelines for granting observer status.  The importance of relations with IGOs was recognized in Article V of the Marrakesh Agreement, which called for effective cooperation with IGOs.  It was, therefore, important that requests for observership be evaluated on the merit of each application and on the relevance of the participation of the applicant to the discussions in that respective body.  Consideration of requests for observer status should not be based on political considerations but on merit, on relevance and on the international standing of the applicant.
&& The representative of China thanked Egypt for bringing up an important issue.  Since his delegation had just heard the intervention from Egypt, more time would be needed for analysis.  For the present, he wished to limit himself to some preliminary comments.  He said that observer status was an issue of systemic importance to the WTO.  It not only helped foster sound relationships between the WTO and other IGOs, but also played a significant role in enhancing the visibility and relevance of the WTO in global governance.  Clear and appropriate procedures would facilitate achieving these objectives.  He noted that Annex 3 of the rules of procedure for sessions of the Ministerial Conference and meetings of the General Council adopted in July 1996 provided the basic guidelines for granting observer status.  However, the failure to grant observer status to any applicants during the past few years had demonstrated that the Annex, despite its merits, still needed further improvement. In particular, procedures and criteria to grant observer status should be established.  According to paragraph 4 of the Annex, requests for observer status should be considered on a case‑by-case basis in a particular WTO body.  Therefore, in China's view, the CTD had the prerogative to develop the procedures and criteria to grant observer status based on the existing guidelines. This could constitute a valuable contribution of the CTD to the whole system.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
REPORT OF THE 44TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XLIV)/238)
&& The Chairman said that the report of the 44th Session of the Joint Advisory Group (JAG) on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC) was contained in ITC document ITC/AG(XLIV)/238.  He invited Ms Patricia Francis, the Executive Director of the ITC, to present the report.  
&& The Executive Director of the ITC said that the Chairman of the JAG - Ambassador Darlington Mwape of Zambia - was unable to present the JAG report to the CTD, due to another commitment.  She would be, therefore, be presenting the report on behalf of the JAG Chairman. 
She said that the JAG had held its 44th Session on 16 and 17 December 2010.  The meeting was convened to discuss the ITC's 2009 Annual Report, the Consolidated Programme Document for 2010 and the ITC's draft Operational Plan for 2011.  Government representatives had also announced their trust fund contributions to the ITC for 2011.  In their opening statements, the Director-General of the WTO and the Secretary General of UNCTAD had expressed their full support to the ITC.  They had both noted that the ITC was a key partner in the Aid-for-Trade Initiative.  They had also cited several examples of strengthened cooperation between the WTO, UNCTAD and the ITC.  She said that, in her opening statement, she had noted that there was a greater understanding now of the role that the ITC could play in trade-related technical assistance.  She had also indicated that the ITC had concluded the change management process in 2009.  The organization had actively participated in the regional and global Aid-for-Trade reviews with a view to ensuring that the private sector voice was well represented and that trade was mainstreamed as a tool for achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).  She had also informed the JAG that, in 2010, the ITC had prioritized its work around least-developed countries (LDCs), landlocked developing countries (LLDCs), small‑island developing states (SIDS) and Sub-Saharan Africa.  Programmes were focused on gender, environment and poverty.  
She said that the JAG had provided the ITC with useful guidance on the organization's annual programme of work.  The impact of the ITC's capacity-building work was acknowledged.  The Group had welcomed improvements in the presentation and content of the Annual Report.  Satisfaction was expressed with the progress made in embedding results-based management (RBM) into the organization.  The ITC was encouraged to work further on RBM.  The proposal to move the annual JAG meeting from December each year to the second quarter of the year was endorsed.  This would allow the ITC to present its annual report for the previous year in a more timely fashion.  She remarked in this regard that the next JAG meeting, which was to take place on 30 June and 1 July 2011, would be held on the WTO's premises.  She continued by saying that the JAG had applauded the ITC's growing emphasis on regionally structured solutions, while stressing the importance of country ownership of projects.  The ITC was encouraged to ensure that multi-country programmes contributed to regional integration.  The Group had also taken note of the Consolidated Programme Document for 2010 and of the 2011 draft Operational Plan.  Finally, she mentioned that a number of government representatives had announced voluntary contributions to the ITC.  In this regard, she thanked Canada, China, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Norway, and Switzerland. 
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation was pleased to be the donor coordinator for the ITC, and looked forward to the upcoming JAG meeting. Canada encouraged the ITC to continue to implement the RBM approach, which was yielding positive results.  He acknowledged that more work needed to be done, but welcomed the efforts that had been made so far to help to maximize the development impact of ITC programming.
&& The representative of the European Union said that the EU looked forward to the upcoming JAG meeting, which would review in detail the activities carried out in the previous year.  The EU welcomed the efforts that the ITC had made to apply RBM and reporting in its operations.  The efforts made by the organization to improve the efficiency of its procurement were also appreciated. She encouraged the ITC to continue to sharpen its focus on results and impacts, in line with the overall priority given to impact and value for money in Aid for Trade, and in development cooperation more generally.  This needed to be done in a holistic way, and not just in terms of individual projects and activities.
&& The Executive Director of the ITC said that she wished to assure delegations that the ITC was committed to RBM in order to make the organization more efficient and effective, and to deliver results to beneficiary countries.  This had been the focus of the ITC's work over the past couple of years, and continued to be the direction in which the organization was moving.
&& The Committee took note of the report of the 44th Session of the JAG and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs.  He firstly informed the Committee that no RTAs had been notified under the Enabling Clause since his predecessor's update to the Committee at the 81st Session.  Furthermore, for a number of notified RTAs – namely, RTAs between India and MERCOSUR, India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, and India and Bhutan – the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties.  Of these agreements, only data relating to India-MERCOSUR had been provided to date.  In particular, the Secretariat had received all the necessary data from MERCOSUR, but was still waiting to receive some data from India.  He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible.
He also recalled that it had been mentioned in past meetings that there were a number of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties.  Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), an RTA falling in that category would only be considered by the CTD after it had been ratified by all the parties.  There were three RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that fell within this category, namely the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA), the South-Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) and the ASEAN-India Agreement.  The parties to those agreements were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
Having completed his update, he invited the Committee to move to the sub-items listed under agenda item D.  He said that he wished the Committee to treat the first three sub-items together, as had been done at the last meeting.  The Committee would then move on to the other sub‑items.
-	GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL (GCC) NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMS UNION – COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA, EGYPT AND INDIA (WT/COMTD/W/175)
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND KOREA
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT BETWEEN INDIA AND KOREA (GOODS)
&& The Chairman said that he would first ask China, Egypt and India if they wished to take the floor, since it was these delegations that had requested that the three sub-items under consideration be retained on the CTD's agenda for the present meeting.  He pointed out that a lengthy discussion had taken place at the last CTD meeting on this issue, and that the positions of delegations were on the record.  He, therefore, encouraged Members to keep their interventions brief. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that for the past few years, his delegation - along with China and India - had given a detailed account of the specific and systemic issues that needed to be resolved in connection with the CTD's consideration of the GCC Customs Union notification.  The three delegations had raised several legal and procedural issues with regard to the exclusive nature of RTAs with a dual notification status.  A communication had been submitted in the CTD to evoke discussions on the matter and to address the legal and procedural implications arising from dual notifications.  The three delegations had worked constructively in the CTD, the Council for Trade in Goods, the NGR, the CRTA and the General Council to try to resolve the issues of contention.  It had been demonstrated that, if the specific and systemic issues that had been raised in connection with the consideration of RTAs with a dual notification status were not handled with caution, Members risked impinging on the mandate and terms of reference of the CTD. Furthermore, they would be undermining the scope of application of the Enabling Clause, as well as the rights and obligations of Members and the proper application of the TM for RTAs.
He said that China, Egypt and India had also illustrated during the last CTD meeting, through more than a dozen questions and arguments - which were both specific and systemic in nature - the issues that needed to be resolved in the CTD.  These issues needed to be resolved in order to safeguard that a decision taken with respect to RTAs with a dual notification status was coherent, non‑biased and transparent.  Such a decision also needed to be compatible with the disciplines and procedures that had been maintained, which warranted an appropriate consideration of RTAs with a dual notification - including the GCC Customs Union.  He believed that the outcome of this process was that a number of points had been established. 
He said firstly in this regard that the matter of RTAs with a dual notification status was not to be overlooked.  This was not an issue that would casually fade away, nor was it something to be dealt with on an ad hoc basis.  Rather, RTAs with a dual notification represented systemic challenges, and the time was ripe to set up a proper harmonized methodology to deal with the matter.  Second, he emphasized that all notifications made under the Enabling Clause, including the GCC Customs Union, were valid.  This had been confirmed by the former CTD Chairman.  There was no such thing as an incorrect Enabling Clause notification, unless that term was used to describe a formal corrigendum that was circulated by the notifying Members, stating their intention to revoke an earlier notification made on the basis of the Enabling Clause.  Third, he noted that the CTD had, in fact, considered in the past several customs unions between developing countries on the basis of the Enabling Clause.  There should be no selectivity between agreements as far as the process of their consideration was concerned.  Fourth, he indicated that the GCC Customs Union had been notified in 1984 on the basis of the Enabling Clause.  This had been accepted as such by the entire membership, within the ambit of preferential agreements among developing countries notified under the Enabling Clause.
As his fifth point, he noted that the procedures established under the TM for RTAs did not allow the Mechanism to automatically process RTAs with a dual notification status.  Therefore, the procedures established by the Mechanism needed to be improved.  His sixth point was that Members had adopted over time a relaxed interpretation of the provisions of the TM for RTAs.  In particular, according to the RTAs TM, Members were obliged to proceed - upon receipt of a notification and irrespective of the legal basis invoked to notify an RTA - in applying the transparency procedures.  Seventh, he said that the NGR was only dealing with one procedural aspect raised in connection with dual notifications, and did not address the full scope of specific and systemic issues that had been raised with respect to RTAs with dual notifications.  In fact, it seemed that negotiations in the NGR had stalled altogether, and were deadlocked over how to process RTAs with a dual notification status.  His eighth point was that, since 2002, a rising tide and a growing tendency had been observed among some Members to keep challenging the legality and rights of developing country Members to invoke the Enabling Clause when notifying their RTAs to the WTO.
Moving on to his ninth point, he said that the Enabling Clause did not prohibit the establishment of RTAs between developing countries that involved the reduction or elimination of non-tariff barriers (NTBs).  On the contrary, the Enabling Clause sanctioned such measures, which were warranted until the time Members agreed on the criteria and conditions for the reduction or elimination of NTBs within a customs union.  Such a practice should continue to be viable, and was in conformity with the provisions of the Enabling Clause.  Tenth, he indicated that it would be erroneous to maintain a practice whereby Members were to continue challenging at first sight, or on a prima facie basis, the legal basis upon which RTAs had been notified.  Any questions or issues of contention that Members might wish to raise regarding an RTA that had been notified under the Enabling Clause should be done on the premise of a factual report prepared by the Secretariat.  Discussions should take place in a Dedicated Session of the CTD, so as to allow Members to substantiate - or argue against - such challenges.  More important was the fact that Members should differentiate between the RTA transparency exercise and the question of how to address the adverse trade effects that might arise from the establishment of RTAs.
His eleventh point was that the body that had the ultimate prerogative to interpret WTO provisions - including the scope of application of the Enabling Clause - was the General Council.  The provisions were not subject to Members' interpretations or preferences within the CTD, or within any other WTO body.  Twelfth, he noted that the specific and systemic issues raised in connection with the consideration of the GCC Customs Union notification were more profound and diverse in nature than was the case for other dual notifications.  In this light, the CTD had a central - if not the ultimate - role in resolving these issues.  This was in view of the Committee's broad terms of reference and mandate in considering any questions arising from the application or use of special provisions in favour of developing countries, including the Enabling Clause. 
He went on to say that Members had not provided any counter-arguments in response to the substantive questions and arguments that had been raised by China, Egypt and India at the 81st Session.  The points raised by the three delegations were concerned with the consideration of RTAs with a dual notification, as well as the specific and systemic issues raised in connection with these RTAs - particularly as they related to the GCC Customs Union.  In this light, he said that the consideration of RTAs with a dual notification should proceed according to the proposal presented by India in the NGR.  In particular, RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause, as well as RTAs with a dual notification, should be considered in the CTD.  This would preserve the role of the CTD and uphold its mandate, and would only require the introduction of minor changes to the application of the RTAs TM.  Proceeding along the lines of India's proposal would also preserve the application of the Enabling Clause and its standing in WTO law as lex specialis.  Furthermore, this would validate the legal opinion that had been upheld by the Secretariat in 2003 when it had confirmed that any review of an RTA - wherever it occurred - had to be performed according to the legal provision that had been invoked to justify the WTO consistency of the RTA in question.  The Secretariat had additionally indicated that any review of an RTA notified under the Enabling Clause needed be carried out in accordance with the terms of reference of the CTD, and that the CTD had the overall responsibility for the operation of the Enabling Clause.
The proposed way forward was coherent and addressed the concerns and positions that had been expressed by the African Group in document TN/CTD/W/3/Rev.2.  In that document, the African Group held the view that, with regard to the reduction or elimination of tariffs under the Enabling Clause, no WTO body or Member could prescribe any criteria relating to the arrangements in question.  The African Group had further indicated that Members should respect such arrangements as an exercise of rights that developing and least-developed country Members had under the WTO.  The proposed way forward also matched the view expressed by the LDC Group in document TN/CTD/W/4.  In particular, the LDC Group deemed that the scope and effectiveness of the Enabling Clause had been eroded through the Uruguay Round process.  The LDC Group had, therefore, indicated that a reversal of this erosion was essential, and was a key aspect of the strengthening of special and differential treatment measures.  Finally, the proposed way forward supported the views expressed by the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group in document TN/RL/W/155.  The ACP Group had reaffirmed the legal validity of the Enabling Clause to cover regional trade arrangements entered into among developing countries, to the effect that developing countries' rights to form such arrangements under the Enabling Clause were not undermined by paragraphs 5 to 9 of GATT Article XXIV. 
He concluded by expressing his hope that, on the basis of the points that had been made, the CTD could proceed to resolve the issues that China, Egypt and India had been raising for a number of years.  He also hoped that Members could constructively engage in discussing the specific and systemic issues in question under the present agenda item, and that they could support the suggested way forward. 
&& The representative of India noted that the Chairman had indicated at the beginning of the meeting that China, Egypt and India had requested to retain the three sub-items presently under consideration.  He wished to clarify in this regard that China, Egypt and India had only stated in their message of 6 June 2011 that the procedural practice that had been applicable in the CTD should be maintained with respect to the GCC Customs Union notification.  The three delegations had expressed their expectation that the sub-items would continue to appear on the CTD's agenda in their current form, under the heading "Notifications under the Enabling Clause".  This was to allow Members to revert to the sub-items until the time that discussions were fully exhausted, that a decision had been taken on how to consider RTAs with a dual notification status, and consensus was reached on removing the sub-items from the CTD's agenda. 
He said that he appreciated the Chairman's proposal to take up together the sub-items relating to the three RTAs with a dual notification.  There were clear similarities between the three, and India had common concerns about them.  He also associated his delegation with the intervention by Egypt.  He recalled that issues relating to the GCC Customs Union notification were first discussed at the 69th Session of the CTD, under "Other Business".  Since the 73rd Session, the GCC Customs Union notification had appeared as a regular item, initially at the request of the US.  He noted with concern that discussions had largely focused on procedural issues.  In an effort to promote constructive and substantive engagement, the delegations of China, Egypt and India had made a formal submission in September 2010, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.  However, the efforts of these three delegations remained futile.  For one thing, no substantive responses had been provided by other delegations, particularly the EU and the US.  In addition, the EU and the US had requested a duplicate agenda item without engaging substantively on the concerns raised in the submission by China, Egypt and India. 
He went on to say that, at the 80th Session, some delegations had indicated that they had had limited time to consider the points raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175.  Since several months had now elapsed since the 80th Session, India hoped that a substantive discussion could take place at the present meeting.  He did not want to summarize the issues raised in WT/COMTD/W/175 but noted that they were listed in paragraph 4 of the submission.  He additionally recalled that some Members had suggested that many of the issues raised in the submission should be discussed in the NGR.  In this regard, his delegation wished to highlight once again that the mandate of the NGR was limited and could not capture the entire gamut of systemic and specific concerns arising from the GCC Customs Union dual notification.  Furthermore, as things stood at the present time, his delegation was not entirely sure of the future work schedule of NGR.  Therefore, it became even more important for Members to discuss the issue in the CTD.  
He informed the Committee that Members had been facing a blockage in the NGR over the same issue, particularly in view of a proposal by the US, which was contained in document TN/RL/W/248.  The US proposal was that, irrespective of the notification provisions, all RTAs - including "dually notified" RTAs - should be considered in the CRTA.  While this was in line with the persistent and long-standing attempts of some developed country Members to have all RTAs considered in the CRTA, from India's point of view such a way forward would undermine not only the Enabling Clause, but also the mandate and terms of reference of the CTD.  He added that India still remembered the questions that the US had raised in 2002 regarding the notification of the India‑Sri Lanka Agreement under the Enabling Clause.  India was very clear that the US' position was to move the consideration of all RTAs to CRTA, even if this would result in diminishing the role of the CTD and eroding its mandate.  He emphasized in this regard that the CTD had a clear mandate to discuss developmental issues and to review RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause. 
Turning to the proposal that India had made in the NGR, he said that this was a very reasonable proposal, which was supported by several developing countries.  The proposal was essentially that Members continue with the existing practice of considering RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause in the CTD, and RTAs notified under GATT Article XXIV and GATS Article V in the CRTA.  The suggestion for "dually notified" RTAs was that these be considered in the CTD for two main reasons, namely that the CTD had a mandate for review, and the Enabling Clause was lex specialis.  He noted that at the last CTD meeting, some delegations had requested the Chairman to make a pronouncement on whether any decision had been taken with regard to the consideration of the GCC Customs Union.  Quoting from the minutes of that meeting, he observed that the Chairman had stated that "it was very obvious that there were differences between Members.  As there was no consensus, this meant that the issue had not been resolved."  This clear opinion of the Chairman had to put to rest all confusion regarding the issue. 
He indicated that there were attempts to deflect attention from critical developmental issues in the CTD, particularly from those Members who were suggesting that the NGR was a more appropriate forum for discussion.  From India's point of view, there were some imperatives in moving forward.  First, the rights of developing country Members under the Enabling Clause needed to be respected.  Second, the pivotal role of the CTD in development-related issues needed not only to be maintained, but strengthened if the development aspirations enshrined in the Marrakesh Agreement were to be realized.  Third, Members needed to seriously engage in finding a resolution to the systemic and specific issues pertaining to the GCC Customs Union and the other RTAs with dual notifications, namely the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement. 
&& The representative of China expressed appreciation to the Chairman for having retained on the agenda the three sub-items under consideration.  He, however, wished to clarify that it was not China, Egypt and India that had requested to include these sub-items on the agenda for the present meeting.  The only reason for their repeated appearance on the agenda was that one Member had made a request for one sub-item over two years ago, and no satisfactory solution had yet been found.  This was confirmed at the 81st Session by the former CTD Chairman.  In this light, the three sub-items had to remain on the agenda until the time that Members had exhausted their discussion and reached consensus to remove the sub-items. 
He went on to say that the sub-item concerning the notification of the GCC Customs Union had appeared on the CTD's agenda for ten consecutive CTD meetings.  As China, Egypt and India had stated repeatedly, the issue was not simply a procedural one concerning the venue of consideration of the RTA.  More fundamentally, the issue related to the legal rights and obligations of Members under WTO Agreements.  This was because the venue of consideration would determine the legal basis for the review, and the threshold for measuring the reviewed RTA's conformity with WTO rules.  The consequences of a review under different Committees were also different.  A proper solution had to consist of several elements.  Among these, the rights of developing country Members under the Enabling Clause had to be respected, especially the right to invoke paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.  In addition, the central role of the CTD in development-related issues, as stipulated in paragraph 1 of the CTD's terms of reference, needed to be maintained and strengthened. 
To help break the long-standing deadlock, China - together with Egypt and India - had tabled a joint communication in September 2010 illustrating numerous specific and systemic concerns arising from the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union.  The purpose of the paper was to remind Members of the complexity, and the implications, of dual notifications and to trigger brainstorming in order to find an appropriate solution.  However, the three delegations noted with deep disappointment that some Members had focused their efforts on endless quarrels regarding the formulation of the CTD's agenda rather than seriously engaging in substantive discussion.  Several specific and systemic issues listed in the submission by the three delegations still remained to be addressed. 
He said that, at the last CTD meeting, a number of surprising arguments had been made by some Members.  Among these was the argument that the GCC Customs Union notification under the Enabling Clause was not a valid notification.  Other surprising arguments were that the Enabling Clause did not address customs unions, and that the GCC Customs Union notification was different from the notifications of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement.  As China, Egypt and India had clearly indicated, it was firstly a Member's prerogative to decide under which provision it wished to make a notification.  Other Members had no rights to challenge or draw any conclusion on the appropriateness of the legal basis of a notification during the review process.  Therefore, the assertion that the GCC Customs Union was not a case of a dual notification was baseless.  Furthermore, no provision in the Enabling Clause precluded the possibility of addressing custom unions.  In fact, several custom unions had been notified under the Enabling Clause without any objection.  In addition, China, Egypt and India had not found any inherent difference among the three "dually notified" RTAs.  The only obvious difference was that the GCC Customs Union was more complex, hence more time-consuming than the other two. 
He also noted that some Members had indicated that the agenda item "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" was only for transparency and information-sharing purposes, and that these objectives had been fulfilled with regard to the three "dually notified" RTAs. However, China, Egypt and India had a different view on this matter.  The CTD's long-standing discussion between 2006 and 2009 on the EU's GSP scheme clearly demonstrated that the "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" item could touch upon issues that went far beyond procedural ones.  The request by the US for the sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification - which had triggered substantive discussion on the legal interpretation of the Enabling Clause, and the relationship between the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV - was another example.
He next turned to the suggestion by some Members that the dual notification issue should be addressed in the NGR.  He said that China, Egypt and India did not have a fundamental objection to this, and had seriously engaged in the discussions in the NGR.  However, some of the concerns that were illustrated in the submission by the three delegations could not be fully resolved in the NGR.  He gave as an example the question of whether the Enabling Clause could provide the legal justification for the formation of a customs union that involved the elimination or reduction of non-tariff measures.  Another example was the question of whether a Member's accession commitment to notify an RTA to the CRTA under GATT Article XXIV would have precedence over the rights of other parties to the same RTA to notify the agreement to the CTD under the Enabling Clause.  He noted that an additional concern was the present stalemate in the Doha Round.  In light of this stalemate, it remained to be seen whether the discussion in NGR could yield any results in the near future.  He concluded by expressing his delegation's firm belief that Members should discuss the issue in the CTD without further delay.  He urged the relevant Members to actively and constructively engage in the discussion.
&& The representative of Egypt said that China, Egypt and India had agreed to adopt the agenda for the present meeting on the understanding that the sub-items concerning the notifications of the three RTAs with a dual notification appeared on the CTD's agenda not for transparency purposes, but as an integral part of the consideration of the RTAs.  Furthermore, the three delegations had made a proposal on a way forward for the three RTAs, and no Member had commented on the proposal.  He, therefore, proposed a motion that the three RTAs be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD. The Chairman could then make the necessary pronouncement.
&& The Chairman said that the issue under discussion was to be the subject of informal consultations. He asked whether Egypt could allow the informal consultations to take place.
&& The representative of Egypt said that the point had been made that the present discussion was not an exercise in transparency.  Rather, what was being discussed was the consideration of the RTAs with a dual notification.  Under the present agenda item, China, Egypt and India had presented their comments several times.  They had circulated a communication raising specific and systemic issues, they had deliberated on the issue and they had made a proposal on the way forward.  If there was consensus in the meeting room - and if no Member had any reservations on the arguments put forward by China, India and Egypt at the present meeting and at previous ones - he did not see any reason why a motion could not be put forward that the RTAs with a dual notification be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD.  He added that the three delegations were more than willing to hear Members' views, reservations or comments, so that a substantive discussion could take place under the present agenda item.  He did not believe that any other agenda item was appropriate for such a discussion, or for the Committee to take a decision on the consideration of the RTAs in question.
&& The representative of India said that he fully agreed with the points that had been made by Egypt.  His understanding was that the Chairman would engage in informal consultations on issues of nomenclature relating to the CTD's agenda, in continuation with what the previous CTD Chairman had been doing.  The implication was that there would be no informal consultations on issues of substance.  He indicated that the substance was being discussed in the CTD itself.  A very clear proposal had been made by Egypt.  Since no objections had been heard, he presumed that Members agreed with the proposal.
&& The Chairman asked if any other Member wished to express a view on this matter.
&& The representative of the United States asked the Chairman for confirmation that, as had earlier been indicated, informal consultations would continue to be held on this issue.  
&& The representative of Japan similarly asked for confirmation that the Chairman would be continuing the informal consultations.  With respect to the three RTAs with a dual notification, he said that a part of these notifications had been made in the CRTA.  Therefore, colleagues in the CRTA would need to be consulted.  In this light, Japan was not in a position to take a decision at the present meeting on the consideration process for these RTAs.
&& The Chairman said that there was no consensus at this time, and that informal consultations were necessary.
&& The representative of Egypt said that it was his understanding that the process regarding RTAs with a dual notification was on hold in the CRTA.  In this light, he sought clarification as to what Japan wished to discuss with colleagues in the CRTA.  He added that one conclusion that had come out of the informal consultations held by the previous CTD Chairman was that no decision had yet been taken on the consideration of the GCC Customs Union, the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement.  Since discussions on this issue had not been exhausted, the three sub-items concerning the RTAs with a dual notification needed to be maintained on the CTD's agenda, in line with the CTD's rules of procedures, as well as the practice.  With regard to the proposal that had been made at the present meeting on the way forward for the consideration of RTAs with the dual notification, the record showed that only one Member had indicated that it wished to consult with colleagues in the CRTA.  No other delegation had voiced any substantive or procedural objections to the proposal.  In this light, he asked what would be the purpose of the Chairman's upcoming informal consultations, since Members were apparently only waiting for Japan to conclude its discussions with colleagues in the CRTA.
&& The representative of the European Union said that her delegation's silence up to this point should not be interpreted as consent.  As Members knew, the EU had fundamental reservations with the way in which the issue was being addressed.  Her delegation looked forward to the informal consultations that were to be held in order to try to find a way forward.  She regretted that the lack of engagement under the present agenda was interpreted as a free path to start the consideration process for the RTAs with a dual notification.  Members had been discussing these matters for some time now, and it was clear that there was disagreement. 
&& The representative of Japan, in response to Egypt's request for clarification on Japan's position, said that the three RTAs with a dual notification had been notified to both the CTD and the CRTA.  In view of this, his delegation was not in a position to decide at the present time on the consideration process for these RTAs.  His delegation looked forward to participating in the informal consultations that would be held by the Chairman.
&& The representative of China said that while his delegation was open to the informal consultations that the Chairman would hold, he wished to know what the objective of these consultations was.  He asked whether the Chairman intended to address issues relating to the CTD's agenda, or whether the objective was to discuss the venue of consideration of the three RTAs with a dual notification.
&& The representative of India said that he wished to comment on the point made by the EU regarding a lack of engagement.  He said that there had been a lack of engagement from some Members on this issue, and the focus of the CTD's discussions had been on procedures.  To facilitate substantive engagement, China, India and Egypt had made a formal submission.  Yet, in spite of this, substantive engagement was not forthcoming. He added that he could not understand the point made by Japan.  Japan's position was that the CTD could not take a decision at the present meeting on the consideration of the three RTAs with a dual notification, because notifications had been made to the CRTA as well as the CTD.  However, he recalled one CTD meeting in which some Members had tried to push through a decision in the CTD on the venue of consideration of the GCC Customs Union.  While this had not met with consensus, the efforts to push through such a decision pointed to a contradiction in Japan's position.  Finally, he asked the Chairman for clarification on the nature of the upcoming informal consultations.  While the former CTD Chairman's consultations had been entirely on procedural issues, India believed that it was necessary to have substantive engagement involving a wide membership.
&& The representative of Australia said that her delegation had not intended to take the floor under the present agenda item.  Australia was surprised and disappointed to see the three sub-items appear once again on the CTD's agenda.  A significant amount of the Committee's time over the past few years had been spent discussing largely procedural matters, which Members should be able to resolve in informal consultations - preferably before the next formal CTD meeting.  She said that she had not heard any points in the present discussion that could not have been more appropriately made under agenda item E.  Given the clear interest of the demandeurs in discussing the systemic issues raised in this context, she was puzzled by the continued resistance to have a discussion under agenda item E.  She indicated that Australia was not in a position to take any decision under the present agenda item, but looked forward to actively engaging in informal discussions with a view to resolving the issue as soon as possible. 
&& The representative of Canada said that it seemed premature to address substantive issues before agreeing procedurally on how these issues would be looked at.  The informal consultations called by the Chairman needed to treat the procedural question first.
&& The representative of New Zealand said that her delegation had not intended to take the floor on this issue.  However, with respect to the motion that had been proposed by Egypt, she wished to indicate that New Zealand was not in a position to agree to any such action without further consultations. 
&& The Chairman said that the purpose of the informal consultations that he would be calling was to forge the consensus necessary to allow the CTD to move forward. 
&& The representative of Egypt sought confirmation that the informal consultations to be called by the Chairman would be substantive in nature, and would address the points raised by China, Egypt and India in their submission, as well as in the CTD.  To date, the three delegations had not received any substantive replies from Members.  He also hoped that the Chairman could confirm that Members would no longer discuss matters relating to the CTD's agenda.  With regard to the agenda for a meeting, he observed that there were rules of procedure that needed to be followed, and these were not subject to interpretation or compromise.  He expressed appreciation to those delegations that had responded to his proposal for a motion.  However, since discussions were not exhausted under the present agenda item, the three sub-items concerning RTAs with a dual notification needed be retained until the issues were resolved.  Finally, in response to a point made by Australia, he said that China, Egypt and India had never restrained themselves from having a discussion, regardless of the agenda item. It was clear which delegations had been resisting an in-depth discussion.
&& The Chairman reiterated that the purpose of his informal consultations was to forge consensus. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
-	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES - NOTIFICATION BY THE EUROPEAN UNION (WT/COMTD/N/4/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman said that the notification concerning the EU's new rules of origin in its GSP scheme had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/4/Add.5.  He recalled that at the last CTD meeting, the EU had already made a presentation on these new rules of origin and the document that was subsequently circulated as the notification to the CTD had been made available in the meeting room.  Since the Committee had already discussed the new rules of origin, he suggested that, for the record, the Committee take note of the notification.  
&& The representative of Egypt said that, at the last CTD meeting, his delegation had posed a number of questions to the EU on the new GSP rules of origin.  Egypt had, inter alia, asked how the GSP rules of origin compared to the rules of origin in the "Pan Euro Med" context and in the Economic Partnership Agreement protocols.  Egypt had also asked whether a drawback rule was applied.  His delegation was hoping to receive responses from the EU at the present meeting. 
&& The representative of the European Union said that the EU's new GSP rules of origin had been introduced in both the CTD and in the Sub-Committee for LDCs.  She did recall that Egypt had posed a number of questions at the last CTD meeting.  Since the questions were technical in nature, she had invited Egypt to submit the questions in writing, so that they could be forwarded to her colleagues in Brussels.  She once again invited the Egyptian representative to submit the questions in writing.
&& The Committee took note of the notification by the EU. 
-	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES - NOTIFICATION BY JAPAN (WT/COMTD/N/2/ADD.15)
&& The Chairman said that the notification by Japan had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.15.  He invited the representative of Japan to introduce the notification.
&& The representative of Japan said that Japan's GSP scheme applied reduced tariffs on designated imported goods originating from developing countries or territories, with the aim of helping them to increase their export income, to advance their industrialization and to promote their economic development.  Through the implementation of the scheme, Japan believed that it had been contributing to the economic development of developing countries.  The scheme entered into force on 1 August 1971, and had been revised every ten years.  The previous version of Japan's GSP scheme had expired on 31 March 2011, but in line with the GSP policy objectives and expected benefits from the scheme, Japan had decided to extend the scheme until 31 March 2021.  The renewal - which became effective on 1 April 2011 - also came with some amendments, with a view to enhancing the transparency and simplicity of the GSP scheme, and providing more balanced market access opportunities among GSP beneficiaries. 
In the context of the renewal, Japan had firstly had decided to abolish import ceilings.  Previously, if certain industrial products exceeded the ceiling, the preferential treatment would be suspended.  Under the revised scheme, however, beneficiary countries could enjoy the preferential treatment until the end of each fiscal year, regardless of the amount imported.  Second, for the purpose of sharing preferential benefits equally among developing countries, Japan had revised the criteria for the application of the competitiveness-focused, product-by-exclusion measure.  The criteria were now more objective and transparent, and properly put even more emphasis on international competitiveness.  According to the new criteria, Japan could exclude for a period of three years certain products from GSP coverage for a beneficiary.  This was on the condition that the import volume of a given product from that beneficiary accounted for more than 50 per cent of Japan's total import volume for that product in the previous three years, and that import values for the product exceeded 1.5 billion yen.  While Japan's scheme formerly had qualitative criteria in place, such criteria - which were related to the effects on domestic industries - had been abolished.  As a result, Japan's GSP scheme would now be able to promote a more equal sharing of preferential benefits among developing countries.
The third amendment concerned a relaxation of the GSP preferential rules of origin on textile and clothing products, so as to expand opportunities for developing countries to utilize the scheme.  Formerly, developing countries were required to follow three steps - from fiber to cloth and from cloth to cloths - but in the revised scheme only two steps - from cloth to cloths - were required.  In addition, he said that Oman, Trinidad and Tobago, and Barbados had been graduated from the list of GSP beneficiaries, as they were classified as "high income economies" in the previous three consecutive years by the World Bank.  These were standard and objective criteria used by the international community.  Furthermore, since the Maldives had been officially taken off the UN's list of LDCs on 1 January 2011, this country would graduate from the list of LDC special beneficiaries under Japan's GSP scheme as from 1 July 2011.  With regard to special preferences for LDCs, no amendment had been made.  Finally, he informed Members that details of the GSP scheme were available on the website of Japan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
&& The representative of Egypt asked whether Japan could provide some clarification on the product coverage of its GSP scheme.  He also asked for confirmation as to whether the amended scheme had entered into force.  He observed that several GSP schemes were being discussed in the CTD, but not all of them had been renewed. 
&& The representative of Japan said that, of the approximately 9,000 tariff lines in the Japanese tariff system, 3,100 lines were duty free.  Japan's GSP scheme dealt with about 3,500 lines of the remaining 5,900.  On Egypt's second question, he confirmed that Japan's amended GSP scheme had entered into force.  He also reiterated that Japan's GSP scheme had existed for 40 years, with amendments being made every ten years.
&& The Committee took note of the notification by Japan. 
SYSTEMIC AND SPECIFIC ISSUES ARISING OUT OF THE DUAL NOTIFICATION OF THE GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL CUSTOMS UNION - COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA, EGYPT AND INDIA (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that he would first invite the EU and the US to take the floor, since it was these delegations that had requested the present agenda item.  He once again reminded Members of the discussion that had taken place at the last meeting, and therefore encouraged interventions to be brief.  He said that the floor was open to the two proponents.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation was not a proponent of the submission that was listed in the title of the present agenda item.  He said that he deferred to the authors and proponents of the submission in question. 
&& The representative of the European Union said that, at the previous CTD meeting, her delegation had offered some comments on the communication by China, Egypt and India on "Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council Customs Union".  The EU had indicated that the communication did indeed address the important systemic issue of some RTAs having been notified under two legal provisions, namely the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.  She said that this was an issue of systemic importance, which was why it was being discussed in the context of the review of the RTAs TM.  The discussions within the NGR, to which the communication could be transmitted, would clarify the procedures which an agreement that had been notified twice should follow.  She observed that the CRTA respected this way of proceeding.  She noted that Egypt and India had referred to India's proposal in the NGR on how to deal with the issue of dual notifications.  These delegations had also mentioned that, pending discussions in the NGR, the consideration of the GCC Customs Union and other "dually notified" RTAs was put on hold.  The EU was, therefore, surprised that it had been suggested at the present meeting to already jump to the consideration stage.
She said that the NGR was the correct forum to discuss any emerging systemic issue related to RTAs.  In that context, it would be the right venue for any possible systemic discussion to clarify the rules governing the creation of RTAs, including the scope of the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.  Her delegation was not trying to avoid a substantive engagement, but simply believed that the NGR was a more suitable forum.  The EU did not see the advantages in continuing to dwell on the matter in the CTD, when the matter was being discussed in the NGR, and when the NGR had a clear negotiating mandate to review the RTAs TM and to address systemic issues related to RTAs.  The EU looked forward to a final solution being found in the NGR, which the CTD would no doubt take note of and apply.
&& The representative of Egypt thanked the EU for its preliminary comments on some of the points that had been raised by China, Egypt and India.  He noted, however, that he had not heard any counter-arguments or reasonable answers.  In this light, he requested that Egypt's statement from the last CTD meeting - which laid out the numerous points raised by the three delegations - be included in the records of the present meeting as part of the discussion under this agenda item.  He explained that he had not heard anything that he could convey to his capital as responses to the numerous questions and arguments that had been put forward.  When his capital asked him what had transpired at the present meeting, he would have to respond that he had read out his statement again. 
In response to the remarks that had been made by the EU, he said that Members could keep attempting to push issues into the NGR, have them blocked in the NGR and then see them coming back to the CTD.  This was, however, becoming irritating.  He also asked what the EU would do in the hypothetical situation in which the Doha Round was suspended, or was declared to have failed.  He in particular wished to know how the EU could continue negotiating systemic issues - or the review of the RTAs TM - in the NGR, since the work of this body formed part of the Doha Round.  He added that the NGR was in a deadlock over the issue of dual notifications.  The US had made a proposal on the issue, and a counter‑proposal had been made by India.  In his delegation's view, the US proposal called for a fundamental restructuring of the WTO, as it implied an elimination of the role of the CTD in examining RTAs.  The Indian proposal, on the other hand, was a compromise proposal. According to this proposal, the current practice of the CRTA considering RTAs notified under Article XXIV and the CTD considering RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause would be maintained.  The only addition to existing procedures was that the goods parts of "dually notified" RTAs would be considered in the CTD. In his delegation's view, this would amount to a minor amendment of the RTAs TM. 
He went on to say that the improvement of the RTAs TM was only one aspect of the numerous points that had been put forward by China, Egypt and India.  Other issues concerned the scope and interpretation of the Enabling Clause.  The question was raised, for example, as to whether the Enabling Clause allowed the reduction and elimination of non-tariff measures.  There were also issues relating to the fact that the GCC Customs Union had been notified in 1984 under the Enabling Clause. Since no Member had raised any objection to the notification at the time, he did not understand why some Members were doing so now.  Furthermore, his delegation considered the 2007 Enabling Clause notification of the GCC Customs Union to be a subsequent notification, and not the notification of the customs union itself. 
&& The representative of India expressed concern that a substantive discussion was being avoided by some Members.  These Members had indicated that the "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" item was not the correct agenda item to have such a discussion.  However, under the agenda item requested by these Members, the Committee was simply told that the NGR was the appropriate place for the discussion.  This was the crux of the problem, and delegations would need to get past this in order to resolve the issue.  He also expressed concern with the US' position that customs unions could only be notified under GATT Article XXIV, and that an Enabling Clause notification of a customs union was not a valid notification.  This was causing a lot of uncertainty for developing countries.  The US' position effectively sought to undermine the availability of the Enabling Clause for developing countries to conclude and notify RTAs.  He recalled in this regard the references India had previously made to the CTD's consideration of the India-Sri Lanka Agreement. 
He added that India was unsure if developing countries should expect legal challenges from the US regarding RTAs among developing countries that had been notified under the Enabling Clause.  He referred to the article by Susan Schwab, the former US Trade Representative, which had appeared in the May-June 2011 edition of Foreign Affairs.  He said that, in the article, Ms Schwab had suggested that "interested Members should consider using focused WTO cases and dispute settlements to target poor-quality bilateral and regional trade agreements that fail to meet the letter and spirit of the WTO's requirement that such agreements cover substantially all trade".  He presumed that Ms Schwab understood that there was no agreed figure to define "substantially all trade".  Furthermore, he hoped that Ms Schwab recognized that the Enabling Clause was available to developing countries to enter into bilateral and regional trade agreements, and that she did not equate "poor quality" RTAs with RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  In conclusion, he said that some RTAs among developed country Members also had low trade coverage and long transition periods.
&& The representative of China expressed support for the interventions by Egypt and India.  As China, Egypt and India had already stated several times, the mandate of the NGR was quite limited, and could not address all the concerns and questions raised in their joint submission.  Even the NGR Chairman had requested the CTD to provide a report on any problems faced in the implementation of the RTAs TM.  In China's view, the CTD had the mandate and the capacity to undertake analysis on the dual notification issue.  The entire scope of work could not simply be shifted to the NGR.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation had explained its arguments in detail in previous CTD meetings.  The US did not find it useful to repeat the same points, particularly in light of the informal consultations that were to be held by the Chairman to attempt to resolve the systemic concerns that had been raised, or to refer the concerns to the appropriate WTO body for consideration. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that the US had indicated for the first time its willingness to talk about substance and systemic issues in the upcoming informal consultations, and not simply to discuss the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  He welcomed this.  He also noted that the US had mentioned that systemic issues could be referred to the appropriate WTO body for consideration.  However, since the CTD was the focal point for the integrated treatment of any development-related issue, and since the systemic issues being discussed related to the scope of the Enabling Clause and developing countries' rights to invoke the Enabling Clause, Egypt did not see what other WTO body the US was referring to.  Noting that the NGR would not exist as a forum to tackle systemic issues if the Doha Round no longer existed, he asked the US for further clarification. 
&& The representative of the United States requested the Egyptian representative to allow Members and the Chairman to speak for themselves, and to not put words in their mouths.  With respect to the purpose of the informal consultations, he drew Members' attention to the Chairman's intention, which was to find consensus in order to move forward.  He indicated that he remained optimistic in this regard.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
MODALITIES TO IMPLEMENT THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS - STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN
&& The Chairman said that he would shortly invite Members to consider the informal document titled "Modalities to implement the Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements" that had been sent to them by fax.  A possible standard format for the notification of PTAs to the CTD had also been sent to Members with the same fax.  He said that he wished to make a few introductory comments on the process that had brought the Committee to this point.
He recalled that, at the previous CTD meeting, his predecessor had made some preliminary remarks regarding the implementation of the TM for PTAs.  To build on the preliminary remarks of his predecessor, and to get some feedback on how the Mechanism could be implemented in a practical sense, he had held some informal consultations with a small group of Members.  The informal document that had been sent to Members had been prepared on the basis of those consultations.  The document contained the text of the PTAs TM, as well a number of modalities for implementation, which had been placed in italics in the document.  The modalities were meant to serve as guidelines as to how the Mechanism was to be implemented in practical terms.  The notification format had been prepared as an outcome of the informal consultations, as one of the implementation guidelines.
He said that there was no intention to formally revise or modify the agreed text of the TM that was contained in document WT/L/806.  The guidelines had been placed under relevant paragraphs in the informal document only to help Members better appreciate how the Mechanism was to be implemented.  The text of the TM was being used as a tool for this purpose, since Members could see which paragraphs the modalities related to. While the guidelines were important for Members and the Secretariat to have the necessary clarity to implement the PTAs TM, the modalities were only being put forward in an effort to begin the implementation of the Mechanism.  There would, however, certainly be opportunities in the future to revisit how the Mechanism was being implemented.  He added that the issues raised in the informal document might not be the only ones that would need to be addressed in the implementation of the PTAs TM.  Members might need to consider making additional clarifications in the future, as experience was gained in the implementation of the Mechanism.  He believed that Members would agree that the CTD's work in implementing the Mechanism should not duplicate the work of other WTO bodies.  This was something to be avoided, and might be one of the things to be looked at in the future.
He went on to provide a brief overview of the modalities for implementation that were laid out in the informal document.  A first clarification related to paragraph 1(c) of the PTAs TM, which formed part of the paragraph dealing with the coverage of the Mechanism.  The guideline here was that, for practical purposes in implementing the Mechanism, paragraph 1(c) should be understood to cover "any other non-reciprocal preferential treatment to products authorized under the WTO Agreement".  He explained that the reference "to products" would allow paragraph 1(c) to be consistent with the language found in paragraph 1(b).  This clarified that services were not included in the coverage of the Mechanism.
He said that he wished to move on to the procedures to consider PTAs that entered into force after the adoption of the TM.  Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Mechanism laid out the notification requirements for these PTAs.  The modalities clarified that the notification would be made to the CTD through a written communication, which would be circulated as a CTD document.  In the process of finalizing the factual presentation for a PTA, the modalities indicated a number of time-frames to clarify what was laid out in paragraph 7(c) of the TM.  The notifying Member would, in the first instance, submit comments to the Secretariat on the draft factual presentation within a four-week period.  This followed the current practice in the implementation of the TM for RTAs.  After incorporating these comments, as appropriate, the Secretariat would, through a fax, inform Members receiving benefits under the PTA that the draft was ready for their viewing.  Beneficiary Members that requested to view the draft would submit comments to the Secretariat within three weeks of the date of the fax.  If further modifications were made by the Secretariat to the draft on the basis of comments by beneficiary Members, the Secretariat would share the draft once more with the notifying Member.  The notifying Member would submit any further comments within a two-week period, after which the factual presentation would be finalized and circulated as a CTD document.     
With regard to the additional exchange of information specified in paragraph 11 of the PTAs TM, the modalities pointed to the current practice in the implementation of the TM for RTAs.  In particular, after a meeting of the CTD's Dedicated Session on PTAs, Members would have one week to submit any further written questions on a PTA that was considered.  The notifying Member would then have two weeks to provide written responses.  The questions and responses would be circulated as a CTD document.
He invited the Committee to next turn to broader issues which also applied to PTAs that were in force when the PTAs TM was adopted.  He suggested that the modalities in this context be appreciated in terms of making the electronic database on PTAs as extensive and as up to date as possible.  While the text of the TM distinguished between a "guide" to a PTA - which was to be prepared for PTAs which entered into force after the adoption of the Transparency Mechanism - and a "factual abstract" of a PTA - which was to be prepared for PTAs in force when the Mechanism was adopted - the modalities indicated that the information requirements to complete the guide and the factual abstract were quite similar.  Therefore, in order to make the information in the electronic database on PTAs uniform across all PTAs, and as extensive as possible, the two sets of information requirements would be merged to prepare an "abstract/guide" for each PTA.  The information required to complete the "abstract/guide" would be incorporated into the electronic database on PTAs.  Thus, for any given PTA, the specified internet links and statistics would be found on the web pages devoted to that PTA in the PTAs database.  The "abstract/guide" would not be circulated as a CTD document.  The Secretariat would put together the information requirements to complete the "abstract/guide" for each PTA to place on the PTAs database in full consultation with the Member implementing the PTA.
An "abstract/guide" would be prepared for PTAs that entered into force after the adoption of the Mechanism; for PTAs that were in force when the Mechanism was adopted and were previously notified through a written communication submitted by the implementing Member in any WTO body;  and for PTAs that were in force when the Mechanism was adopted but for which a written communication was not previously submitted in any WTO body by the implementing Member.  He said that this would allow the electronic database on PTAs to be complete, to the extent that it would contain information on all PTAs being implemented by Members.  For a PTA that was in force when the Mechanism was adopted, but had not yet been notified, the modalities specified that the implementing Member would notify the PTA at the earliest possible date - not later than 14 December 2011 - through a written communication, which would be circulated as a CTD document.
Also to ensure that the PTAs database was as up-to-date and extensive as possible, the Secretariat and Members would maintain informal contact.  As part of this informal contact, Members implementing PTAs would inform the Secretariat as soon as possible of any changes to website addresses, so that the internet links provided on the PTAs database remained valid.  If, for any PTA in force when the TM was adopted, the Secretariat did not have the information specified in paragraph 4, the Secretariat would inform the Member implementing the PTA so that the information could be obtained.  Finally, he said that he would conclude his overview of the modalities with a word on the communications to be submitted under paragraph 15 of the TM, which concerned changes affecting the implementation of a PTA during a calendar year.  In particular, the modalities specified that these communications would be circulated as CTD documents.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's statement and agreed to the modalities to implement the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs.  The Committee also adopted the proposed standard format for the notification of PTAs to the CTD.  In addition, the Committee agreed with the Chairman's proposal that the Secretariat would prepare a preliminary, informal, list of PTAs being implemented by WTO Members, which would be shared with Members for their feedback.  The Chairman remarked that, until new PTAs entered into force, the list would provide clarity as to which PTAs would initially form part of the electronic database that the Secretariat was in the process of establishing.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  The CTD had to date undertaken five of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision.  He asked if any Member wished to take the floor under this agenda item.
&& The representative of India said that paragraph 47 of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration placed an obligation on developed countries to provide DFQF market access for products originating from LDCs.  The Declaration also encouraged developing country Members declaring themselves in a position to do so, to provide such treatment to LDCs' products.  The Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for LDCs was announced by the Indian Prime Minister of India in April 2008.  India was, therefore, the first developing country to announce a comprehensive scheme under the DFQF mandate.
 He recalled that his delegation had previously provided details of the DFTP Scheme. To date, letters of intent had been received from 27 LDCs, although only 22 LDCs had submitted the details of their signatory authorities so far.  He urged the remaining LDCs to finalize their internal processes, and to intimate to India their willingness to avail of the benefits under this Scheme, and more generally to benefit from India's substantial market access opening to the LDCs.  He also indicated that India remained open to the feedback it received from beneficiary countries.  For example, Cambodia had requested a simplification of the procedures under the rules of origin pertaining to registered vessels.  Requests for the inclusion of such products as cashews, milk products, tea and coffee, and sesame seeds had been received from Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda and Ethiopia respectively. 
He added that the DFTP Scheme was only a baseline scheme. Several LDCs received concessions over and above the preferences available under the Scheme.  At the 2nd Africa–India Forum Summit held in May 2011, India had committed to offer US$ 5 billion over three years under lines of credit to help Africa achieve its development goals.  Additionally, US$ 700 million would be offered to establish new institutions and training programmes in consultation with the African Union and its institutions.  India had also proposed the establishment of new institutions at the pan-African level.  These included an India-Africa Food Processing Cluster, as well as an India-Africa Integrated Textiles Cluster to support the cotton industry through the processing and conversion of cotton into high-value products.  Other examples included an India-Africa Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting - to harness satellite technology for the agriculture and fisheries sectors and to contribute to disaster preparedness and the management of natural resources - an India-Africa Institute of Agriculture and Rural Development and an India-Africa University for Life and Earth Sciences. 
&& The representative of China said that the review of the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to LDCs was an important item on the CTD's agenda.  This was particularly the case at the present time, given that Members were considering having some deliverables for the LDCs by the end of 2011, before the Doha Round was concluded.  As had already been stated on previous occasions, China supported the delivery of an LDC package - of which DFQF was a core element - at the 8th Ministerial Conference.  China believed that the faithful implementation of the Hong Kong mandate on DFQF would not only provide the long-awaited support for the poorest, but would also help preserve the creditability and relevance of the multilateral trading system. 
As a developing country faced with numerous development challenges, China fully understood the difficulties confronted by LDCs in their economic development.  China was doing its utmost to expand its bilateral cooperation with the LDCs, including through the provision of DFQF market access for LDCs' products.  In 2001, China had started to provide DFQF treatment to products imported from LDCs.  The scope of both beneficiaries and products had been expanding gradually since then.  In September 2008, at the UN High-Level Plenary Meeting on the Millennium Development Goals, the Chinese Premier had announced that China would apply DFQF treatment for LDCs' products on 95 per cent of tariff lines.  Since 1 July 2010, China was offering such treatment to LDCs' products on 4,762 tariff lines, accounting for roughly 60 per cent of total tariff lines.  He noted that this treatment, together with many other bilateral initiatives, had made important contributions to the economic and trade cooperation between China and the relevant countries.  In particular, WTO data showed that, since 2008, China had become the world's largest export destination for LDCs, absorbing 23 per cent of LDCs' total exports.  Comparing this to the 10.9 per cent figure registered in 2000, he said that the annual growth rate of China's imports from LDCs during the 2000-2009 period was 24 per cent, which was much higher than that of any other Member. 
He noted that the scope of DFQF treatment had been established based on China's past experience importing from LDCs, as well as through amicable consultations with the LDCs.  The purpose was to include items with demonstrable export capacity, both actual and potential.  The 60 per cent tariff line coverage had already accounted for 98.2 per cent of all LDCs' exports to China in value terms in 2008.  China would continue to expand the scope of coverage in order to achieve the final objective of 95 per cent of lines under zero-tariff treatment.  Finally, he observed that almost six years had passed since the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  The uneven and fragile economic recovery should prompt all Members to demonstrate their firm determination to retain an open and fair multilateral trading system, as well as their good faith in honouring their commitments towards the LDCs. 
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, recalled that Ministers had agreed that the Doha Round would be a development Round, and that the issues of developing countries - in particular the LDCs - would form the core of the Round.  He believed that DFQF for LDCs was the centre point of the development dimension.  In this regard, he recalled that the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration had further articulated the issue.  The LDC Group welcomed and appreciated the steps that had been taken by several Members to meaningfully enhance the market access available for products originating from the LDCs.  However, there was still ample room for work to be done by the developed countries - as well as the developing countries in a position to do so - to fully and effectively implement the Hong Kong Decision, including through the simplification of rules of origin.  He called on Members to live up to the spirit and letter of the mandate in the Hong Kong Declaration.  He also expressed appreciation that there was broad-based consensus on the LDC‑specific issues, and indicated that the 8th Ministerial Conference would be an opportunity to deliver on DFQF market access for LDCs.  He called upon the Secretariat to enlighten Members with a factual presentation on the status of DFQF implementation.  Finally, he said that he looked forward to engaging constructively with Members on the DFQF issue with a view to an early implementation.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2010 (WT/COMTD/W/178)
Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2010 (WT/COMTD/W/177 and Corr.1)
&& The Chairman said that there were two reports for consideration under this agenda item, namely the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training (TA Report) for 2010 - circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/178 - and the Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2010 - circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/177.  A corrigendum to the Audit Report, in English and Spanish only, had also been issued.  He invited the Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) and the Head of the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit (TCAU) to introduce the TA Report and the Audit Report, respectively.
&& The Director of the ITTC said that he would only make a few brief remarks, as the TA Report had been circulated and regular discussions on technical assistance (TA) were taking place with the different regional groups. His first point concerned the finalization of the reforms - in particular in the context of the "progressive learning" initiative, which permitted coherence and continuity between the different levels of training in the WTO.  The implementation of the reforms had initially led to problems for some beneficiaries who, due to technical difficulties, could not access the "e-learning" facilities.  Many of these difficulties had been resolved, and it was now possible to access "e-learning" without the same problems.  On the introduction of RBM in the WTO - since the end of 2010, but particularly from the beginning of 2011 - he expressed his thanks to a number of Members that had made available their experience and knowledge in this area.  Members had had the opportunity to discuss RBM at an informal CTD held earlier in 2011, and would have another opportunity when the Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan) for the 2012-2013 period was considered by the Committee. 
He said that, in 2010, priority had been given to TA activities concerning African countries and LDCs.  Priority had also been given to collaboration with regional institutions.  Efforts were additionally being made to strengthen coordination with other international organizations providing trade-related technical assistance (TRTA).  He mentioned in this regard the Global Trade-Related Technical Assistance Database (GTAD), which provided extensive information on TRTA activities that would take place in 2012.  He added that the ITTC was working with parliaments, with the private sector and with the media.  The ITTC had also reinforced its cooperation with universities and with academia, especially through the launching of WTO Chairs Programme.  Finally, he thanked the donors for their support. Observing that some delays had been encountered in 2011 in the disbursement of funds, he expressed his hope that the reminders that had been sent to various capitals would allow the ITTC to continue with its activities in the best possible conditions. 
&& The Head of the TCAU said that, in anticipation of the introduction of RBM in the WTO, the 2010 Technical Cooperation Audit Report focused on TA output - including the number of activities, the duration of the activities, the number of participants, the subjects covered and the teaching methods - before addressing the immediate and longer-term outcome of the activities for beneficiary countries.  A novelty of the 2010 Audit Report was the availability of statistics on the various training methods used in the activities.  It was found that lectures represented only half of the total training time, with more interactive methods such as question and answer sessions, exercises and simulations accounting for the balance.  This gave a measure of the progress already made by the Secretariat on this front over the past decade.  He observed that the immediate outcome of a TA activity – the difference that an activity made for its participants – had traditionally been measured through the self-evaluation presented by the trainers in a back-to-office report (BTOR).  Such reports typically presented the views of the participants on the activity instead of relying on more objective indicators, such as the results of quizzes or exercises, even when such information was available. Efforts were, therefore, being made to use more precise indicators.
He went on to say that, as in 2009, the analysis of the longer-term outcome of the TA provided by the WTO over the years in a limited number of countries had shown some positive effects and impact, in particular on the compliance with their WTO obligations.  More time was, however, needed before the evidence collected could be considered as being sufficiently representative.  Finally, he said that, in 2010, the TCAU had reviewed in some detail two e-training courses and the first Advanced Trade Policy Course (ATPC) in order to test how progressive the training path for generalists was.  This had led to the formulation of various recommendations to better define what was meant by each of the three levels of progressive learning and to recast the programme of activities accordingly.  To be consistent with the new structure of the Audit Report, the results of these evaluations had been broken down between output and immediate outcome.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation's initial look at the TA Report had been positive.  He noted, however, that the report had only recently been issued and that his delegation - and possibly other delegations - would need more time to review it in detail and provide any comments to the Secretariat.  
&& The representative of the European Union said that the TA Report had been received very late and might merit further consideration and discussion.  Her delegation, however, had some preliminary comments on both the TA Report and the Audit Report.  She firstly commended the efforts made by the Secretariat to introduce RBM tools in its work and noted that the Audit Report had adjusted its focus in anticipation of the introduction of RBM.  She particularly welcomed the attempt in the Audit Report to look at longer-term impacts of WTO technical cooperation, for instance in terms of improved compliance with WTO obligations and more active participation in negotiations. Her delegation understood that the Secretariat was at the beginning of a process to introduce RBM, and wished in future meetings of the CTD to be kept informed of the progress that was being made and to have the opportunity to discuss pertinent issues in more detail.  For example, the EU had questions regarding how indicators and base lines would be set and how the Secretariat would collect information on the evolution of such indicators. 
She noted from the Audit Report that the Secretariat had up to the present relied mainly on BTORs by trainers as well as self-evaluation.  In this regard, she agreed that these needed to be complemented by more objective indicators of immediate output such as the results of quizzes and tests, as well as indicators of longer-term impact.  She welcomed the steps taken to improve internal coordination within the Secretariat on TA, including through the setting up of a task force, as well as efforts to coordinate with other agencies.  Noting that Aid for Trade for most donors was decentralized in the field, she encouraged Secretariat staff to meet donor representatives when on mission in order to get a sense of the activities undertaken or planned.  This would help build synergies and avoid costly overlaps. 
She also welcomed the Secretariat's increased partnership with other institutions - notably regional ones - in the delivery of training and technical cooperation, as well as the increased regional focus of the activities.  The EU wished to know if these initiatives had brought positive results.  She welcomed the continued focus on Africa and the LDCs as well as the practical approach that was taken for many activities - for example, concrete training on scheduling and notifications, which had led to a welcome increase in notifications themselves.  She also noted that Trade Policy Reviews (TPRs) were increasingly being used as a way to discern information about the TA and training needs of the partner countries.  She welcomed this and stressed once again the importance of closely liaising and communicating with donors present in the field so as to dovetail, and not undermine, other types of needs assessments that might be carried out.  She additionally noted that the Secretariat was planning a review of the activities that were carried out in the context of the WTO Chairs Programme in order to assess the contribution that had been made in 2010.  Her delegation wished to be informed of the outcome of this review.  Information was also sought on the feedback received from the users of the reference centres, which was in line with the present orientation towards results. 
She added that her delegation had a suggestion on how to present the budget, which was currently presented in a very simple form by sources of funding.  In particular, the Secretariat was requested to include a breakdown of the budget by main areas of activities and objectives pursued. This would give more visibility to the relative priorities of the various activities.  Furthermore, it was suggested that the Secretariat could bring out more clearly in the TA Report and in the Audit Report how the recommendations of the previous year's Audit Report had been followed up on.  Finally, with regard to the financial situation in the DDA Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF), she indicated that her delegation had taken note of the difficulties encountered in 2010 and was well aware of the constraints that were being faced in 2011.  Noting that the European Commission and several of its member States had made contributions or firm pledges, she expressed her hope that other Members would follow suit.
&& The representative of Australia said that the TA Report provided important information on the TRTA being carried out by the Secretariat, including in the context of the increased regional focus of the WTO's work.  This was useful to Australia in developing and coordinating its TRTA activities.  Her delegation commended the Secretariat for the progress made in monitoring and evaluation - including through the introduction of the RBM process, which was in line with the monitoring and evaluation framework under the Aid-for-Trade programme. Australia was also pleased to note that there was a link being drawn between the Secretariat's TA work and the upcoming Third Global Review of Aid for Trade.  Her delegation looked forward to being updated on the RBM initiative in future CTD meetings. 
She welcomed the priority that the ITTC was giving to LDCs. This was consistent with Australia's commitment to assisting LDCs, in recognition of the particular challenges these countries faced in their efforts to reduce poverty and achieve sustainable development.  In this context, she wished to highlight the particular challenges faced by LDCs and small and vulnerable states in the Asia-Pacific region.  Australia placed importance in increasing the visibility of these countries in the WTO's TA activities and looked forward to further exploring these issues at the Third Global Review of Aid for Trade.  She said that she had taken note of the Secretariat's comments concerning the difficulties currently faced in the DDAGTF, and indicated that Australia was considering these challenges.  Any additional questions or comments by Australia on the two reports that had been presented would be shared in due course.
&& The representative of Canada said that the TA Report had only recently been received. In this light, his delegation would not be able to make a full assessment at the present meeting.  Some preliminary remarks would be provided at this stage, and any further comments would be shared later on.  Based on a cursory overview, Canada welcomed the ITTC's approach to meeting the demands of beneficiaries and in tailoring activities for these countries, in particular LDCs. The efforts at coordination with other agencies through GTAD were also welcome, as this would avoid overlap. Further efforts in that regard were encouraged.  He noted that the demand-driven nature of TA provision was in keeping with the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, and commended the ITTC on this.  Also in keeping with the Paris Declaration, he welcomed the adoption of RBM by the ITTC, as stated in the first paragraph of both reports that had been presented.  He noted, however, that the reports focused heavily on outputs rather than on outcomes, and expressed his hope that future reports would incorporate more outcomes and impacts in their assessments.  Comments from other delegations under the present agenda item also seemed to point in the same direction.  His delegation looked forward to working closely with the ITTC on these issues, including on the elaboration of a programme-wide log frame against which progress could be measured.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation had not yet thoroughly reviewed the two reports, and may come back with comments at a later stage.  He indicated his appreciation to the ITTC for the high quality of its work.  Pointing to recent discussions in the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration, and to paragraph 165 of the TA Report, he expressed concern over the insufficient funds that were being made available for TA activities.  He hoped that the financial situation would improve soon, so that the Secretariat's work in providing TA to developing country Members could be facilitated.  Finally, he said that an important way of considering the long-term impact of TA was in terms of the enhanced capacity of developing country Members to participate in the WTO's work, which was a reflection of the success of the ITTC's initiatives.
&& The representative of Cuba said that her delegation had not yet had time to carefully study the two reports.  She, however, wished to express her appreciation to the ITTC for the open dialogue that had always been maintained with her delegation.  Cuba was one of the beneficiaries of the high‑quality services provided by the ITTC, and hoped that the fruitful relationship with the ITTC would continue.
&& The representative of Egypt expressed appreciation for the work undertaken by the ITTC, and in particular the desk dealing with the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. His delegation commended the efforts made with respect to progressive learning and the move towards RBM. Referring to the TA Report, he said that paragraph 108 mentioned that, due to human and financial resource constraints, the Secretariat had not been able to organize a full-fledged three-month Regional Trade Policy Course (RTPC) for Arab countries as it had done for the other regions.  The report also indicated that a one-month Short Trade Policy Course (STPC), organized in collaboration with the Arab Monetary Fund (AMF), had been scheduled to be held in 2010. However, the activity had been cancelled due to the insufficient number of nominations.  He emphasized the importance Egypt attached to the three-month RTPCs.  He also expressed his hope that in the Secretariat's new TA Plan due note would be taken of the fact that the MENA region had not been a beneficiary of an RTPC in 2010, while other regions had benefitted from such a course.  In particular, he hoped that at least one of the three-month RTPCs could be held in the MENA region in 2012.
With respect to the low number of nominations that the TA Report had made reference to, he said that one of the difficulties that Egypt faced was that the notices convening these courses were dispatched at a time that coincided with national religious holidays and recess periods.  Many MENA countries were, therefore, not in a position to name their candidates by the prescribed deadlines.  In this light, he suggested that ample time be given for Members to screen and name their candidates for these courses.  He also noted that, according to the feedback received, the recent one-month course held in Abu Dhabi had been very successful.  This proved that there was sufficient participation and demand, as well absorption capacity for such activities.
&& The Director of the ITTC thanked Members for their comments and for their support for the ITTC's activities.  He observed that RBM was one of the main issues that had been raised.  In this regard, he informed the Committee that several senior officials in the Secretariat were being trained in RBM, so as to ensure that they would implement RBM in assessing their activities.  He also noted the importance of ensuring that TA activities were demand-driven.  On this point, he said that a lot of efforts had been made by the ITTC, including through the use of TPRs.  He additionally expressed appreciation for the suggestion by the EU that Secretariat staff could interact with donor representatives when on mission. 
With regard to the WTO reference centres, he said that the ITTC had started revamping the centres, particularly in LDCs.  Members would probably be briefed in 2012 on the progress made in this regard.  The ITTC's enhanced cooperation with regional institutions was another important development.  He pointed Members to the new ITTC newsletter, which contained positive comments by the senior managers of some of the major regional institutions that the ITTC was working with.  He noted that some of the institutions were contributing financial resources to implement activities jointly with the WTO.  As a result of the collaboration with the WTO, many regional institutions were giving more priority to trade.  He believed that the ITTC should continue to strengthen its collaboration with regional institutions. 
Turning to the comments made by Egypt, he said that the ITTC was working to enhance its cooperation with the Arab countries, and was trying to ensure that all scheduled activities for the MENA region would be implemented in 2011.  In terms of deadlines, he said that all regions were given the same six-week period to submit nominations.  He also noted that there were less national requests from the MENA region than from other regions.  This was part of the explanation for the low level of implementation of activities in this region. 
He next addressed the points that had been raised on the WTO Chairs Programme. He said that an internal evaluation of this programme had been undertaken in 2010.  The outcome of this evaluation, which had been extremely positive, had been discussed with Members.  At the end of 2011, the ITTC was planning to commission an independent and external evaluation of the programme, the results of which would certainly be shared with Members.  Also on the subject of cooperation with the academic world, he said that in June 2012 the WTO - in collaboration with UNCTAD and the ITC - would be hosting the annual Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP) conference.  He added that the ITTC was committed to facilitating and encouraging the participation of developing country scholars and researchers in its activities. Finally, he expressed his hope that the current financial difficulties would be resolved soon.  As Members already knew from discussions with the ITTC, the TA Plan for 2012 and 2013 had been revised in order to take into account the budgetary issues that several Members were facing at the present time. 
&& The Head of the TCAU thanked Members for their comments, which encouraged the TCAU to continue working in the same direction.  He said that he wished to make a point on the EU's request to better reflect how the recommendations made by the TCAU in the previous year had been incorporated in the implementation of activities.  He explained in particular that the current approach was different than in the past.  A big improvement had been found for a number of years in the incorporation of the TCAU's recommendations, but the margin for improvement was inevitably getting smaller.  If the TCAU continued to annually review the recommendations, a significant difference was not going to be found.  In the current approach, what was being done for the first time was to follow up on the recommendations in the BTORs.  A series of interviews would be held with TA providers to explore how the recommendations could be implemented.  The results of the exercise would be reported in the Audit Report for 2011. 
&& The Chairman said that Members could provide any further comments on the two reports directly to the Secretariat. 
&& The Committee took note of the two reports and of all interventions. 
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.
ANNEX
Intervention by Egypt at the Eighty-First Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (31 March 2011)


&& The representative of Egypt noted that the Chairman had indicated that the three sub-items under consideration appeared on the agenda of the present meeting at the request of China, Egypt and India.  In this regard, he said that he wished to clarify that the sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification had initially appeared on the CTD's agenda at the 73rd Session at the request of the United States.  The other two sub-items had appeared when the RTAs to which they related had been notified under the Enabling Clause.  The understanding of China, Egypt and India was that the three sub-items did not appear on the CTD's agenda at their request.
He went on to say that the notification of the GCC Customs Union had been discussed in the CTD under the agenda item "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" since the 73rd Session held in March 2009.  This sub-agenda item was introduced at the request of a developed Member to challenge the legality of invoking the Enabling Clause in notifying the GCC Customs Union.  Some developed‑country Members did not favour moving forward with the process of consideration of the GCC Customs Union until further clarification was sought on the legal justification for such a notification.  This came despite the assertion made by the former CTD Chairman at the 69th Session that the GCC Customs Union was scheduled for a factual consideration at a Dedicated Session of the CTD in October 2008.  However pursuant consultations held between the challenging developed Members and the GCC prompted the latter to make a subsequent notification under Article XXIV of GATT.  This was deemed by some developed Members to be the legal premise for examining this RTA in the CRTA, completely ignoring the fact that there was a legal and valid notification pertaining to this RTA made under the Enabling Clause, and that this RTA was scheduled for consideration in a Dedicated Session of the CTD.
Such undertakings raised several specific and systemic concerns to developing countries.  These undertakings had prompted China, India and Egypt to address some of their concerns in a submission which was introduced and presented in detail at the 80th Session of the CTD held on 4 October 2010.  The proponents of the submission had argued that several issues needed to be discussed and resolved in the CTD before a determination could be made on how to consider RTAs with a dual notification status.  The ambit of the specific and systemic concerns went well beyond the domain of the NGR, which was merely reviewing the TM for RTAs. 
He went on to list a number of points which he said were among the main concerns and questions that needed to be addressed with respect to the consideration of the GCC Agreement.  He firstly inquired whether there was any legal understanding to substantiate the views of some developed Members that the Enabling Clause did not provide legal coverage for the GCC Customs Union notification or any other custom union.  If this was the case, he asked for clarification for the basis on which Members had approved several other customs unions between developing countries that had been notified to the CTD under the Enabling Clause.  He cited a number of customs unions in this regard, including the Andean Community, the East African Community, the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa and the West African Economic and Monetary Union.
He further inquired on the extent to which Members aligned themselves with the Secretariat’s Legal Note of 2003 which argued that, even if GATT Article XXIV was not explicitly set aside in the first paragraph of the Enabling Clause - whereas Article I explicitly was - invoking the Enabling Clause would suffice to authorize RTAs among developing and least-developed Members, even if the requirements of Article XXIV were not completely satisfied. If Members did not agree with the Secretariat’s legal opinion, he wished to know why some developed Members had based their arguments on the Legal Note to justify their proposals on how to deal with dual notifications in the NGR. 
He also asked why Members had not challenged the legality of the Unified Economic Agreement that established the GCC Customs Union, which was notified in 1984 exclusively on the basis of the Enabling Clause.  He pointed out that Members had agreed at the time to consider that Agreement in the CTD within the realm of preferential arrangements among developing countries.  He additionally indicated that if the Agreement establishing the GCC Customs Union was already notified under the Enabling Clause in 1984, it seemed that the 1995 General Council decision on avoidance of procedural and institutional duplication needed be applied in this case.  Furthermore, pointing to the 2007 and 2009 notifications of the GCC Agreement as subsequent notifications regarding implementation procedures, he suggested that these notifications should be treated as such in the context of the RTAs TM.
He additionally referred to the procedures on reporting on RTAs adopted by the CTD in 1998 and contained in document WT/COMTD/16.  According to these procedures, any information subsequent to an initial notification made under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause regarding the modification of the preferential arrangements between developing countries was to be notified under paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause.  In this light, he inquired on the extent to which Members had adhered to these procedures in the case of the GCC Customs Union.  He also asked whether it would be legal to obtain accession commitments in violation of existing WTO provisions.  It appeared that one member country of the GCC had in 2007 notified the implementation procedures for the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause and subsequently in 2009 had notified the same implementation procedures on the basis of Article XXIV of GATT.  Furthermore, in 1984 another GCC member country had notified the GCC Economic Agreement, which established the customs union itself, under the Enabling Clause.  On this basis, he asked how such unilateral actions would affect the rights and obligations of Members.  In addition, he inquired on the legal implications of having an agreement establishing a customs union notified under the Enabling Clause, while another notification regarding an amendment to that agreement was notified under both GATT Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause. 
He continued with his list of issues by inquiring on the extent to which Member's accession commitments to notify an RTA on the basis of Article XXIV had precedence over, or denied the other Members party to the same RTA, the right to notify the Agreement to the CTD under the Enabling Clause.  He additionally queried whether the CTD had fulfilled its mandate in considering the GCC Agreement, in so far as the Committee's terms of reference required it to consider any questions which may arise with regard to either the application or the use of special provisions in favour of developing country Members, including the invocation of the Enabling Clause.  He also shared his concern as to whether the CTD had reported the impasse on the interpretation and scope of the Enabling Clause, as well as other specific and systemic issues arising from the GCC dual notification, to the General Council for appropriate action, as per rule 33 of the Committee's rules of procedure.
He next queried whether Members had agreed to set a practice whereby notifications of RTAs among developing countries were to be contested at first sight or on a prima facie basis, without having any factual report prepared by the Secretariat to substantiate such challenges.  In this light, he asked whether Members would be in a position to accept a similar practice in the case of RTAs that were notified to the CRTA under GATT Article XXIV, given that both the CRTA and the CTD followed the same reporting procedures on RTAs, and despite the fact that such actions were not prescribed by the RTAs TM.  Moreover, he wished to know whether Members were now in a position to revert to the practice of making legal judgments on the compatibility or conformity of RTAs notified to the WTO under GATT Article XXIV.  He observed that this would prove to be interesting since, according to the Secretariat, the only RTA notified on the basis of Article XXIV that was ever deemed to be fully WTO-compatible was the Czech-Slovak Customs Union.  This suggested that neither the North American Free Trade Agreement nor the Treaty of Rome establishing the European Economic Community had ever been decreed as being compatible with Article XXIV, given that the commissioned working party could not, upon scrutiny, reconcile the legal issues.
He additionally asked whether Members would subscribe to the view that the Enabling Clause was neither a waiver nor an exception to the MFN obligation, but rather constituted a self-standing and designated regime.  Furthermore, if Members had the right to challenge the legality of an RTA that had been notified under the Enabling Clause, he questioned the extent to which Members in doing so were respecting their previous ad referendum commitment - as prescribed in Annex C of the draft Cancun Ministerial declaration - to guarantee that the Enabling Clause would apply whenever action was taken by developing Members under the provisions of this Clause.  He also queried whether RTA transparency obligations were distinct from any action that affected Members might wish to take in other WTO bodies.  If not, he asked how Members qualified and interpreted the provisions in the RTAs TM which stated that RTA factual presentations and the consideration of RTAs should not be used as a basis for dispute settlement procedures.
He continued with the following points. He firstly inquired how Members interpreted the obligation not to prejudge the substance of a required RTA notification and not to affect the Members rights and obligations under the WTO agreements in any way, as was specified in the RTAs TM.  He pointed to Section C of the RTAs TM in particular, which stated that upon notification and without prejudging the substance under which an RTA had been notified, that RTA would be considered by Members on the basis of a factual presentation.  Furthermore, he asked what was of most importance for the RTA transparency exercise, in particular whether it was the venue of consideration or rather the relevant applicable WTO law that had been invoked to justify the creation of the RTA.  It seemed from the reaction of some developed Members in their consideration of the GCC Customs Union, and from a number of panel and appellate body rulings - including the Turkey-Textiles case and the EC‑Bananas dispute - that the applicable WTO legal provision was the core issue here. 
Finally, he raised the question of whether the CRTA could review any notification automatically and unilaterally.  In this regard, he said that, according to the CRTA's terms of reference, it could not do so.  In particular, the CRTA could only carry out an examination of agreements in accordance with the procedures and terms of reference adopted by the Council for Trade in Goods, the Council for Trade in Services or the CTD, as the case may be, and thereafter report to the relevant body for appropriate action.  Moreover, there were no prescribed provisions in the RTAs TM that would allow the CRTA to proceed with the examination of an RTA that had been notified twice, each time invoking a distinct WTO legal provision. 
He went on to say that these were some of the specific and systemic issues that needed to be addressed in considering the GCC Customs Union.  He emphasized that, according to the Secretariat’s Legal Note of 2003, any review of the RTA – wherever it occurred – must be performed according to the legal provision that had been invoked to justify the WTO consistency of the RTA in question.  The Note went on to ascertain that any review of an RTA notified under the Enabling Clause must be carried out in accordance with the terms of reference of the CTD, and that the CTD had overall responsibility for the operation of the Enabling Clause.  The legal obligations arising from the application of the Enabling Clause were very much different from those prescribed by GATT Article XXIV, and this was why his delegation had called for prudence in addressing the specific and systemic issues at hand.  Merely addressing the issue of "venue for consideration" was clearly a legal and procedural understatement. 
He said that he wished to conclude by quoting the Appellate Body's ruling in the EC–Tariff Preferences case, which ascertained that the Enabling Clause had become an integral part of the GATT 1994.  The Appellate Body also noted that the relationship between trade and development, and in particular the role of the Enabling Clause, remained prominent on the agenda of the WTO.  The Enabling Clause, by its own terms, sought to promote the fuller participation of developing countries in the world trading system.  The EU even argued that the Enabling Clause was the most concrete, comprehensive and important application of the principle of special and differential treatment, and that it was the most basic principle of the international law of development and constituted lex specialis that applied to the exclusion of more general WTO rules. 
It was, therefore, arguable that customs unions among developing countries should continue to be notified on the basis of the Enabling Clause.  The object and purpose of the Enabling Clause clearly distinguished it from other exceptions such as those found in Articles XXIV, XX and XXI of the GATT 1994, allowing developed and least developed Members to adopt and pursue legitimate policy objectives.  For these reasons, Egypt requested that the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union be retained on the agenda for the consideration of the CTD on the basis of the Enabling Clause, and in light of the aforementioned specific and systemic issues that had been raised in its connection. He indicated that a discussion on these issues had not yet properly begun.
__________
 The 82nd Session was reconvened on 5 July 2011 to discuss agenda item F only. As there was not enough time on 21 June to consider all items on the agenda, the Committee agreed with the Chairman's proposal to reconvene the 82nd Session to consider item F, while considering all other items on 21 June.  
 The intervention by Egypt at the 81st Session of the CTD can be found in the Annex to this Note.
 The remainder of the discussion under this agenda item took place in informal mode. What is reproduced below is what, on the basis of the discussion, Members agreed would be reflected in the formal minutes of the meeting. 
 The standard format was subsequently circulated as document WT/COMTD/73.
 Agenda item H was considered immediately after item C on 21 June.  This was because the Secretariat representatives who were to present the reports under item H were not able to stay until the end of the meeting, due to another commitment.  The Committee therefore agreed, on the basis of a proposal by the Chairman, to consider item H earlier.      
 In English and Spanish only.
 As found in the Note on the meeting (WT/COMTD/M/81), under agenda item C.









WT/COMTD/M/82 Page  PAGE 4



	WT/COMTD/M/82 	Page  PAGE 3



 

 

 

 



