 
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 5 JULY 2018
Chairman: H.E. Mr. Diego Aulestia (Ecuador) 

A.	adoption of the agenda	2
B.	observers	2
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	2
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the  Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	2
C.	TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING	2
-	Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training 2017  (WT/COMTD/W/235)	2
D.	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial  conference (wt/min(11)/11)	2
-	Committee on Trade and Development Mandate: Focal Point for Consideration and Coordination of Work on Development in the WTO – Proposal from Barbados, Belize, China,  Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)	2
-	Operationalization of the CTD's Mandate: a Proposal to Deliver Outcomes based on the  MC8 Mandate – Proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	2
E.	notifications under the enabling clause	2
-	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements –  Status Report on the Committee's Work	2
(I)	Notifications received pursuant to Enabling Clause (Paragraph 4(a))	2
- 	Notification of Regional Trade Agreement – Submitted by Argentina, Brazil,  Chile,  Mexico, Paraguay and Uruguay (WT/COMTD/N/53)	2
(II)	Questions from the United States to the delegations of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay and Uruguay regarding document WT/COMTD/N/53 (WT/REG/W/126 – WT/COMTD/W/232)	2
(III)	Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/236)	2
-	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – Communication from  China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	2
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast  Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	2
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and  Korea (Goods)	2
F.	TEMPLATE FOR NOTIFYING CHANGES TO AN EXISTING REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENT – PROPOSAL BY THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS  TO THE COUNCIL FOR TRADE IN GOODS, THE COUNCIL FOR TRADE IN SERVICES  AND THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT (WT/REG/28)	2
G.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	2
-	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements – Status Report on the Committee's Work	2
- 	status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/237)	2
H.	REVIEW of STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	2
I.	WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE	2
J.	DATE OF THE NEXT MEETING	2
K.	OTHER BUSINESS	2

	•	adoption of the agenda


&& The Chairman indicated that he wished to say a few words about the work of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) going forward. He noted that there were several items that had remained on the CTD's agenda for many years, and that Members had divergent views on certain issues. While he appreciated that some Members might have interests or concerns in particular areas, and might therefore wish for items to be maintained on the agenda, he also felt that it would be useful to find ways to update the agenda – including by potentially adding new issues to discuss, or leaving some elements behind. His intention was to hold consultations with Members after the summer break, in order to explore what could be done to update the CTD agenda and reinvigorate the work of the Committee. Turning to the agenda for the present meeting, he said that the proposed agenda for the 106th Session of the CTD was contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/14/Rev.1, circulated on 25 June 2018. He also indicated that he wished to make a brief intervention under "Other Business" concerning the recent Secretariat publication titled "Mainstreaming Trade in the Sustainable Development Goals".
The agenda was adopted as amended.
	•	observers 
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers


&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter-Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.


&& The Chairman said that, in line with his intention to work with Members to try and update the CTD agenda, he wished to make an observation about the organizations that were granted ad hoc observer status on a meeting-by-meeting basis. In particular, he noted that the Committee had been granting ad hoc observer status to these organizations for many years now – in several cases since 1999. As Members were agreeable to inviting these organizations to each CTD meeting, he asked the Committee whether it could consider granting permanent observer status to these organizations. If this was possible, then the Committee would not have to revisit the issue of ad hoc observers at each meeting, and this matter could be removed from the CTD agenda. He appreciated that delegations would need time to consider his question, and requested any Member that had any difficulty in granting permanent observer status to these organizations – or any specific organizations in the list – to inform him before the next CTD meeting. He referred Members to document WT/COMTD/W/22/Rev.8 - which contained the most recent list of organizations with observer status in the CTD, as well as those which were granted ad hoc observer status on a meeting by meeting basis – and indicated that he would return to this matter at the next meeting.


&&  The Committee took note of the Chairman's intervention.    
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that he had some observations to make under this sub-item as well, since the listed requests for observer status in the CTD had been pending for many years, and he was not even sure whether the organizations in question were still interested in being granted observer status in the Committee. For this reason, he intended to write to these organizations, and ask them whether there was still interest on their side in this regard. He would report back to the Committee on the responses received. He also believed that it was important for Members to once again consider their positions vis-à-vis each one of these requests, since it had been so long since the original requests from these organizations were submitted. Accordingly, he invited Members to consider whether they would be in a position to grant observer status to the listed organizations, or at least to some of them. He additionally requested any Member having difficulty in granting observer status to these organizations – or any specific organizations in the list – to let him know before the next meeting, when he would return to this matter.


&& The representative of the United States asked if a Chair's note could be provided on the points made by the Chairman on observer issues. She explained that, in light of the importance of these issues, it was preferable to have the points in writing. 
&& The Chairman said that it would not be a problem to put the points he made in writing.
&&  The Committee took note of the interventions.
	•	TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING 
-	Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training 2017 (WT/COMTD/W/235)


&& The Chairman said that, according to its terms of reference (TORs), the CTD had a mandate to provide guidelines for, and to review periodically, the technical cooperation activities of the WTO as they related to developing country Members. The agenda for the present meeting contained an item relating to the Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2017, which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/235. He invited a representative of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) to introduce the annual report. It was his understanding that the ITTC representative would also take the opportunity to briefly demonstrate how to access information relating to technical assistance (TA) from the WTO website.
&& The representative of the ITTC said that the annual report was structured around three principal sections. The first section presented the main developments in TA in 2017 compared to the previous year. Another section addressed the implementation of the Biennial Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan) and the main features of the TA provided in 2017, while a third section looked at the evaluation of performance in 2017 and laid out some lessons learned. As part of his summary of the main developments in 2017, he observed that significant progress was registered in the implementation of the 28 recommendations formulated in the report of the external evaluation of the WTO's TA, which had been considered by the Committee at its 101st Session. In particular, by the end of 2017, half of the recommendations were considered as already implemented – to a large extent through the preparation of the TA Plan for the 2018-2019 period – while the implementation of another 29% was in progress. In light of the tight management policy implemented by the Secretariat, the volume of TA activities and related expenses remained stable for the sixth consecutive year. However, because of the continued decrease in TA resources, the Secretariat had been obliged to tap into its financial reserves. Work on the implementation of a TA management system based on results continued in 2017. An audit of the TA workflows and information system was completed, leading to a number of improvements, such as a diversification of the TA workflows, preparatory work for the development of a new TA management system and the development of new dashboards on the TA provided by the Secretariat. Work also continued to improve and enrich the substantive content of the TA offer through, inter alia, the revision of several existing online courses, the selection of a new cloud-based e-learning platform for implementation in 2018, and the deepening of the holistic approach to subjects like public health, e-commerce and standards. 
Turning to the implementation of the TA Plan, he informed the Committee that 261 activities were delivered in 2017, and the Secretariat was also involved in 54 other activities. A total of 18,200 participants were trained, representing a decrease of 2% compared to 2016. Participation in online courses increased by 12%, with close to two-thirds of participants in TA activities being trained online. About 46% of the participants in TA activities were women. In 2017, priority continued to be given to Africa and the least developed countries (LDCs). However, for the first time since the Secretariat started compiling statistics on TA activities, it was the Asia-Pacific region which had the highest number of TA activities and participants. The proportion of TA activities with a general scope decreased from 50% in 2016 to 40% in 2017. Overall, 64% of TA was provided in English, 13% in French and 16% in Spanish. In addition to the reduction of TA resources, the main challenges faced by the Secretariat continued to come from the limitations on the training facilities available on the WTO campus, and the heavy workload of staff members in certain areas. With regard to the evaluation of performance, the results in 2017 were positive overall. He indicated in this regard that the proportion of targets met increased by five percentage points relative to 2016, reaching 62%. An overwhelming majority of the TA activities – a total of 82% – contributed to Key Result 1, which was related to government officials implementing WTO Agreements and making full use of Members' rights. Key Result 4, concerning outreach to non-traditional audiences, was next at 12%, followed by Key Result 2 concerning accessions at 5%, and Key Result 3 concerning access to information at 2%. The Committee was informed that Key Result 2 was the most successful, with 75% of its targets met. This was followed by Key Result 1 at 69%, Key Result 4 at 56%, and Key Result 3 at 25%. He concluded his presentation by demonstrating how to access information relating to TA activities on the WTO website, including through the TA dashboards. It was explained that the information available related, inter alia, to the type of activity, location, participants, topics covered, and whether the activity was delivered online or face-to-face.


&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, stressed the relevance of the WTO's TA activities for LDCs. While welcoming the overall positive results of TA activities in 2017, he noted the relatively low achievement in terms of government officials' understanding of the WTO Agreements and the conduct of trade negotiations. He also observed that, while LDCs in Africa and the Asia-Pacific region were the main beneficiaries of TA activities, there was a significant difference in the number of activities taking place in these two regions. He wished to know why this was the case, and what could be done to address the issue. He additionally inquired what could be done to deal with the imbalances in the linguistic distribution of TA activities, as the majority of activities were delivered in English. After outlining the importance to LDCs of the internship programmes, he asked for the reasons behind the decline in the number of interns benefiting from the Regional Coordinator Internship (RCI) Programme. Among his other points, he highlighted the importance attached by the LDCs to the WTO Reference Centres, and to ITTC support in implementing the recommendations of the Trade Policy Reviews of LDCs. He additionally noted the decrease in the number of national activities held in LDCs, and in this regard requested that the WTO contribute to the costs of organizing these activities. The readiness of the LDCs to cooperate in improving technical cooperation and training procedures was also indicated. In closing, he called on donors to scale up their financial contributions. He underlined a number of key factors that would help address LDCs' development challenges and contribute to economic growth and job creation, and in this regard called for continued TA to contribute to these objectives through the better integration of LDCs in the multilateral trading system (MTS).
&& The representative of Guatemala expressed appreciation for the annual report, as well as for the Secretariat's efforts to improve its TA offer and implement many of the recommendations from the external evaluation. The efforts made to implement a TA management system based on results were also appreciated. He noted that the Secretariat had had to draw on its reserves in order to implement the TA Plan in 2017, and wished to know the short-term and long-term implications of this approach. He also called on donors to sustain their contributions in order to ensure that the Secretariat could continue to implement TA activities. Turning to the online courses, he welcomed the progress made in this area and hoped that the launch of a new platform would be of use to beneficiaries. He also noted that his delegation's request to update the content of the e-learning courses had been taken into account by the Secretariat. With regard to the concern expressed by his delegation on numerous occasions regarding the lack of availability in Geneva of advanced courses in Spanish, he noted that some pilot courses with simultaneous interpretation had been launched by the Secretariat. His delegation wished to have some details about the experiences in implementing these courses.   


&& The representative of Nigeria emphasized the importance of TA and capacity building for developing countries, which he noted were core elements of the development dimension of the MTS, as laid out in the Doha Ministerial Declaration. He indicated his satisfaction with the implementation of many of the recommendations formulated in the external evaluation, and highlighted a number of elements from the annual report – including the continued improvement and enrichment of the substantive content of the TA offer, the reporting rate on TA activities of close to 100%, the continued priority accorded to Africa and LDCs, the fact that the Asia-Pacific region hosted the highest number of TA activities in 2017, and the fact that the overwhelming majority of the TA activities – a total of 82% - contributed to the achievement of Key Result 1. While noting the overall positive results of TA activities in 2017, he indicated that developing Members still needed more assistance to properly implement WTO Agreements. As an example, he pointed to the difficulties faced by developing Members in fulfilling their notification obligations under various agreements, including the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement) and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT Agreement). In closing, he called on donors to sustain their financial support for TA activities. He believed that there was always the opportunity for evaluation and re-evaluation of TA – on the basis of reports, and through continued interaction with the ITTC. He also encouraged the ITTC to consider how to address the challenges relating to the lack of availability of data in some areas.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka welcomed the annual report. She expressed appreciation to the Secretariat for implementing many of the recommendations of the external evaluation, and for the improvement of the TA offer, notably for online courses. She went on to highlight the importance of TA for small economies like Sri Lanka, and drew particular attention to the continued need for the mission internship programmes for delegations with small missions like her own. She pointed to the difficulties experienced by these missions when there were overlapping meetings, particularly in the lead-up to Ministerial conferences, and in this regard indicated that the capacity of missions should be included as part of the selection criteria for the mission internship programmes. She expressed appreciation to donors and to the Secretariat, and in particular to the Standards and Trade Development Facility (STDF) for its support to Sri Lanka.


&& The representative of the European Union said that the European Union and its member States were strong supporters of the ITTC and the TA provided by the WTO. She welcomed the annual report, and commended the Secretariat for the implementation of many of the recommendations contained in the external evaluation. In her delegation's view, all Members needed to be on an equal footing in terms of participation in the MTS and the WTO's work. In this regard, she underlined the importance of TA, and the need to give continued priority to the LDCs. She pointed to the positive developments in e-learning, which she believed was a cost-effective and efficient way of providing quality TA to a large group of recipients. More generally, she appreciated the efforts by the Secretariat and the beneficiaries of TA to enhance the efficiency and the impact of the activities. She looked forward to seeing the continued implementation of TA activities, targeting the main goals set, and keeping within the planned budget. The Committee was also informed that the French-Irish Mission Internship Programme (FIMIP) had been renewed in 2018. Finally, she indicated that the European Union's financial contribution to TA activities remained constant, and that continued support to the Global Trust Fund was provided on an annual basis.


&& The representative of Vanuatu supported the intervention by Chad. He welcomed the annual report, and expressed appreciation to the Secretariat for the TA provided. The importance of the mission internship programmes to his delegation was stressed. He also highlighted more generally the challenges facing small missions in Geneva, including difficulties in following all the issues discussed at the WTO. He called for the consideration of specific measures to support small missions, including through participation in the Geneva Week programme. He indicated that his remarks also applied to other delegations with small missions, including Fiji, Seychelles and Solomon Islands. 


&& The representative of Ecuador welcomed the annual report, and the Secretariat's efforts to implement many of the recommendations of the external evaluation. She recognized the TA-related achievements in 2017, and expressed appreciation to the ITTC for its cooperation with Ecuador. The ITTC was also encouraged to continue to improve the substantive content of the TA offer, with a view to effectively addressing Members' needs. In closing, she expressed appreciation to the donors for their contributions, and encouraged them to sustain these contributions, so as to allow the Secretariat to continue to implement the TA Plan. 


&& The representative of Egypt said that TA was one of the main tools to help developing countries and LDCs build their trade capacity and human resources, with a view to facilitating their integration into the MTS and realizing sustainable development. He expressed appreciation for the work of the ITTC. He also expressed appreciation to the donors, and encouraged them to continue to provide financial assistance in support of TA activities.  


 && The representative of Côte d'Ivoire expressed appreciation for the annual report, and for the Secretariat's efforts to continually make improvements in TA delivery and performance. He underlined the importance of TA activities for developing countries, and pointed particularly to the benefits of the mission internship programmes, which he believed should be further enhanced. He thanked the donors for their financial support, and invited them to maintain their support.


&& The representative of the United States indicated his appreciation for the annual report, and for the information provided by the Secretariat at the present meeting, including with respect to the TA dashboards. Referring to Annex I of the report, he noted the Secretariat's efforts to implement many of the recommendations of the external evaluation, with a view to making TA more effective and serving more Members in various ways, while also helping to stretch finite funding even further. 


&& The representative of Afghanistan welcomed the comprehensive nature of the annual report, and the continued overall positive results in TA activities. He stressed the importance of TA activities for his country, as a recently acceded Member and an LDC. He also informed the Committee that Afghanistan was coordinating the g7+ group of countries, which comprised post-conflict and fragile economies – some of which were in the process of accession to the WTO – and called for focused TA to address the needs of these countries. With regard to Geneva-based courses, he observed that officials from LDCs and post-conflict countries often found it difficult to participate, because of difficulties in obtaining visas. As an alternative, he proposed that there be more focus on regional training courses, so as to allow these officials to participate more easily. He additionally sought clarification on why some TA targets were not met in 2017, despite the overall positive results. Finally, he thanked the donors for their support, and encouraged them to sustain their contributions to the Global Trust Fund. 


&& The representative of Colombia thanked the ITTC for the annual report. He noted that Colombia benefited from various TA activities, and expressed appreciation to 
the donors for their contributions. He also believed that the number of courses delivered in Spanish – particularly at a more advanced level – needed to be increased. 


&& The representative of Guinea supported the intervention by Chad, and welcomed the annual report. She stressed the importance of TA activities for developing countries and LDCs, and highlighted in particular the benefits of national activities and the mission internship programmes. She also expressed appreciation to the donors and to the ITTC, and called for continued commitment to the WTO's TA activities.


&& The representative of Ghana expressed appreciation for the annual report, and for the TA provided. He thanked the donors, and encouraged them to continue to ensure the sustained delivery of TA. He indicated that his delegation had taken note of the ITTC's implementation of many of the recommendations of the external evaluation, as well as the work undertaken on the new TA management system. He additionally asked for clarification on the reasons underlying the 2% decline in the number of participants in TA activities in 2017 compared to 2016. 


&& The representative of Benin supported the intervention by Chad. He thanked the donors for their contributions, and also appreciated the overall positive results in TA achieved in 2017. He highlighted the importance of TA for developing countries and LDCs, and indicated that he wished to address an issue relating to training activities in trade statistics. He observed in particular that these activities were only delivered in English, and asked the Secretariat to consider organizing such courses in French, or at least, to provide simultaneous interpretation to allow for the participation of officials from French-speaking LDCs. 


&& The representative of Mozambique supported the intervention by Chad. She thanked the donors for their contributions, and encouraged them to continue to provide support. She highlighted the relevance of TA activities for developing countries and LDCs, and particularly emphasized the importance of the participation of officials in national activities. In this regard, she said that her delegation had on a number of occasions raised a specific concern relating to the language of delivery of TA activities. She explained that Portuguese was the national language of Mozambique, and it was difficult for officials from her country to benefit from WTO TA activities, including national activities, because interpretation into Portuguese was not provided. She called on the Secretariat to consider covering the cost of interpretation for national activities, as her government did not have the necessary resources for this purpose.


The Director of the ITTC indicated that she would provide responses to some of the comments and questions raised, after which she would invite other representatives of the ITTC to contribute as well. With regard to national activities, she said that it had been observed over a number of years that LDCs' requests for these activities had declined. It appeared that this was mainly due to the difficulties these countries faced in covering the local costs associated with the hosting of such activities. On this matter, the ITTC was working with a number of LDCs to try and identify local partners to help cover the local costs. In addition, she observed that some LDCs were in arrears and therefore subject to administrative measures, and this also had an impact on the number of requests for national activities by LDCs. As for the question relating to the gap between the number of TA activities delivered in the Asia-Pacific region relative to Africa, she explained that this was a function of the requests received. She went on to note the importance of the internship programmes to some Members, and in this regard indicated that discussions were presently taking place with the Netherlands on the way forward for the Netherlands Trainee Programme (NTP). As for the RCI Programme, she observed that not all coordinators of regional groups had made a request for an intern. With regard to funding issues, she indicated that additional efforts would be made to mobilize financial resources from donors. She also explained that the Global Trust Fund was not used for the purpose of funding participation in meetings. On the issue of the lack of data for some indicators, she explained that it had not been possible to collect data on a number of indicators contained in the TA Plan for the 2016-2017 period. The indicators had been adjusted in the 2018-2019 TA Plan, and it was hoped that relevant data would be collected going forward. Finally, with regard to the delivery of TA in a language other than an official WTO language, she indicated that guidance would be needed from Members on the way forward. In the meantime, the Secretariat was making every effort to identify suitable staff members to deliver activities requested in other languages. 


In their responses, the representatives of the ITTC informed the Committee that the requests made by some Members for linguistic diversity in Geneva-based activities had been taken into account through an increase in the TA offer in French and Spanish. It was noted, however, that this increase did not come without some challenges. One challenge pertained to the limited infrastructure available for the implementation of these courses, in particular because there were no training rooms in the WTO that allowed for simultaneous interpretation. Another challenge related to the insufficient number of candidates for some courses organized in French and Spanish. On this matter, it was suggested that the Secretariat could explore with Members how to disseminate information relating to French and Spanish courses, so that more candidates could be identified. The information available on the WTO website relating to upcoming courses could help Members in this regard. With respect to the WTO Reference Centres, Members were informed that there was an ongoing programme, for which the Secretariat would continue to ensure follow-up. It was also indicated that the Secretariat would consider the suggestions made by Vanuatu.       


&& The representative of the European Union noted the challenges associated with identifying experts to provide training in different languages, and in this regard indicated that the European Union was willing to offer assistance through the identification and provision of French and Spanish speakers for training courses.


&& The representative of Nigeria indicated that he wished to address the issue of local costs in the organization of national activities. He suggested that assessments of local costs needed to be made on a case-by-case basis, and that the Secretariat could help to cover local costs if required, particularly in the case of LDCs. He drew a parallel in this regard to what was done during the trade facilitation needs assessments, and shared his view that some flexibility was required on the issue of local costs, especially if this was a critical factor in a country's decision to make a request for a national activity. 


 &&  The Committee took note of the Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2017, and of all interventions.        
	•	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)


&& The Chairman said that, at the Eighth WTO Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. Before turning to the two submissions for consideration at the present meeting, he indicated that he wished to draw Members' attention to the proposal by Ecuador, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1, which the Committee had agreed to at its 97th Session in November 2015. The proposal was for the Secretariat to update, at least once every two years, its document on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. Accordingly, an update had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/219 in September 2016. Given that close to two years had passed since the circulation of this document, he informed Members that he had instructed the Secretariat to begin work on another update, which would be circulated in advance of the next CTD meeting. He also indicated that he wished to remind Members of some elements of the proposal from Ecuador that had been agreed to. He noted firstly that the purpose of the Secretariat report was to serve as a reference document for Members, for use as they deemed necessary. In addition, if a Member wished to propose that any particular element in the report be used as the basis for the inclusion of an agenda item at a CTD meeting, that Member would need to explain in its request the scope and purpose of the proposed discussion. In this light, he invited any Member wishing to discuss any particular element of the report in the Committee to submit a request along the lines agreed to, so that an appropriate agenda item could be included on the agenda of a future CTD meeting.


&& The representative of the United States said that it was mentioned in the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1 that the Secretariat report must include an objective and analytical listing of S&D provisions. In this regard, she drew Members' attention to the words "objective and analytical", and indicated that this underscored the need for the Secretariat report to remain neutral and factual in its representation.
&& The representative of South Africa requested that the present agenda item be addressed during the informal consultations that the Chairman would be holding after the summer break.


&& The Chairman indicated that he would hold consultations on the matter, as requested by South Africa. 
-	Committee on Trade and Development Mandate: Focal Point for Consideration and Coordination of Work on Development in the WTO – Proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208) 
-	Operationalization of the CTD's Mandate: a Proposal to Deliver Outcomes based on the MC8 Mandate – Proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)


&& The Chairman began his intervention by referring to the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 by Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group, which was for the CTD to report on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies. He recalled that, in the course of the discussion on this proposal at the last meeting, some requests had been made by India for information regarding past activities in the CTD. India had firstly requested information relating to some specific work undertaken by the CTD in 1996. India had also requested information with respect to the activities carried out by the Committee in the past year relating to each of the six paragraphs of the CTD’s TORs, as contained in document WT/L/46.  


&& The representative of the United States said that she wished to raise a point of order. She indicated that the issues that the Chairman was referring to did not pertain to any of the agenda items agreed for the present meeting. Her delegation had therefore not had the opportunity to prepare for a discussion on these issues. If the Member that had raised these issues at the last meeting wished to discuss them in the CTD, an agenda item would need to be requested for a future meeting.


&& The Chairman said that he was making a reference to issues raised by a Member at the last meeting. He indicated that he would give the floor to the United States after he finished his intervention.   


&& The representative of the United States said that there was still a point of order that needed to be addressed. She did not believe that the issues referred to by the Chairman were appropriate for discussion at the present meeting, as they were not reflected on the agenda, and no related proposals had been circulated to help delegations prepare. She requested that the meeting be briefly suspended so as to allow consultations to take place.
The meeting was briefly suspended.
Upon resumption of the meeting, the Chairman gave the floor to the United States. 


&& The representative of the United States reiterated the point of order, and expressed once again her delegation's disagreement with the Chairman's reference to issues that were not on the agenda of the present meeting. However, as her delegation did not wish to hold things up any further, she concluded by requesting that the point of order raised by her delegation be duly reflected in the minutes of the meeting. 
&& The Chairman said that, in the course of the discussion at the last meeting on the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208, some requests were made by India for information regarding past activities in the CTD. India had firstly requested information relating to some specific work undertaken by the CTD in 1996. India had also requested information with respect to the activities carried out by the Committee in the past year relating to each of the six paragraphs of the CTD’s TORs, as contained in document WT/L/46. He said that he had had the opportunity to talk to the Secretariat on these issues, and wished to share some information and observations with the Committee. 
With regard to the CTD's activities in 1996, he said that the question from India was related to the Committee's review that year of the implementation of provisions in favour of developing country Members. In particular, according to the CTD's annual report for 1996, contained in document WT/COMTD/9, it was agreed that this review would be undertaken on the basis of contributions from Members and from the WTO bodies responsible for monitoring the implementation of the Uruguay Round commitments. Furthermore, to assist in this exercise, the Chairman had invited the Chairpersons of other WTO bodies to submit information on how provisions in favour of developing countries had been dealt with in their respective Committees. On the basis of these responses, the Secretariat had prepared background documentation presenting the replies received in an analytical format. He informed the Committee, in response to the request from India, that the main documentation in this regard bore the symbol WT/COMTD/W/16. Two addenda to this document had also been circulated. The title of the document was "Implementation of Uruguay Round provisions in favour of developing country Members". He added that, while 1996 seemed to be the only year where Chairpersons of other bodies were contacted to request their inputs on this particular subject, it appeared that the documentation itself had been regularly updated and built upon over the years. This had been done with inputs from Secretariat staff working on the various WTO bodies, and not under the direction of the Chairpersons of other bodies. The most recent Secretariat document in this regard was the one from September 2016 that he had referred to earlier, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/219, on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. As he had mentioned earlier, an update of this document was currently being prepared. 
He then turned to the second request from India, which concerned the CTD's activities in the past year under the various paragraphs of its terms of reference. On this matter, he believed that it was important to take a constructive approach, in line with his intention to work with Members to update and reinvigorate the CTD's work. For example, it was his hope that the update of the Secretariat paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions would generate discussions on substance in the Committee. In addition, with regard to potential new avenues for discussion – and in line with the CTD's TORs – he thought that it might be useful for other international organizations to be invited to the Committee, in order to share information on their development-related work in areas that could be determined. This was something that had been done in the past, and he believed it could benefit the Committee's discussions. He added that Members might have other ideas and, as had been mentioned at the beginning of the meeting, he intended to hold consultations after the summer break on what could be done to update the CTD agenda and reinvigorate the work. Furthermore, this did not imply that past discussions would be ignored. Rather, the intention was to find common interests, or to look at issues in a different way. He also noted that, according to paragraph 6 of the CTD's TORs, the Committee was to establish a programme of work, which might be reviewed as necessary each year. On this matter, he understood that no specific work programme had been agreed to in the CTD Regular Session in 2017, and that the last time a work programme had been agreed to for the Regular Session was in 2007. Although no requests had been found by any Member over the years to re-establish the practice to have a work programme, he indicated that he was bringing this to the Committee's attention, in case Members wished to bring back the practice. He believed that this matter deserved attention, but how to proceed ultimately depended on Members' views. 


&& The representative of India said that the General Council, at its meeting of 31 January 1995, had established the CTD, with the TORs as contained in document WT/L/46. He went on to read out paragraphs 1, 3, and 6 of the terms of reference, and explained that it was with regard to the CTD's TORs that the proponents of document WT/COMTD/W/208 were proposing that the Committee recommend that the General Council amend the second paragraph of its Decision on procedures for annual overview of WTO activities and for reporting under the WTO. 


&& The representative of China expressed support for the intervention by India. He noted that the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 was a paraphrasing of the CTD's TORs, and that Ministers had given the instruction to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. He believed that following these instructions would contribute favourably to work on development in the WTO, and would enhance the credibility of the organization. Finally, he highlighted the proponents' openness to participate in small-group consultations with interested Members, and requested that the sub-item concerning document WT/COMTD/W/208 be maintained on the agenda.
He also indicated that the position of his delegation regarding document WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192 remained unchanged from previous meetings. He requested that both submissions remain on the agenda, and that these submissions be addressed in the consultations that the Chairman would be holding.   


&& The representative of South Africa clarified that the earlier request of her delegation for the Chairman to hold consultations related specifically to the proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192.
&& The representative of the United States indicated that she wished to reiterate what had been said by her delegation at past meetings with regard to documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192. She believed that six years were sufficient for these proposals to have been fully considered by other Members. The proponents themselves had failed to take any initiative to advance their ideas for several years. They needed to address the concerns raised by other Members – either by revising their proposals, or by dropping the proposals altogether. Either way, the subitems concerning these proposals needed to be removed from the CTD's agenda until the proponents had something new to say. Her delegation had repeatedly stated that there was no consensus for these items to remain on the agenda as standing items, as if there was unfinished business to address. She also pointed out that, at several meetings, the Chairman had had to actively solicit acknowledgment of the item from the proponents. While the proponents were free to add these items to the agenda of a future meeting, the United States did not agree to these as standing items. With respect specifically to the remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192, the United States had repeatedly stated that the proposal suggested a diminishing of Members' substantive rights and obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), and the Enabling Clause. Her delegation saw no prospect for consensus in either the CTD or the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA). The only outcome from the proposal would be to provide one Member with the right to prevent others from complying with their notification obligations, which would be prejudicial in the face of any dispute settlement proceedings regarding a particular regional trade agreement (RTA). The proponents had failed to make their case. 


&& The representative of the European Union recalled that the proponents of document WT/COMTD/W/192 had previously indicated that they were undertaking consultations with a view to eventually submitting a revision of the document. She inquired whether the proponents had any progress to report in this regard. She also shared her delegation's view that, in order to implement the MC8 mandate, the CTD should further explore the positive link between trade and development. This needed to be based on constructive exchanges on clearly identified topics, in line with the instruction from MC8 to carry out focused work. The proposals submitted in the context of the MC8 mandate that had previously been agreed to by the Committee responded to the requirement of being focused. However, her delegation continued to have concerns with the proposals that remained under consideration, as they did not respond to this requirement, and were not in line with the MC8 mandate. She indicated her delegation's openness to engage with the proponents, and invited the proponents to consult with other Members between formal CTD meetings, as this might prevent a repetition of the same positions at each formal meeting. 


&& The representative of Canada indicated that her delegation continued to have concerns with the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208. Canada did not believe that the CTD had the authority to require other WTO bodies to report to it, nor did it have the authority to provide recommendations to the General Council on the work undertaken by other bodies. She also observed that attempts to separate out the development-related aspects of other Committees’ work would be challenging, and might trigger a theoretical debate about what constituted development. Additionally, such an approach could create a duplicative process – which would not be desirable in light of resource constraints – and might water down discussions through the absence of technical experts from the substantive Committees. In closing, she said that the end objectives of the proposal, and what exactly would be achieved, remained unclear to her delegation.
She welcomed the indication from India that the proponents were working towards submitting a revision to document WT/COMTD/W/192. She noted that India had observed in its intervention that the Secretariat paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions had not been updated since 2016. In this regard, she recalled that the Committee had agreed that the report would be updated after two years, and her delegation was therefore expecting an update in 2018. She hoped that this would address India's concern. She also noted that Canada did not support the remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192. In her delegation's view, notifications of RTAs should remain the responsibility of individual Members, and a requirement for joint notifications risked exacerbating issues with regard to non-notified RTAs. It was also not clear how joint notifications would contribute to fulfilling the instructions from MC8 to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. Finally, she noted that, pursuant to paragraph 28 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration, the CRTA had been instructed to consider systemic issues arising from RTAs.


&& The Chairman encouraged continued engagement among Members in order to try and make progress on the matter. He also said that, although the practice in the Committee for many years had been to maintain an item on the agenda if any Member so requested, the rules of procedure stated that requests for items to be placed on the agenda for a forthcoming meeting would be communicated to the Secretariat in writing. He believed that submitting written requests would make things clearer, thereby avoiding any potential misunderstandings, and he therefore asked Members to do so. 
&& The representative of South Africa sought clarification on the Chairman's intervention regarding the rules of procedure. In particular, she inquired whether, for the next meeting, Members would be required to submit requests in writing.
 && The Chairman said that, according to the rules of procedure, requests for items to be placed on the agenda needed to be communicated in writing. In order to avoid any misunderstandings, he asked Members to submit requests in writing. 
&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.
	•	notifications under the enabling clause
-	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements – Status Report on the Committee's Work
 (I)	Notifications received pursuant to Enabling Clause (Paragraph 4(a))  
- 	Notification of Regional Trade Agreement – Submitted by Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay and Uruguay (WT/COMTD/N/53)


&& The Chairman said that the notification by Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay and Uruguay – contained in document WT/COMTD/N/53 – appeared once again on the agenda.


&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation had requested that this notification remain on the agenda for the present meeting, because discussion on the issue was not exhausted. The issue was also related to the following sub-item concerning the questions submitted by his delegation. If there were no additional comments by Members on document WT/COMTD/N/53, he indicated that the Committee could move on to the next sub-item.
(II)	Questions from the United States to the delegations of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay and Uruguay regarding document WT/COMTD/N/53 (WT/REG/W/126 – WT/COMTD/W/232)


&& The representative of the United States appreciated the opportunity to return to this item, which was introduced at the previous meeting. He hoped that the delegations of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay, and Uruguay would be in a position to respond at the present meeting to the questions posed by his delegation regarding document WT/COMTD/N/53. These questions had been posed because, in his delegation's view, the submission was unclear in its intent and purpose, and the lack of clarity undermined the express purpose of the notification obligations in question.


&& The representative of Uruguay informed the Committee that responses to the questions by the United States were presently being finalized, and would be submitted to the CTD as soon as possible. 


&& The representative of the European Union indicated her delegation's interest in receiving the responses to the questions posed by the United States. As had been previously stated in both the CTD and the CRTA, her delegation believed that the questions by the United States would allow the parties to address the concerns raised regarding document WT/COMTD/N/53. She also indicated that, given that the venue for the discussion of RTAs represented a concern, her delegation was open to discuss these issues in the CTD, as well as in other venues, and wished to find a pragmatic solution.


 && The representative of the United States expressed appreciation to Uruguay for the indication that the responses to the United States' questions were forthcoming. His delegation looked forward to reviewing the responses.
&&  The Committee took note of the interventions made.
(III)	Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/236)  


&& The Chairman said that his report on the status of the preparation of factual presentations, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/236, contained 18 separate entries relating to the status of factual presentations. He noted that two factual presentations were in the process of being finalized, and would be circulated shortly. These concerned the Arab Mediterranean Free Trade Agreement (Agadir Agreement) between Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia, and the agreement between the Dominican Republic and Panama. A Dedicated Session of the CTD would be scheduled to consider these two agreements. As for the other RTAs listed in the report, the Secretariat was still not in a position to finalize the factual presentations. In some cases, the full set of data had not been submitted, while in other cases not all comments on the draft factual presentations had been received. He urged all the parties to these agreements to provide the Secretariat with the required data and information as soon as possible. He also informed the Committee that he had recently held a series of informal consultations with several of the parties to these RTAs, and he intended to continue meeting with delegations in the future in order to help expedite the submission of the required data or comments. Finally, he said that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following CRTA procedures, a factual presentation on PICTA would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were completed.
&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation for the report, and for the Chairman's consultations. He urged the parties to RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that had not yet submitted the required data, or provided comments on factual presentations, to do so as soon as possible.


&&  The Committee took note of the Chairman's report, and of the interventions made.     
-	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – Communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
No Member took the floor under this sub-item.
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea


&& The representative of the United States appreciated the inclusion of this sub-item on the agenda, and noted that a correct reference to the notification in question would need to include the document symbol WT/COMTD/N/33 of 8 July 2010, which served as the ASEAN members' notification of 6 July 2010. He regretted that the review process of the ASEAN-Korea agreement had not been initiated, which was due to the failure of some parties to submit the necessary data to the Secretariat for the preparation of the factual presentation. Referring to the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs (RTA TM), he said that, according to paragraph 7, it was the responsibility of the parties to RTAs to submit to the Secretariat the data specified in the Annex. He also noted from paragraph 8 of the RTA TM that the required data needed to be made available as soon as possible, normally not to exceed 10 weeks – or 20 weeks in the case of RTAs involving only developing countries – after the date of the notification of the agreement. However, in the case of the ASEAN-Korea agreement, eight years had passed since the notification of this agreement. He commended Korea for submitting its data in a timely fashion, and shared his delegation's understanding that, from the ASEAN side, data remained outstanding from Cambodia, the Philippines and Viet Nam. He requested an update from these parties, and urged them to provide the data to the Secretariat without any further delay. He also observed that Lao PDR, which was a member of ASEAN, had not been identified as a party to the ASEAN-Korea agreement in the notification of 6 July 2010. In this regard, he requested clarification as to whether Lao PDR was a party to the agreement – and if so, whether it would submit a notification, and subsequently the necessary data to the Secretariat. Finally, he noted that some Members had raised concerns regarding the venue for the mandated review of the ASEAN-Korea agreement. While it was important to reach a consensus on a path forward for the review, his delegation did not believe that the question of venue should be a reason for Members to avoid fulfilling their obligations under the RTA TM.
&& The representative of the European Union indicated that she wished to begin her intervention by making some observations about the GCC Customs Union. While welcoming the circulation of the factual presentation on the GCC Customs Union, as well as the Secretariat's general incidence calculation, she expressed disappointment that the CRTA had not been able to review the agreement at its last meeting, as the matter had been withdrawn. She urged the GCC parties to expeditiously fulfil their obligations, so that the review of this RTA could take place in a timely manner. Turning to the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea agreements, she said that it was important to clarify the legal and procedural questions arising from agreements being notified by each party under different legal provisions. With respect to the ASEAN-Korea agreement, she regretted that no progress had been made, and encouraged the parties to make additional efforts in this regard. She noted that this situation had prevented the Committee from reviewing the goods aspects of the agreement, whereas the services aspects had already been discussed in the CRTA. This situation was unsatisfactory in terms of transparency, as it prevented Members from having the full picture of the agreement. She also regretted that no progress had been made with regard to the India-Korea agreement, and encouraged the parties to make additional efforts to find a solution.


&& The representative of Korea said that issues relating to dual notifications of RTAs had appeared on the CTD's agenda for several years. He indicated that Korea had notified its RTAs – and in particular the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea agreements – in accordance with GATT Article XXIV and GATS Article V, and in compliance with the RTA TM. He also indicated that there were systemic issues to consider, and in this regard referred to document WT/COMTD/W/175. He went on to say that, while the Enabling Clause was designed to allow developing Members to accord differential and more favorable treatment for trade in goods to each other, it was unsure whether the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea agreements fell into this category, as they covered trade in services as well. The view of his delegation was that all RTAs should be considered in a comprehensive way in the same body, irrespective of whether they covered trade in goods or trade in services. Korea had engaged in discussions with interested Members, and with CTD Chairs, with a view to resolving the issue of dual notifications. In closing, he said that Korea wished to explore with interested parties the possible solution of having a joint review by the CTD and CRTA.  


&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)
&& The representative of India said that, with regard to the notification of RTAs which involved both developing and developed countries, and which also had elements of both goods and services, he would be referring the suggestion made by Korea to his capital, and depending on the feedback his delegation would be informing the Committee. 


&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation's concerns were similar to those raised under the previous sub-item, including with respect to the excessive delay in providing data to the Secretariat for the preparation of factual presentations. He requested that the Secretariat include the full title of the notification in question, including the date, on any future agendas. He commended the efforts by Korea for its timely submission of data, and encouraged India to submit its data without further delay. He went on to note that some Members had raised questions regarding the venue for the mandated review of the India-Korea agreement, pursuant to the RTA TM. In this regard, he believed that it was important for Members to reach consensus on a path forward. He expressed appreciation for the suggestion made by Korea, and looked forward to continuing discussions on this matter. However, his delegation did not believe that the question of venue should be a reason for Members to avoid fulfilling their obligations under the RTA TM. He therefore asked India to submit its data, so that a factual presentation could be prepared. Members could then discuss the venue for the review on the basis of a factual presentation.


&& The representative of South Africa indicated that she wished to provide responses to a question posed by the European Union at the last meeting, seeking clarification as to why the parties to the agreement between MERCOSUR and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) had notified their agreement under the Enabling Clause. In particular, she said that the MERCOSUR-SACU agreement had been notified to the CTD in document WT/COMTD/N/55 of 20 July 2017, under paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause. All information deemed appropriate for this agreement had been notified. She additionally made reference to paragraphs 1 and 2(c) of the Enabling Clause, as well as to paragraph 18 of the RTA TM, and indicated that these provisions provided the reason for the notification of the MERCOSUR-SACU agreement under the Enabling Clause.


&& The representative of the European Union said that her delegation had shared its view at the last meeting that customs unions did not fall under the Enabling Clause, and needed to be notified under GATT Article XXIV. She hoped that the response from South Africa could be provided in writing, so as to allow her to transmit it to her capital.
&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.  
	•	TEMPLATE FOR NOTIFYING CHANGES TO AN EXISTING REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENT – PROPOSAL BY THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS TO THE COUNCIL FOR TRADE IN GOODS, THE COUNCIL FOR TRADE IN SERVICES AND THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT (WT/REG/28)
&& The Chairman said that the CRTA, at its 89th Session on 19 June 2018, had agreed to recommend to the Council for Trade in Goods (CTG), the Council for Trade in Services (CTS) and the CTD the adoption of a template for notifying changes to an existing RTA. The template could be found in the Annex of document WT/REG/28. He believed that in the case of the CTD, this notification template would apply to RTAs originally notified under the Enabling Clause. 


&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation was in need of more time to complete internal consultations regarding the new template. He recalled that his delegation had also explained this at the recent CTG meeting.


&& The Chairman noted that the Committee was not in a position to adopt the notification template at the present meeting. He indicated that he would inform the CRTA Chairman of this situation. He also indicated his openness to discuss the matter with any interested delegations.


&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.   
	•	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements
-	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements – Status Report on the Committee's Work
- Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/237)  


&& The Chairman said that his report on the status of the preparation of factual presentations was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/237. In summarizing the information contained in the report, he informed the Committee that, as had been mentioned in past meetings, there were five PTAs that had been notified since the establishment of the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs (PTA TM) for which the Secretariat had still not received the full set of data or information required for the preparation of the factual presentations. These were the PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation, Chinese Taipei and Thailand. He urged the notifying Members to provide all the required data and information as soon as possible, as per the requirements of the PTA TM. He added that, as he had done with RTAs, he intended to hold informal consultations in the near future with the Members implementing the PTAs mentioned in his report, in the hope that this would help expedite the provision of the required data and information.
&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation to the Chairman for making this matter a priority in terms of his consultations. He encouraged the Members in question to provide the full set of data and information that would allow the Secretariat to complete the drafting of the outstanding factual presentations. He noted with concern that, for some PTAs, the Secretariat had been waiting for more than six years for the information and data, which reduced transparency for all Members.


&&  The Committee took note of the Chairman's report, and of the interventions.
	•	REVIEW of STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning duty free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered.


 && The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, emphasized the importance of DFQF market access for the integration of LDCs into global trade. He indicated that DFQF market access was a key S&D provision in the MTS in favour of LDCs. He went on to express appreciation to the developed and developing Members that had made significant efforts to provide DFQF market access for LDCs, while also noting that some Members could do more to implement the Hong Kong and Bali DFQF Decisions, by providing better market access to LDC products. He additionally observed that LDCs experienced difficulties in taking full advantage of market access opportunities, and stressed the importance of examining the utilization of preferences in order to better identify these difficulties and find solutions. In this regard, he recalled that the LDC Group had submitted a proposal in 2016 for a clinical examination of DFQF implementation to be undertaken by the Secretariat. He believed that it would useful for the Secretariat study to be prepared as soon as possible, so that Members could address relevant issues relating to DFQF market access for LDCs. 
&& The representative of the European Union expressed her delegation's commitment to the Hong Kong and Bali DFQF Decisions. She said that the European Union provided DFQF market access for all products from LDCs, except for arms and ammunition, and remained the most important destination for LDCs' agricultural products and manufactured products. She also observed that the number of beneficiaries of the European Union's Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme had been reduced, thereby generating considerably more benefits for LDC exports. She welcomed the progress made in DFQF market access, and encouraged other Members, including emerging economies in a position to do so, to endeavor to provide better market access to LDCs.


&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.
	•	WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE


&& The Chairman said that, at the last CTD meeting, Members' attention had been drawn to the Decision taken at the Eleventh WTO Ministerial Conference (MC11) concerning the WTO's Work Programme on E-Commerce which, inter alia, called for a continuation of the work under the Work Programme. He recalled that some interventions had been made, and some ideas had been shared on possible work for the CTD in the e-commerce area going forward. He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor under this agenda item at the present meeting.
No Member took the floor.


&& The Chairman proposed that the agenda item concerning the Work Programme on ECommerce be maintained on the agenda for the next meeting.
It was so agreed.  
	•	DATE OF THE NEXT MEETING 
&& The Chairman said that the next meeting of the CTD Regular Session was tentatively scheduled to be held on Wednesday, 21 November 2018. An initial agenda would be circulated four weeks before the meeting, on 24 October 2018, as per the CTD's rules of procedure. After the circulation of this initial meeting notice, Members would still have the opportunity to request items on the agenda for the meeting. The agenda would close on 8 November 2018, and would be circulated on 9 November 2018.  
	•	OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the 104th Session in November 2017, Members had been informed that the Secretariat was working on a document titled "Mainstreaming Trade in the Sustainable Development Goals". As the document had now been published, he encouraged Members to review it.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
