NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 24 AND 25 NOVEMBER 2016
Chairman: H.E. Mr Christopher Onyanga Aparr (Uganda) TOC \O "1-3" \Z \U \T "TITLE" 
A.	ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA	 PAGEREF _TOC476584997 \H 2
B.	OBSERVERS	 PAGEREF _TOC476584998 \H 2
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc476584999 \h 2
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc476585000 \h 2
C.	REPORT OF THE 50TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG/(L)/264)	 PAGEREF _TOC476585001 \H 3
D.	TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING	 PAGEREF _TOC476585002 \H 4
-	Consideration by the Committee of the external evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance – statement by the Chairman	 PAGEREF _Toc476585003 \h 4
-	Update on the external evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance – statement by Norway on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation	 PAGEREF _Toc476585004 \h 4
E.	TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT – WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC476585005 \H 4
-	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO – proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)	 PAGEREF _Toc476585006 \h 5
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate – proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc476585007 \h 7
F.	NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE	 PAGEREF _TOC476585008 \H 7
-	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc476585009 \h 8
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc476585010 \h 9
- 	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc476585011 \h 9
G.	COMMUNICATION FROM URUGUAY ON BEHALF OF THE LATIN AMERICAN INTEGRATION ASSOCIATION (LAIA) (WT/COMTD/W/220)	 PAGEREF _TOC476585012 \H 9
H.	ELECTRONIC COMMERCE	 PAGEREF _TOC476585013 \H 12
- 	Work Programme on Electronic Commerce: Aiming at the 11th Ministerial Conference – Communication from the People's Republic of China and Pakistan (JOB/GC/110/Rev.1 – JOB/CTG/2/REV.1 – JOB/SERV/243/Rev.1 – JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc476585014 \h 12
I.	NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS	 PAGEREF _TOC476585015 \H 16
J.	ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE (DFQF) MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	 PAGEREF _TOC476585016 \H 16
- 	Report by the Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/222)	 PAGEREF _Toc476585017 \h 17
- 	Draft terms of reference for the clinical examination of implementation of the Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs (WT/COMTD/W/218/Rev.1) – revised submission by Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group	 PAGEREF _Toc476585018 \h 18
K.	DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2016 (WT/COMTD/W/221)	 PAGEREF _TOC476585019 \H 20
L.	OTHER BUSINESS	 PAGEREF _TOC476585020 \H 21

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman indicated that he wished to say a few words about the commemorative event that had been held earlier in the day to mark the 100th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD). He believed that a useful discussion had taken place at the event, which was organized under the theme of “Current and Future Perspectives on Trade and Development”. He expressed his hope that the discussion would help Members in their consideration of ways to strengthen the CTD and make trade work even better as a tool for development. A brief written report of the event would be prepared under his responsibility and circulated in due course. He invited the Committee to adopt the draft agenda for the 100th Session, which was contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/8 circulated on 14 November 2016.
The agenda was adopted.
OBSERVERS
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organisation. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record. He indicated that, if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed.
REPORT OF THE 50TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG/(L)/264)
&& The Chairman said that the report of the 50th Session of the Joint Advisory Group (JAG) on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC) was contained in ITC document ITC/AG(L)/264. He welcomed Ambassador Negesh Kebret Botora of Ethiopia, the Chairman of the 50th Session of the JAG, and Ms. Dorothy Tembo, the Deputy Executive Director of the ITC. He invited Ambassador Botora to introduce the report.
&& The Chairman of the JAG said that the Group had held its 50th Session on 4 July 2016. At the meeting, the JAG was presented with the ITC's Annual Report for 2015, which highlighted the organization's highest ever delivery, as well as the strategic reforms undertaken and the results achieved. Delegations expressed appreciation for the ITC’s renewed focus on innovation, effectiveness and pragmatic results on the ground, as well as for its investment in measuring and assessing impact. They also appreciated the organization's efforts in supporting UN global goals and WTO Ministerial Decisions, as well the thematic focus on such areas as the economic empowerment of women, the promotion of employment opportunities for young people, and market-led approaches to working with economic migrants and refugees. Delegations additionally recognized other areas of the ITC's work, including with respect to the promotion of South-South cooperation, value chain development, non-tariff measures, and connecting small and medium ‑ sized enterprises (SMEs) to markets. It was noted that almost 80% of the ITC's interventions were delivered to priority countries, including least developed countries (LDCs), landlocked developing countries (LLDCs), small island developing states, Sub-Saharan African, and post-conflict states. There were calls for the ITC to expand its delivery, and for increased and more consistent financing for the organization. In terms of areas for further improvement, delegations had mentioned, inter alia, the need to better express the linkages between results achieved and related costs, the need for more information on the allocation of resources by priority country, and the need to further disaggregate data based on gender, in order to better reflect the impact of the ITC’s work on women’s economic empowerment and gender equality.
He went on to say that, in the second part of the JAG meeting, a partnership agreement was signed between the ITC and eBay Greater Europe, with a view to boosting the capabilities of SMEs in developing countries to participate in global digital commerce. The Deputy Executive Director of the ITC had briefed delegations on the ITC’s evaluation function – putting emphasis on its independence and its strategic nature – and had provided an update on the implementation of the management response to the recommendations of the independent evaluation carried out in 2014. Presentations had also been made in a number of other areas, including with respect to the 2015 Evaluation Synthesis Report, the results of the Joint Inspection Unit’s reports in relation to the ITC, and the results of a Professional Peer Review conducted during the first half of 2016. The ITC's Executive Director had reaffirmed the organization's commitment to implement the recommendations of the various evaluations, and to continue its work in improving impact assessment and collecting results data. In closing, he said that, at the JAG meeting, several donors had announced or confirmed their voluntary contributions to the ITC. He also informed the Committee of a number of ITC activities and events held in the course of 2016, including the annual World Development Forum – organized in collaboration with the Government of Sri Lanka – and the Trade Promotion Organization Network World Conference, which was organized in collaboration with Maroc-Export. 
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed appreciation for the ITC’s efforts to support LDCs, and emphasized the importance of enhancing connectivity for SMEs. He called for the development of further synergies between the WTO, the ITC and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), and stressed the need for continued efforts to build and strengthen the production and export capacity of the private sector in LDCs.
&& The representative of Uganda indicated his delegation's appreciation to the ITC for its various initiatives in Uganda. He cited in particular the support provided under the Netherlands Trust Fund – Phase III (NTF III), and in this regard outlined the benefits of projects aimed at increasing export competitiveness in the coffee sector, as well as in the information technology (IT) and IT-enabled services sector. He also highlighted the benefits of the Supporting Indian Trade and Investment for Africa (SITA) project. Finally, he requested the ITC to consider designing projects to build awareness in LDCs on the operationalization of the LDC services waiver.
The Deputy Executive Director of the ITC reaffirmed the ITC’s commitment to build capacity in developing countries, and in particular LDCs. She indicated that she had taken note of the request from Uganda.
&& The Committee took note of the report of the 50th Session of the JAG and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption.  
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING 
-	Consideration by the Committee of the external evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance – statement by the Chairman
&& The Chairman recalled that an external evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance had been carried out in 2016. Regular updates on the status of the evaluation were provided to the CTD in the course of the year by Norway, on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation. He informed the Committee that the final evaluation report – prepared by Saana Consulting – along with the WTO management response, would be circulated to Members shortly. As per the terms of reference for the evaluation, the final evaluation report and the WTO management response were to be presented and discussed in the CTD. In this regard, he informed Members of his intention to convene the 101st Session towards the end of January 2017, with a view to discussing the evaluation report – which would be presented by Saana Consulting – as well as the WTO management response. After the discussion on these documents, the 101st Session would be suspended. It would be reconvened later in 2017 to consider the other regular items on the agenda. He explained that this procedure was being followed in order to accommodate the need to ensure that Saana Consulting was able to present the evaluation report before its term of contract expired.
&& The Committee took note of the statement by the Chairman.
-	Update on the external evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance – statement by Norway on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation
&& The representative of Norway, on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation, said that the Steering Committee had reviewed the final evaluation report, and had subsequently approved it. He welcomed the Chairman's announcement that the 101st Session would be convened towards the end of January 2017 to allow a consideration of the final report, as well as the WTO management response. In this regard, he informed Members that the Steering Committee had invited the Director-General to present the management response. He indicated that the evaluation covered all WTO trade-related technical assistance during the 2010-2015 period, which had required an examination of over 2,000 activities involving about 80,000 participants. He emphasized the importance of the January 2017 CTD meeting, and encouraged all Members to attend and participate in the discussion.
&& The Committee took note of the statement by Norway.     
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT – WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. He recalled that, at the 97th Session, the Committee had agreed to the proposal from Ecuador contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1, which had been submitted in the context of the CTD's mandate from MC8. The proposal was for the Secretariat to periodically update its paper on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. He informed the Committee that the updated Secretariat document had been circulated in September 2016 in document WT/COMTD/W/219, and indicated that he wished to remind Members of some elements of the proposal from Ecuador that had been agreed to. He noted firstly that the purpose of the Secretariat report was to serve as a reference document for Members, for use as they deemed necessary. In addition, if a Member wished to propose that any particular element in the report be used as the basis for the inclusion of an agenda item at a CTD meeting, that Member would need to explain in its request the scope and purpose of the proposed discussion.
Turning to the two proposals for work under the MC8 mandate that were to be considered at the present meeting, he observed that the submissions containing these proposals had been appearing on the CTD’s agenda for quite some time. Previous CTD Chairpersons had held informal consultations to try to make progress on the proposals. He noted in this regard that he had also met informally with the proponents of the two proposals on 1 November 2016, and had convened an informal, open-ended CTD meeting on 15 November. At these informal meetings, he had shared his view that engagement among Members would be necessary in order for progress to be made on the proposals. He hoped that some progress could be reported at the present meeting.
-	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO – proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)
&& The Chairman said that the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 had the aim for the CTD to report on development-related work taking place in the WTO. He recalled that there were originally two proposals which broadly had this aim, and that the proponents of the two proposals had decided to work together. Document WT/COMTD/W/208 was the outcome of this collaboration.
&& The representative of India recalled the mandate from MC8 and indicated that it was appropriate for the CTD to report regularly on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies, and to provide recommendations to the General Council on how to achieve better coordination within the WTO on development issues. He informed the Committee that the proponents had recently met informally with a number of other Members to exchange views on the remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192. Delegations had agreed to continue discussions, with a view to making progress on the proposals. He requested that the present sub-item remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of Morocco, on behalf of the African Group, said that her intervention related to both the sub-items under the present agenda item. She emphasized that the proponents did not have the objective of usurping the mandate of the General Council, as some delegations may have felt. Rather, the aim was to fulfil the instructions of Ministers at MC8 to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD. Recalling that the CTD had been established to serve as a focal point for the consideration and coordination of development-related work in the WTO, she noted that the current reporting structure between WTO bodies fell short of appropriately fulfilling the CTD's overarching mandate. She explained in this regard that relevant decisions taken by other WTO bodies were not being regularly reported to the CTD, nor had the CTD been consulted on a range of development-related issues that had been taken up by these bodies. 
In order to operationalize the CTD's mandate, she suggested that other WTO bodies could submit a brief report on the development-related aspects of their work. She went on to provide some examples of the type of information that could be provided to the CTD, including with respect to S&D, the development impact of the elimination of trade-related investment measures, the development impact of the operationalization of the LDC services waiver, information relating to the implementation of Articles 66.1 and 66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement, and information relating to the work of negotiating bodies such as the Negotiating Group on Market Access and the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture. The Secretariat could then put the various reports together into a single document, which would be discussed in the Committee. The CTD would also be able to provide guidance and appropriate recommendations to the General Council and other WTO bodies on any development-related work. This would better link development to trade in a manner that would contribute to the economic development of the WTO’s developing, least developed, and small and vulnerable constituencies. The compilation document would additionally help to address the capacity constraints of many delegations that were not able to participate in all the meetings of WTO bodies. In closing, she emphasized once again the importance of improving intra-reporting procedures and operationalizing the CTD’s mandate by periodically reviewing the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies. She also indicated that the proponents would be continuing their consultations with other Members.
&& The representative of Ecuador expressed support for the remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/208, and indicated her delegation's willingness to continue working with Members to make progress on the proposals. She also welcomed the circulation in document WT/COMTD/W/219 of the updated Secretariat document on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions.
&& The representative of Egypt informed the Committee that a number of informal meetings had been held on the remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192, including a meeting that the proponents had organized with a number of other Members. He recognized that a fresh view was required in order to make progress on the proposals, and indicated that his delegation looked forward to further discussions with Members on how to improve coordination on development-related work in the WTO.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed the Group's support for the remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192. He indicated that the Group was committed to ensuring the centrality of development in the WTO's work, as laid out in paragraph 7 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration. In the view of the LDC Group, the CTD was the most competent body in the WTO to serve as a focal point for development-related work. He invited the proponents and the Members that had raised concerns to engage in constructive discussions, and also suggested that the Chairman could hold informal consultations to try to make progress on the matter. Among his other points, he noted that the Monitoring Mechanism on S&D could only be operationalized after steps had been taken to strengthen S&D provisions. Finally, he requested that the two sub-items under the present agenda item remain on the CTD's agenda until the matter was resolved.
&& The representative of Australia informed the Committee that, after the informal discussions that had taken place with the proponents, his delegation had a better idea of what the proponents were seeking in the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208. He believed that there was a possibility to find a way forward, especially if the objective was to make the discussions in the CTD more relevant and useful.        
&& The representative of Canada indicated that the informal discussions with the proponents had been productive. She also noted that her delegation continued to have concerns with the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208, as other WTO bodies were not required to report to the CTD, and the CTD did not have a mandate to issue recommendations to the General Council on the work of other bodies.
&& The representative of the European Union expressed appreciation for the discussions that had taken place with the proponents.  She reaffirmed her delegation’s view that the proposals on the table did not correspond to the mandate from MC8. The EU believed that the CTD needed to carry out focused work by further exploring the positive link between trade and development on the basis of constructive exchanges on clearly identified topics. 
&& The representative of Japan indicated his delegation's appreciation for the constructive approach taken by the proponents in the informal discussions. He expressed willingness to engage in further discussions on the remaining proposals.
&& The representative of Cuba believed that progress on the remaining proposals was possible, and that further informal consultations were necessary for this purpose. She emphasized the importance of finding a way forward so as to respond to the needs of developing Members.
&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation to the proponents for the informal discussions that they had organized. She noted that the proposal under consideration had been on the CTD's agenda for several years, and the US still had the same concerns. She looked forward to receiving more details from the proponents on their suggestions for moving forward, and also to considering a revised proposal. 
&& The Chairman welcomed the informal discussions that had taken place between Members. He encouraged further engagement in order to find a way forward.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate – proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
&& The Chairman said that, while there were three proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192, the first two proposals had already been addressed by the Committee. The first proposal, which was for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, had been agreed to by the Committee at its 87th Session. The updated Secretariat paper was circulated in June 2013 and had appeared on the CTD's agenda for a number of meetings. As for the second proposal, which was for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO, this idea was now being dealt with in the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 which had been addressed under the previous sub-item. The remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly.
&& The representative of India said that the parties to RTAs had several requirements to fulfil under the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. In order to help ensure a timely consideration of RTAs and the smooth operation of the Transparency Mechanism, it was important for the parties to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. As outlined in his intervention under the previous sub-item, he noted that the proponents were holding informal consultations with other Members with a view to making progress on the remaining proposals. He requested that the submission remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation could not accept the proposal in its current form. Nevertheless, she welcomed the indication from the proponents that consultations would continue with a view to making progress.
&& The Chairman once again encouraged further engagement among Members.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the regional trade agreements (RTAs) notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs. He firstly informed the Committee that the factual presentation on the agreement between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and India would be circulated shortly. With regard to the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA), he said that Afghanistan’s accession to SAFTA was notified on 29 July 2016 in document WT/COMTD/N/50. The parties had been requested to provide the data for the preparation of the factual presentation by 22 December 2016. Turning to the Agreement between the Dominican Republic and Panama, he said that the Secretariat would be in contact with the parties concerning some clarifications on the data provided. As for the Arab Mediterranean Free Trade Agreement – or Agadir Agreement – between Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia, data had been received from Egypt, Jordan and Morocco. The Secretariat was still waiting to receive data from Tunisia, which was requested by 15 July 2016. With regard to the Agreement between the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and Singapore, data had been received from Singapore. The Secretariat was still waiting to receive data from the GCC parties, which was requested by 23 November 2015. In the case of the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the East African Community, the Secretariat was waiting to receive comments on the draft factual presentation, which was sent to the parties in 2014. 
For a number of other RTAs - namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, India and Bhutan, and Cuba and El Salvador - the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties. He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible. He went on to say that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete. 
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update.
&&	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The representative of India indicated that his intervention related to the three sub-items under the present agenda item, since the three RTAs referenced in these sub-items had been "dually notified" under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. He noted that the systemic concerns that were raised by China, Egypt and India over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV were pertinent even now, but they remained unaddressed. Some Members had expressed the view that the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 were outside the scope of the CTD, and needed to be discussed in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR). The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification. Pointing to the terms of reference of the CTD contained in document WT/L/46, he noted that the CTD was designated to serve as a focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO and its relationship to development-related activities in other multilateral agencies. He added that the Committee could consult with other WTO bodies in addressing the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175. This was in keeping with paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference which entrusted the Committee to review periodically, in consultation as appropriate with the relevant bodies of the WTO, the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and in particular LDC Members, and report to the General Council for appropriate action. In concluding, he indicated that the three sub-items under the present agenda item needed to remain on the CTD's agenda until the systemic and specific concerns arising from "dually notified" RTAs were addressed.
&& The representative of Egypt said that systemic concerns had been raised by some Members, including Egypt, over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. He noted that a number of delegations had previously expressed the view that the Enabling Clause did not provide the appropriate legal basis to justify the formation of a customs union involving the reduction or elimination of NTMs. However, others had argued that the non-prescription of criteria or conditions for the elimination of NTMs did not exclude customs unions among developing countries from the coverage of the Enabling Clause. The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification. This originated from the CTD's terms of reference, which stipulated that the CTD was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO. In addition, paragraph 4 of the terms of reference mandated the CTD to consider any questions with regard to either the application or the use of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, which included questions relating to the invocation of the Enabling Clause to notify customs unions among developing countries. He hoped that Members could have a substantive discussion on the systemic concerns that had been raised. The present sub-item needed to be maintained on the CTD's agenda until a solution was found.
&& The representative of the United States, said that the GCC Customs Union had been notified under GATT Article XXIV, and was in the pipeline to be reviewed in the CRTA. The GCC Customs Union issue was therefore not an issue of dual notification. In this light, he suggested that the proponents of document WT/COMTD/W/175 needed to reconsider the content of their communication by looking at the factual correctness of the GCC Customs Union issue, and subsequently submit another communication if they still had concerns. His delegation was willing to work with Members to find a way to resolve the matter. With regard to the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea agreements, which were listed as the second and third sub-items under the present agenda item, he did not understand why the proponents insisted on maintaining them on the agenda, particularly since no solution had been proposed. The sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and needed to be removed from the agenda.
&& The representative of Korea expressed regret that the notifications of the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea agreements had been on the CTD's agenda for so long. His delegation was open to discussions to make progress on the dual notification issue and other related issues – including with regard to the transformation of the current provisional Transparency Mechanism for RTAs into a permanent mechanism, which he believed would make the consideration of RTAs more efficient and practical.
&& The representative of the European Union indicated that her delegation’s position on these issues had not changed. She reaffirmed the importance that the EU accorded to clarifying the legal and procedural questions arising from an agreement being notified by each party under a different legal provision. Substantive discussions on these issues needed to take place in the context of the implementation of paragraph 28 of the Nairobi Declaration.
&& The representative of Nepal referred to the Chairman's update on RTAs to be considered in Dedicated Sessions of the CTD. With respect to the agreement between India and Nepal, she informed && The Committee that the parties were consulting with their respective capitals, and would revert as soon as possible.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea 
No Member took the floor under this sub-item.
- 	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)
No Member took the floor under this sub-item.
&&COMMUNICATION FROM URUGUAY ON BEHALF OF THE LATIN AMERICAN INTEGRATION ASSOCIATION (LAIA) (WT/COMTD/W/220)
&& The Chairman recalled that a communication from Uruguay, on behalf of the LAIA, had been considered at the 99th Session. This communication had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/217. A further communication, addressed to the CTD Chairman, had now been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/220. It was this second document that was to be considered at the present meeting. He informed the Committee that he had convened a small group informal consultation with the LAIA member countries and some other Members on 1 November 2016, in order to provide an opportunity for a preliminary discussion on the new communication. His feeling from that meeting was that more discussions among Members would be required in order to find a way forward on the issues relating to the LAIA agreements. He had therefore encouraged delegations to continue to discuss these issues with a view to finding a solution.
&& The representative of Uruguay, on behalf of the LAIA, read out the content of the communication contained in document WT/COMTD/W/220. She, inter alia, reaffirmed the content of the previous communication from LAIA circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/217, and emphasized that each of the LAIA member countries acted in an individual capacity with regard to the agreements they concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo (TM80). This was clear from the Individual Notification of Agreement Data Sheets annexed to the document "Report to the WTO on Instruments Concluded Under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo". She confirmed that it was the LAIA member countries – and not the General Secretariat, or the LAIA itself – which drafted, approved and submitted to the WTO the Individual Notification of Agreement Data Sheets. These Data Sheets conformed to the notification format for RTAs contained in document WT/REG/16 of 23 November 2006. The LAIA member countries were ready to supplement the information contained in the various Individual Data Sheets in a Dedicated Session of the CTD, in accordance with paragraphs 16 and 18 of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. This did not preclude voluntary exchanges on systemic issues within the CTD framework. 
Referring to the list of RTAs that had appeared in factual presentations and had not yet been notified to the WTO, she indicated that the LAIA member countries wished to know the criteria for determining whether an RTA had not been notified. They also wished to know why, despite the provisions of paragraph 18 of the RTA Transparency Mechanism, this list was circulated for consideration in the CRTA instead of the CTD. In addition, they repeated their call for the WTO Secretariat to remove from this list all agreements between LAIA member countries that were duly notified under paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause. Furthermore, the LAIA member countries once again requested that the WTO Secretariat circulate the documents with the title "Report to the WTO on Instruments Concluded Under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo" with the document symbol “WT/COMTD/N/--", in keeping with notifications made within the CTD framework. In closing, she requested a written response to the communication under consideration. 
&& The representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Panama, Paraguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela expressed support for the intervention by Uruguay. A request was also made for a written response to the communication under consideration.
&& The representative of the United States indicated his delegation’s appreciation for the informal consultation that had been convened by the Chairman. He noted that a similar conversation was taking place in the CRTA. While the US preferred that work on RTAs be consolidated in one Committee, it nevertheless remained open to discussions in the CTD on the non-notified LAIA agreements. He called on delegations to coordinate their work, so as to avoid a repetition and duplication of the discussions in the CRTA, which were more advanced than the discussions in the CTD. Turning to the content of the communication under consideration, he firstly welcomed the assertion by the LAIA member countries that they acted independently with respect to how notification obligations were met. He stressed the importance of individual WTO Members taking the necessary steps to fulfil their obligations, and not seeking to collectively avoid these responsibilities through any process of joint notifications. Second, he reaffirmed his delegation’s position that, while the annual reports from the LAIA Secretariat contained some useful information, they did not constitute a notification to the WTO under GATT Article XXIV, GATS Article V or the Enabling Clause. The US could not support the LAIA member countries' assertion that the information contained in the LAIA reports satisfied the notification requirements under Section D of the RTA Transparency Mechanism. With regard to the question raised in the LAIA communication regarding the criteria for determining non-notified RTAs, he believed that the criteria were clear. He explained in this regard that, for those agreements appearing in the most recent list of non-notified RTAs, contained in document WT/REG/W/111, there had been no notifications received from individual parties to RTAs – either under Section B or Section D of the RTA Transparency Mechanism. As the annual reports from LAIA were not notifications by the individual parties to the agreements, his delegation could not agree with the request for the WTO Secretariat to circulate the LAIA reports with the symbol "WT/COMTD/N/ --".
He added that his delegation could not support the request to remove the LAIA agreements from the list of non-notified RTAs, and recalled that there had been no consensus to do so when the issue was discussed in the CRTA on 7 November 2016. He also questioned why the communication under consideration had been addressed to the CTD – and not to the CRTA, which was the Committee in which the list was circulated. He believed that it was inappropriate to make such a request in a communication to the CTD, as the CTD could not take decisions regarding what another Committee – or the Secretariat staff assigned to another Committee – might do. However, there were several options for the LAIA member countries to reduce the number of non-notified RTAs on the list. On the basis of discussions that had taken place, he indicated that many Members would welcome a case-by-case examination of specific LAIA agreements on the list, based on the substance of these agreements. Responses to the EU's written questions circulated in the CRTA would facilitate a productive discussion in this regard, and would help Members to reach consensus on how the agreements related to obligations under Section B or Section D of the RTA Transparency Mechanism. If LAIA member countries wanted their agreements to be removed from the list of non-notified RTAs, he believed that this would be the most productive way forward.
&& The representative of the European Union reaffirmed the importance it attached to receiving responses to its questions, which had been circulated in the CRTA in document WT/REG/W/109. She believed that this was an essential step to allow Members to have a constructive discussion on the matter. Her delegation did not agree that the discussion could only be confined to the CTD, or that the LAIA agreements could be removed from the list of non-notified RTAs. She explained that any action in this regard would be premature, as the LAIA member countries had not yet provided clarifications on some crucial issues.
&& The representative of Brazil indicated that it was incorrect to suggest that the LAIA agreements had not been notified. She noted that LAIA member countries had submitted many pages of reports on agreements concluded under the TM80. Detailed information had been made available to WTO Members over several years.
&& The representative of Australia did not believe that the LAIA countries had complied with their RTA notification obligations. He underlined the importance of transparency in RTAs, and noted that Members had not had the opportunity to consider the LAIA agreements on the basis of factual presentations prepared by the Secretariat. He also expressed concern that the LAIA communication was only addressed to the CTD Chairman, even though it dealt with a document considered in the CRTA. He suggested that the CTD Chairman should consult with the CRTA Chairman in the preparation of a response. In closing, he indicated that his delegation looked forward to engaging in discussions aimed at bridging the differences on this issue, and called on the LAIA countries to respond to the EU’s written questions.
&& The representative of the United States, in response to the intervention by Brazil, said that it was factually correct that the LAIA agreements had not been notified. He explained in this regard that the annual LAIA reports were not recognized as notifications by the membership.
&& The representative of Canada indicated that her delegation could not agree with the request from the LAIA member countries for their agreements to be removed from the list of non-notified RTAs. She urged the LAIA countries to respond to the written questions circulated by the EU.
&& The representative of Panama expressed concern with the suggestion that the LAIA member countries were not fulfilling their transparency obligations by hiding behind a joint notification. He explained that the LAIA member countries were trying to coordinate amongst themselves, including by preparing responses to the questions that had been submitted. He emphasized the importance of coordination on this matter, and called for continued consultations to find an acceptable way forward.
&& The representative of Brazil said that her delegation maintained its position on this matter. She also welcomed Panama's suggestion that consultations should continue.
&& The representative of India said that the communication under consideration clarified that the LAIA reports contained Individual Notification of Agreement Data Sheets, which were drafted and approved by the LAIA member countries, and which were in conformity with the notification format under the RTA Transparency Mechanism. He supported the emphasis placed by Panama on the need for coordination among the LAIA member countries. He also believed that the CTD was the appropriate forum to discuss this matter.
&& The representative of the United States, in response to the intervention by Panama, recalled that his delegation had welcomed the steps taken by the LAIA member countries to clarify that they acted in an individual capacity with regard to how notification obligations were met. He emphasized the importance of each individual Member taking the steps to determine whether its agreements qualified under GATT Article XXIV, GATS Article V or the Enabling Clause, as no Member should decide for another Member which legal cover to use with respect to a violation of the most-favoured-nation (MFN) principle. In this regard, he believed that the LAIA member countries needed to give further thought on what was a joint notification relative to a notification by individual Members. 
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation looked forward to receiving responses to the written questions circulated by the EU. Given that the questions had been circulated in the CRTA, he believed that it was appropriate for the issues relating to the LAIA agreements to also be discussed in the CRTA.
&& The representative of Brazil sought clarification from the US representative regarding his characterization of RTAs as an MFN violation. 
&& The representative of the United States explained that what he had meant was that Members could derogate from their MFN obligations and enter into RTAs, provided that certain steps were taken. He emphasized the need for the parties to RTAs to properly notify their agreements, as this was important to all Members.
&& The Chairman said that he had noted the request from the LAIA member countries for a written response to their communication. He encouraged Members to continue to discuss the issues relating to the LAIA agreements with a view to finding a way forward.
&& The Committee took note of the communication, and of all interventions. 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&&- 	Work Programme on Electronic Commerce: Aiming at the 11th Ministerial Conference – Communication from the People's Republic of China and Pakistan (JOB/GC/110/Rev.1 – JOB/CTG/2/REV.1 – JOB/SERV/243/Rev.1 – JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1)
&& The Chairman said that a communication from China and Pakistan relating to the Work Programme on E-Commerce had been circulated in the CTD, as well as in a number of other WTO bodies. The CTD document symbol was JOB/DEV/39/Rev.1. He invited the proponents to introduce the communication.
&& The representative of China said that Members had recently demonstrated a strong interest to discuss e-commerce. For her delegation, the priority task was to continue discussions under the Doha Development Agenda (DDA), according to the existing mandate. In the meantime, against the background of weak economic recovery and sluggish global trade growth, discussions in the WTO on e-commerce were also important. She indicated that such discussions should have the aim to help developing Members to use e-commerce, and to provide more opportunities for their SMEs to participate in international trade and global value chains (GVCs).
Turning to the communication itself, she said that it had been submitted to support discussions on e-commerce in the WTO, with a view to achieving progress by the Eleventh Ministerial Conference (MC11). The communication had already been considered at the meeting of the Council for Trade in Goods (CTG) on 17 November 2017. It focused on cross-border trade in goods enabled by the internet, and was based on China’s successful experience with e-commerce. In the past five years, China had experienced an average annual growth rate in e-commerce transactions of 35%. She noted that e-commerce had contributed to economic growth and welfare in China, and her delegation believed that e-commerce could help other developing countries as well. The proposal also emphasized that e-commerce needed to reflect the concept of inclusive trade, thereby providing fair chances for SMEs to participate in, and benefit from, international trade and GVCs. China’s experience proved that small farmers and small businesses in remote areas could be integrated into the domestic and international market with the help of e-commerce. She added that the proposed discussion did not envisage new market access commitments. Rather, the proponents suggested focusing the discussion on the clarification of existing multilateral rules, and on how to more fully benefit from existing market access opportunities. She also emphasized the development dimension of the communication, and shared her delegation's view that work on e‑commerce in the WTO needed to proceed progressively, with priority given to the easier issues so as to secure pragmatic progress.   
&& The representative of Pakistan welcomed the exploratory approach taken in the communication. He hoped that the sharing of experiences would help Members to bridge the information gap on this subject.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, highlighted the potential of e‑commerce in promoting development, but also believed that Members needed to have a balanced discussion on the subject, within the context of the 1998 Work Programme on E‑commerce. In particular, he emphasized the need for discussions to take into account the constraints faced by developing countries, and in particular LDCs. He listed a number of specific challenges that LDCs were experiencing in this regard, including with respect to basic infrastructure and equipment, appropriate regulatory frameworks, cyber security and financing.  The low internet penetration rate in LDCs was outlined. He also reaffirmed the importance the LDC Group attached to the achievements of results on issues of concern to LDCs in the context of the DDA and paragraph 31 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration, and indicated that discussions on e‑commerce should not divert Members from these issues. He went on to outline a number of areas which the LDC Group believed could be discussed in the context of e-commerce. In particular, he suggested that discussions could focus on improving online and credit card payment methods, promoting access to electricity, developing e-commerce infrastructure and logistics, providing training and support for SMEs, and promoting digital literacy. He also emphasized the need for discussions on e-commerce to be inclusive and transparent, and to establish a clear link between development and e-commerce, with a view to assessing the issues and challenges for LDCs. In closing, he indicated that the LDC Group was considering the communication, and would make its position known in due course.
&& The representative of Singapore said that her delegation was presently studying the communication. She also indicated her delegation’s interest to participate in any further discussions on e-commerce.
&& The representative of Paraguay asked for further details from the proponents on how they envisaged discussions taking place in the context of their proposal, and how the proposal would be developed further in this regard. He also drew Members’ attention to a communication related to e-commerce that had been circulated by Paraguay and a number of other Members in document JOB/GC/97/Rev.3.
&& The representative of Chinese Taipei highlighted the development dimension of e-commerce and the importance of bridging the digital divide, which she saw a major barrier to trade. She stressed the importance of ensuring fair competition.
&& The representative of Argentina indicated that his delegation would be looking at the proposal in detail, and expressed support for the intervention by Paraguay in seeking further information on how the proposal would be developed. He stressed the potential of e-commerce and technology for development, while also noting that there were infrastructure constraints in developing countries that needed to be addressed. He also believed that it was important for discussions on e-commerce to be held at the WTO, particularly for developing countries, as this was the best guarantee of ensuring transparency and inclusiveness. 
&& The representative of Brazil welcomed the communication, which he noted was focused on trade in goods enabled by electronic means. He also noted that the communication indicated the need to hold discussions on related services and other areas, and in this regard he said that it was important for his delegation that discussions went beyond trade in goods. With regard to the references to tax policies in the proposal, he noted that these issues fell outside the competence of the WTO. He also believed that Members needed to think carefully about the suggestions in the communication relating to bonded warehouses and trade facilitating measures. On issues relating to the infrastructure and related constraints of some Members, and in particular LDCs, he suggested that Section II of the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) could be taken as a reference. In closing, he expressed support for the idea of holding an informal joint meeting of the relevant bodies, and noted that his delegation looked forward to reviewing an elaborated version of the proposal in due course.
&& The representative of Peru said that his delegation was still studying the communication. He emphasized the link between e-commerce and development, and in particular noted that e‑commerce allowed SMEs in developing countries to gain access to the global market. The facilitation of trade in goods through electronic platforms would help SMEs to benefit in this regard. Many Members, including Peru, were keen to move forward with discussions on e-commerce, with a view to achieving results at MC11. He believed that the idea of holding an informal joint meeting of the relevant bodies would avoid duplication and focus on results. 
&& The representative of Colombia indicated that his delegation was studying the proposal. He stressed the importance of e-commerce for development, and expressed his delegation's willingness to have a substantive discussion on any proposal relating to e-commerce, with a view to achieving results at MC11.
&& The representative of India said that stakeholder consultations were presently taking place in his capital. His delegation would revert with specific comments at a future date.
&& The representative of the European Union believed that discussions on e-commerce at the WTO needed to be intensified and deepened. She outlined the growth in e-commerce in the past decade, and highlighted the benefits of participating in e-commerce, particularly for developing countries. She also noted, however, that not many developing countries were able to take advantage of the opportunities that e-commerce provided. The EU’s view was that an improvement in the global trade framework would contribute to enhancing developing countries’ access to e-commerce. She explained that the concept of e-commerce encapsulated many areas – including trade in goods, trade in services and intellectual property. It also had a direct bearing on many development-related issues. It was therefore useful to explore the topic in the CTD, while also continuing the horizontal discussion. Her delegation was open to consider the options with respect to how to continue the horizontal discussion, including within the framework of dedicated sessions, or in the context of the suggested informal joint meetings. She noted that many of the ideas in the communication under consideration were complementary to, and sometimes overlapped with, the elements put forward by the EU and other co-sponsors in document JOB/GC/97/Rev.3. However, more in-depth reflections and discussions would be needed in order to assess the feasibility of some of the ideas raised, and to identify other potential elements that could be missing. 
She went on to say that her delegation shared the proponents' view that e-commerce covered a broad range of complex issues. Some of these issues could be addressed for MC11, while others would require more time. The EU also shared the assessment of the potential benefits of e-commerce for development and for SMEs, and supported further work to explore measures which would contribute to improving the infrastructure and related conditions for e-commerce in developing countries. She noted that the Aid-for-Trade framework was already providing support for this, through the Aid-for-Trade Work Programme, and through the analytical work for the next Global Review. In addition, the EU agreed with the importance of providing greater clarity and certainty to the trading community regarding the moratorium on customs duties. In this regard, there was a strong case for making the moratorium permanent. She also noted that a number of ideas had been raised in the communication regarding customs procedures, several of which had been considered in the context of the trade facilitation negotiations. She believed that Members needed to focus on the issues which had the highest chance of reaching consensus, while avoiding contentious topics such as tax policies. Her delegation had additionally noted that a number of ideas were set out in the communication regarding services supporting e-commerce, and believed that some of these issues could form part of Members' discussions. As examples, she cited electronic contracts, e-signatures and e-authentication, and consumer protection. Finally, she expressed support for the transparency-related objectives in the communication. 
&& The representative of Switzerland indicated that the approach outlined in the communication would contribute to a better knowledge and understanding of e-commerce. He welcomed the suggestion to move forward in informal joint meetings of the relevant bodies, as this would allow Members to look at e-commerce in a coherent and meaningful way. He also noted the reality of the digital divide, and in this light recognized the importance of including the development dimension in Members' discussions.  
&& The representative of South Africa noted that the communication suggested that work on e‑commerce needed to be carried out on the basis of the existing mandate and guidelines, and on the basis of proposals by Members in the relevant bodies, as set out in paragraphs 2 to 5 of the 1998 Work Programme. She also noted that the communication recognized that there was a wide digital divide between Members. In this regard, she stressed the need to ensure that the participation of developing countries and LDCs in e-commerce was enhanced, and that e‑commerce brought benefits to all. Consideration needed to be given as to how the discussions and information exchange on e-commerce could support developing countries and LDCs by addressing their concerns on e-commerce, including with regard to productive capacity. The process needed to be transparent and inclusive. Her delegation stood ready to advance the work on e-commerce, with a focus on the development dimension, and in accordance with the existing mandate.
&& The representative of Costa Rica believed that the ideas outlined in the communication were interesting, and needed to be further looked into. He indicated his delegation's willingness to discuss e-commerce in the WTO, as well as in other organizations. 
&& The representative of Uganda expressed support for the intervention by Benin. He noted that the communication took into account the process that his delegation had earlier suggested to Members, which was that submissions relating to e-commerce needed to be first taken to the relevant bodies, as set out in paragraphs 2 to 5 of the 1998 Work Programme. Discussions would need to have matured in these bodies before being reported to the General Council. Turning to the content of the communication, he indicated that his delegation sought some clarifications on certain elements. First, he noted that, according to the communication, the proposed discussions aimed to clarify and improve the application of existing multilateral trading rules. Given that the 1998 Work Programme was exploratory in nature, with a mandate to examine and report, he asked the proponents to clarify what their objectives were. Turning next to the reference to tax policies in paragraph 1.1 of the communication, he indicated that such policies were not within the scope of the WTO. He went on to note that the trade facilitation issues mentioned in the communication appeared to already be part of the TFA, and inquired whether the idea of the proponents was to build on the TFA. He also asked how the proponents envisaged the formulation of concrete outcomes on the basis of paragraph 3.2 of the communication, which mentioned the need to improve the infrastructure and technical conditions for developing Members. Finally, he asked the proponents to elaborate on how the idea for joint informal meetings would work in practice.
&& The representative of Australia supported the aim of realizing pragmatic progress on e‑commerce at MC11. She indicated her delegation's interest to learn more about how the proponents envisaged work on e-commerce to be undertaken in the context of the Aid-for-Trade framework, and how the WTO could best contribute with respect to the development aspects of facilitating e-commerce. In terms of the organization of discussions, Australia was open to advancing discussions on e-commerce in any relevant WTO body or format. She noted in closing that her delegation would continue to assess the communication. 
&& The representative of the United States said that the communication contained a number of specific proposals that were ripe for collaboration within the WTO. She noted that trade facilitation measures could encourage the transit of goods bought and sold through e-commerce platforms. As suggested in the communication, simplifying border measures for imports and exports, and encouraging the exchange of information on regulatory measures and procedures impacting e‑commerce, would encourage increased trade – particularly among SMEs that relied on e‑commerce platforms to export. With regard to the communication's recommendation to extend the moratorium on customs duties on electronic transmissions, she observed that this was a step Members had regularly taken, and it had become a cornerstone of the global digital economy. Even beyond extending the moratorium, the US supported making the moratorium permanent, so as to allow digitally enabled firms to more confidently offer their services around the world. She also emphasized the breadth of digital trade, and encouraged the uptake of other related issues beyond trade in goods. She noted that digitally delivered services should be afforded the same protection as services provided in an offline context, and this warranted inclusion in any dialogue in the context of the 1998 Work Programme. In closing, she indicated her delegation's willingness to engage in more detailed discussions on the elements of the communication.
&& The representative of Canada welcomed the initiative to move forward with substantive discussions on e-commerce in the WTO, and invited Members to work together to promote inclusive access to, and participation in, e-commerce. She informed the Committee that Canada was supportive of an informal joint meeting to facilitate a stock-taking of initiatives across the relevant WTO bodies. She also highlighted her delegation's interest to consider ways to enhance services sector commitments, as well as to examining where the WTO could best contribute. She additionally noted that tax policies were outside the scope of the WTO, and also indicated that further reflection was needed with respect to the development-related elements of the communication. Finally, she requested the proponents to provide further information on the proposed Electronic World Trade Platform, and how this would work in practice.
&& The representative of Ecuador said that the communication was being analysed in her capital. She indicated that the 1998 Work Programme needed to be the context for discussions on e‑commerce, and also stressed the importance of prioritizing the pending DDA issues at MC11. 
&& The representative of Japan encouraged Members to start substantive discussions on e‑commerce as soon as possible, including on issues which were included in the communication under consideration. He indicated that his delegation wished to hear more details from the proponents on the idea of a joint informal meeting of the relevant bodies.
&& The representative of Mexico said that his delegation was analysing the communication, and wished to participate in further discussions on e-commerce. 
&& The representative of China said that the proponents' intention was for discussions to be held in the context of the 1998 Work Programme. She noted that the focus of the communication was on cross-border trade in goods enabled by the internet, as well as services directly supporting such trade, as these were areas of particular interest to developing Members. She also indicated the proponents' openness to discuss issues relating to the technical assistance and capacity building needs of developing Members, and in particular LDCs. She expressed hope that the proposal for a joint informal meeting of the relevant bodies would help discussions on e-commerce to move forward. She also indicated that the proponents had taken note of the various comments made by Members, including with regard to tax policies. Finally, with regard to the moratorium, the view of her delegation was that the current practice needed to be maintained.
&& The Chairman encouraged Members to continue to consider the issues raised in the communication from China and Pakistan. He proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions, and also suggested that an item relating to e-commerce be reflected on the agenda of the next CTD meeting
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the last meeting, the Committee had taken note of a notification under the Enabling Clause by Norway, which contained updated information on Norway’s Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme. He indicated that the notification by Norway – contained in document WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.6 – additionally made reference to the communication in the context of a notification under the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs. Turning to the PTAs to be considered in Dedicated Sessions of the CTD, he said that there were five PTAs notified since the establishment of the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs that had yet to be considered in Dedicated Sessions. With regard to India’s Duty-Free Tariff Preference Scheme for LDCs, he informed the Committee that some data had recently been submitted, which the Secretariat was in the process of examining. With regard to the other four PTAs – which were PTAs being implemented by China, the Russian Federation, Chinese Taipei and Thailand – the Secretariat had still not received the data required for the preparation of the factual presentations. He urged the notifying Members to provide the data as soon as possible. With respect to China's PTA – which was China's Duty-Free Quota-Free Programme for LDCs – he informed Members that a notification containing updated information on this programme had been circulated recently in document WT/COMTD/N/39/Add.2.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update. 
The meeting was suspended.
The meeting was reconvened on 25 November 2016.
ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE (DFQF) MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman noted that there were two listed sub-items under the present agenda item. The first sub-item concerned the annual report by the Secretariat on Members’ DFQF market access for LDCs. The Committee would then turn to a revised submission by Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, on the draft terms of reference for a clinical examination of DFQF implementation. 
- 	Report by the Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/222) 
&& The Chairman said that the Bali Ministerial Decision, contained in document WT/MIN(13)/44 - WT/L/919, instructed the CTD to continue to annually review the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to the LDCs, and report to the General Council for appropriate action. To aid in its review, the Secretariat was to prepare a report, in close coordination with Members, on their DFQF market access for LDCs at the tariff line level, based on their notifications. He said that the Secretariat report, which had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/222 was an update of the previous year's report, and followed the same structure. A draft of the document had been considered at the informal, open-ended CTD meeting held on 15 November 2016. 
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that his delegation had not been able to attend the informal, open-ended CTD meeting on 15 November. With regard to the Secretariat report, he noted that references had been made to the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and to the Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act (CBTPA) in paragraph 4.5, as well as in footnote c of Table 1. As far as his delegation was aware, these Acts did not make reference to LDCs. Accordingly, he did not believe that there was a justification to include the references to these Acts in the Secretariat report. He therefore suggested deleting footnote c of Table 1, and also deleting the last two sentences of paragraph 4.5. He additionally suggested a modification to the first sentence of paragraph 4.5, so that it would read: "It may be noted that a few Members maintain multiple non-reciprocal market access schemes for certain groups of developing countries, which are also benefitting some LDCs belonging to those groups."
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had concerns with respect to the way some information in the Secretariat report was presented. These concerns had been raised at the informal, open-ended CTD meeting on 15 November. She noted firstly that Table 1 of the report compared DFQF access under the GSP schemes of developed Members. The US had been cited as providing 82.6% DFQF coverage. However, the table failed to include the duty-free access provided to LDCs under two additional programmes, which were AGOA and CBTPA. Although paragraph 4.5 of the report mentioned these two programmes, the table did not include the data from these programmes. From the perspective of her delegation, the reference to these programmes in paragraph 4.5 was a compromise. In this light, her delegation could not agree to the proposed changes to the paragraph that had been suggested by Bangladesh. She also expressed appreciation for the insertion of footnote c in Table 1, which clarified that the US provided 97.6% DFQF coverage under AGOA. She indicated that her delegation could not agree to the proposal by Bangladesh to delete this footnote, and that the report as it stood took into account the concerns expressed by her delegation at the informal, open-ended meeting on 15 November. She went on to say that, while her delegation appreciated that the objective of Table 1 was to provide information on Members' GSP schemes, this approach did not provide the full picture, since all preference programmes that benefited LDCs were not mentioned. Nevertheless, her delegation was willing to join a consensus to approve the report as contained in document WT/COMTD/W/222. She also informed the Committee that officials from her capital had been in contact with the Secretariat to understand what data was missing. Her delegation would continue to work with the Secretariat and other Members in order to identify ways to provide a more comprehensive picture in the future of Members’ preference programmes. 
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed appreciation to the developed and developing Members that were providing DFQF market access to LDCs. He noted that some developing Members implementing DFQF schemes had as yet not notified their schemes under the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs, and encouraged them to submit the required notifications. Other developing Members in a position to do so were also invited to consider granting DFQF market access to LDCs. Noting that preferential market access was not sufficient to achieve the objectives set out in the Hong Kong DFQF Decision, he invited Members to also respond to the Bali and Nairobi Decisions concerning preferential rules of origin for LDCs. In closing, he noted that the LDC Group was requesting that a clinical examination be undertaken of DFQF implementation. This was the subject of the following sub-item. He believed that a clinical examination would enable recommendations to be formulated with the objective of eliminating any constraints that existed with regard to DFQF implementation.
&& The representative of Australia noted the reference by the representative of Benin to a clinical examination of DFQF implementation. In this regard, he suggested that it would be useful if the LDC Group could identify a list of products of particular export interest, at the 6-digit level of the Harmonized System. The Secretariat could then examine the extent to which these products were included in Members' DFQF schemes. This would give an idea of whether DFQF market access was being provided on items of export interest to LDCs.
&& The representative of Bangladesh repeated his concern regarding the references to AGOA and CBTPA in the Secretariat report. The view of his delegation was that these references should be removed if there was no mention of LDCs in AGOA and CBTPA. 
&& The representative of the United States said that she was not aware of whether there was a mention of LDCs in AGOA and CBTPA. However, she noted that the two preference programmes were benefiting some LDCs, and this needed to be captured in some way in the Secretariat report. Her delegation believed that the Secretariat report as it stood represented a sufficient compromise to capture what these programmes were providing to certain LDCs.
&& The Committee took note of the Secretariat report, and of the interventions.
- 	Draft terms of reference for the clinical examination of implementation of the Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs (WT/COMTD/W/218/Rev.1) – revised submission by Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group
&& The Chairman recalled that the original version of the proposal by the LDC Group for a clinical examination of DFQF implementation had been considered at the 99th Session. Some comments were made on the proposal, and the delegation of Benin had indicated that the LDC Group would hold discussions with the Members that made comments. A revised submission, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/218/Rev.1, had now been circulated. He invited Benin to introduce the revised submission.  
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group emphasized the importance of DFQF market access, and noted that it had been recognized by the international community as a key issue for LDCs. He recalled some of the comments that had been made on the LDC Group's proposal at the 99th Session, and informed the Committee that the revised proposal had been formulated on the basis of consultations with a number of delegations. Referring to the four sections in the submission, he went on to explain the elements of the revised proposal. With regard to the first section, which contained the background to the proposal, he noted that one Member had indicated during the consultations that a reference to the Hong Kong DFQF Decision was prejudicial to its position on the DDA, and had suggested that the reference could be omitted. However, the LDC Group had decided that it was not necessary to make any changes to the first section, since this section recalled the legal basis for the clinical examination. He stressed that the reference to the Hong Kong Decision had no bearing on the ongoing discussions regarding the DDA. 
Turning to the second section of the proposal, which addressed the scope and parameters of the clinical examination, he said that one Member had felt targeted by parameters 9, 10 and 11 in the original proposal, and had suggested that they needed to be made more general. After several consultations, the LDC Group had decided to make the parameters neutral, and to also drop parameter 10. He additionally informed the Committee that no observations had been made on the third section of the proposal, concerning the approach, while the timetable for the study, contained in the fourth section, had been rearranged. He went on to say that the LDC Group had demonstrated flexibility, and urged Members to show similar flexibility. It was observed in this regard that the Group was asking for a study, and not a decision. The objective of the proposed clinical examination was for an impartial and objective diagnosis to be prepared, on the basis of statistical data. This would ultimately contribute to the formulation of recommendations aimed at improving market access for LDCs, with a view to strengthening their export capacity and generating diversification and structural transformation. He stressed the importance of working towards concrete and practical follow-ups to Ministerial Decisions, and called on Members to agree to the terms of reference for the clinical examination, with a view to ensuring the effective implementation of the Hong Kong Decision. Finally, he welcomed the suggestion by Australia under the previous sub-item, and indicated that the proposed study should incorporate the suggested work.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the proposal was a right step towards the implementation of the Hong Kong DFQF Decision and subsequent Ministerial Decisions. He also emphasized the need to ensure that the exports of other developing countries at similar levels of development as LDCs would not be negatively impacted. 
&& The representative of India said that paragraph 47 of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration placed an obligation on developed Members to provide DFQF market access for products originating from LDCs, while it encouraged developing Members declaring themselves in a position to do so, to provide such treatment to LDCs' products. India was the first developing Member to announce a comprehensive scheme to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. India's scheme now provided DFQF market access on 96% of tariff lines at the 6-digit level of the Harmonized System, while an additional 2.2% of lines enjoyed preferential duties. Only 1.8% of tariff lines had been retained in the exclusion list, with no tariff concessions. Turning to the proposal under the consideration, he observed that it quoted only some parts of the Hong Kong DFQF Decision, and in particular omitted those parts which emphasized the differences in obligations between developed and developing Members.  He explained in this regard that, according to the Hong Kong Decision, developed Members were obliged to provide DFQF market access on at least 97% of tariff lines, while this was voluntary on the part of developing Members. Furthermore, developing Members were permitted to phase in their commitments, and also enjoyed appropriate flexibility in coverage. He believed that quoting only selectively from the Hong Kong Decision would send a wrong message that the DFQF obligations of developed and developing Members were the same. He also noted that, in the Bali DFQF Decision, a reference to the 97% coverage was only made in the paragraph concerning developed Members. In conclusion, he indicated that, while India supported the proposed study by the Secretariat, the differences in obligations between developed and developing Members granting DFQF market access needed to be reflected in the terms of reference, and in the study itself.    
&& The representative of Uganda supported the intervention by Benin. He indicated that his intervention was with respect to both sub-items under the present agenda item. Turning firstly to the Secretariat report on Members' DFQF market access for LDCs, he expressed appreciation to the Members that had responded to the Hong Kong Decision by providing DFQF market access to LDCs, including those that had already attained the 97% threshold. He noted that it was important for preference-granting countries to effectively implement the notification requirements, and make available the utilization rates in their DFQF schemes. He also expressed appreciation to the Members that were responding to the Nairobi Ministerial Decision on preferential rules of origin for LDCs. With respect to the revised proposal by the LDC Group for a clinical examination of DFQF implementation, he explained that it had not been possible to accommodate all the requests that had been made by delegations during the consultations. In particular, the Group had decided to maintain the reference to the Hong Kong Decision, as it was felt that this Decision provided the appropriate background and mandate. Furthermore, it had systemic implications for all LDC‑specific issues, including cotton, preferential rules of origin and the services waiver. He questioned the suggestion that no references could be made to the DDA, noting in particular that this had further implications, for example with respect to the implementation of the Ministerial Decisions from the Bali and Nairobi Ministerial Conferences. He also observed that the proposed clinical examination was not about the future, but rather about how DFQF had been implemented in the past. Any recommendations resulting from the study would have to be agreed to by consensus in the CTD. Finally, he indicated that his delegation had taken note of the interventions by Australia and India, and looked forward to engaging.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation attached great importance to the implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs, and had been providing 97% DFQF access since 2015. However, he also emphasized that it was necessary to acknowledge essential differences in the responsibilities of developed and developing Members in this regard. For developed Members, DFQF was an obligation. Developing Members provided DFQF market access on a voluntary basis, and faced more challenges in their own development process than developed Members. He called on developed Members to fully implement their obligations, and suggested that the clinical examination needed to be more focused on DFQF implementation by developed Members.
&& The representative of Chinese Taipei said that DFQF market access was an important tool to help LDCs integrate into the multilateral trading system. While recalling that Chinese Taipei had already notified its DFQF scheme, she also noted that, according to the Hong Kong Decision, developed Members and developing Members had different DFQF responsibilities. For developing Members, the provision of DFQF market access was voluntary. She indicated that the different obligations of developed Members and developing Members needed to be reflected in the clinical examination.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had previously informed the Committee of the actions the US had taken to implement the Bali DFQF Decision. She also recalled that her delegation had raised concerns at the 99th Session on the original proposal by the LDC Group. Although the US was still analysing the revised proposal, she said that she wished to reiterate some of these concerns, as they had not been addressed in the revision. First, her delegation believed that the Secretariat study needed to be fact-based. However, the revised proposal continued to raise subjective questions which could not be answered at a general level, and with respect to which it was not appropriate for the Secretariat to make judgements. As examples, she noted that the proposed terms of reference sought to determine why there had been a problem in DFQF implementation, and why textiles and garments in particular had been a problem in this respect. She also indicated that much of the information called for in the proposed terms of reference was already available elsewhere. For example, in line with the Bali DFQF Decision, the Secretariat produced a report on DFQF market access at the tariff line level. Furthermore, the CTD's Dedicated Session on Small Economies had examined the textile and apparel sector in detail, and the documents produced in that context addressed the data requests in the proposal. Similarly, other data called for in the proposal were already publicly available, or generated by the LDCs themselves. She next pointed to parameter 9 in the submission, and noted that tariff preferences were not always the primary determinant of sourcing decisions. Other factors – such as product availability, production time, and vendor reliability – also played a role. She informed the Committee that her delegation was not in a position to support the proposed terms of reference for the Secretariat study at the present time.
&& The representative of Benin said that the LDC Group would take into account the suggestions by China, India and Chinese Taipei. He also expressed appreciation for the information provided by the US. In this regard, he welcomed any specific written suggestions from the US, and asked whether they could be provided within a week. He indicated that consultations with Members could continue.
&& The representative of Canada said that any terms of reference for a Secretariat study needed to be objective and allow for a factual examination of DFQF market access for LDCs. In this regard, she noted that the revised submission continued to include some subjective elements. She also emphasized that the content of the proposed study should not duplicate information that was already available in existing Secretariat documents. Finally, she indicated that she would need to consider further the suggestion from some delegations that the analysis in the clinical examination should be different for developing Members relative to developed Members.  
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was willing to continue to work with the LDC Group on this matter. However, the US would not be in a position to provide written comments or drafting suggestions. She said that she did not wish to leave the Committee with the impression that any comments would be provided within a week, as requested by the representative of Benin. 
&& The Chairman noted that some questions and concerns remained, and it was therefore not possible for the Committee to agree to the terms of reference for the study at the present meeting. He encouraged the proponents to continue to engage with the Members that had commented on the proposal.       
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2016 (WT/COMTD/W/221)
&& The Chairman said that a fax was sent to Members on 17 November 2016, indicating that the CTD's draft annual report had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/221. It was noted that the draft contained a number of square brackets relating to some items, including with respect to discussions taking place at the 100th Regular Session. The square brackets would be removed as part of the process of adopting the annual report, and the discussion that had taken place at the present meeting would be appropriately reflected in the final report. Noting that Members had been requested to submit in writing any comments on the draft annual report by 22 November 2016, he informed the Committee that no comments had been received on the report.
&& The representative of Bangladesh asked for clarification on the procedure with regard to the finalization of the annual report. 
A representative of the Development Division explained that the practice was for the Committee to adopt the annual report at the present meeting, with the understanding that the Secretariat would appropriately reflect the discussion that took place at the meeting.
The representative of Bangladesh asked whether Members could have an opportunity to view the final draft of the annual report, and provide comments if necessary. He explained that he was particularly interested to see how the discussion on the Secretariat report on DFQF market access for LDCs would be reflected.
&& The representative of the United States indicated that her delegation also wished to be given the opportunity to view the final draft of the annual report, and provide comments if necessary. Like Bangladesh, her delegation’s interest was in seeing how the discussion on the Secretariat report on DFQF market access for LDCs would be reflected.
&& The Chairman said that the final draft of the annual report would be shared with Members, once the Secretariat had reflected the discussion that took place at the present meeting. Members would be given the opportunity to provide any comments within a stipulated timeframe.  If no comments were received, the report would be considered adopted.
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business". 
The meeting was adjourned.

__________


 The report was circulated in document WT/COMTD/92.
&& The points in this paragraph, made by Egypt at the 90th Session and also reflected in the minutes of the 92nd, 93rd, 95th and 97th Sessions, are reflected once again in the minutes of this meeting at the request of the Egyptian delegation.
&& No comments were received on the final draft of the annual report which was shared with Members. The adopted report was circulated in document WT/COMTD/91.









WT/COMTD/M/97

-  PAGE 1 -


WT/COMTD/M/100

-  PAGE 21 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/100


9 March 2017
(17-1385)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/ NUMPAGES  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1
Committee on Trade and Development
100th Session
 




