WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/47
14 January 2004

(04-0096)


Committee on Trade and Development
Forty-seventh Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 27 AND 28 NOVEMBER 2003

Chairperson:  H.E. Mr. Habib Mansour (Tunisia)


Subjects discussed:  

 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC61758866" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC61758866 \H 1
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC61758867" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC61758867 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc61758868" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc61758868 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc61758869" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc61758869 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC61758870" C.	Notification under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC61758870 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc61758871" -	Notification from Iceland (WT/COMTD/N/17)	 PAGEREF _Toc61758871 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC61758872" D.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries (WT/COMTD/W/113 and WT/COMTD/W/121)	 PAGEREF _TOC61758872 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC61758873" E.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC61758873 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc61758874" -	Presentation by the Trade in Services Division	 PAGEREF _Toc61758874 \h 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC61758875" F.	Electronic Commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC61758875 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC61758876" G.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC61758876 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc61758877" (i)	Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2004  (WT/COMTD/W/119/Rev.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc61758877 \h 10
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc61758878" (ii)	Report on the Implementation of the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan  (WT/COMTD/W/120)	 PAGEREF _Toc61758878 \h 26
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC61758879" I	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC61758879 \H 26
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC61758880" H.	Adoption of the Annual Report (WT/COMTD/W/122/rev.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC61758880 \H 27



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft Agenda for the meeting was contained in Airgram WTO/AIR/2209/Rev.1 of 24 November 2003.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had an item to include under "Other Business".
The agenda was adopted as amended.

OBSERVERS

(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite the following intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the African Union (AU);  the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the South Pacific Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).  He therefore proposed that, in accordance with the Committee's procedures, those organisations be invited to the next formal meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD).  
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman said that, at previous meetings, the Committee had also had before it a number of outstanding requests for observer status.  Those came from the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities.  As positions of delegations were well known and on the record, he proposed that, unless there had been any recent change in Members' positions, the Committee would revert to those requests at its next formal meeting.
It was so agreed.

NOTIFICATION UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& -	Notification from Iceland (WT/COMTD/N/17)
&& The Chairman said that the Committee, at its last meeting, had had before it a notification by the Government of Iceland contained in document WT/COMTD/N/17.  That notification related to an initiative taken by the Government of Iceland to improve market access conditions for exports from the least-developed countries (LDCs).  The delegation of Iceland had presented the notification at the last meeting of the Committee.  As the notification related to improved market access for LDCs, the Committee had referred it to the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries for substantive consideration and reporting back, according to the reporting procedures established at the 32nd Session of the Committee.  The next meeting of the Sub-Committee would be held on 8 December 2003.  The CTD would thus only have the report on the Sub-Committee's deliberation at its next meeting.  He reminded the Committee that some Members had posed certain questions at the last meeting and that the Committee, therefore, had decided to keep the item on the Agenda for the delegation of Iceland to respond.
&& The representative of Iceland said that he believed that only one question remained to be answered.  That was the question posed by the representative of Switzerland on whether the Icelandic scheme made a distinction between the goods within the quota and those outside the quota in terms of the application of the zero tariff rate.  The answer was that no distinction was made.  The quantity was not limited when the zero tariff was applied and the zero tariff was applied to all imports of that product.  He said that a question had also been put by the representative of Senegal at the last meeting to which his delegation had then replied.  He also took note of the statement made by the representative of Paraguay at that meeting.  He said that he did not believe that there was a need to reply to that question.
&& The representative of Paraguay said that her delegation had put a question to the delegation of Iceland at the last meeting of the Committee.  Her delegation also had another question.  However, she was not certain that it was the right time to pose the new question, as no response had been given to the original one.  She said that her delegation could not accept the notification proposed by the delegation of Iceland before responses had been given to the questions posed.
&& The representative of Iceland said that his delegation would appreciate it if the delegation of Paraguay could submit their questions in writing in order for his delegation to reply to them.
&& The Chairman said that the delegation of Paraguay indicated that it agreed and would submit its questions in writing.
&& The Committee took note of the notification and the comments made.

DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES (WT/COMTD/W/113 AND WT/COMTD/W/121)
&& The Chairman reminded Members that the item relating to "Declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries" had been treated during previous meetings at the request of certain African countries and that the related document had been circulated as WT/COMTD/W/113.  At the last meeting, the Committee had agreed to ask the Secretariat to prepare an inventory of documents and reports on primary products, including documents prepared by other international intergovernmental organizations, universities, and other research institutions which could be useful for the discussions in the CTD.  In light of the interest Members had shown in the issue, he had indicated that he would hold informal consultations on the issue.  Those consultations had been held on 18 November 2003 at which Members had indicated that they wished to study the bibliography elaborated by the Secretariat before expressing views about how to deal with the issue in the CTD in the future.  The bibliography had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/121 of 20 November 2003.  He hoped that Members had had sufficient time to consider it.  He asked for Members' views on the bibliography as well as on how the CTD should deal with the issue in the future.
&& The representative of Kenya said that the bibliography would provide a good basis for substantive discussions in the CTD of the issues raised in the paper by Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda (WT/COMTD/W/113).  However, since Members had only recently received the bibliography, they needed time to consider the many documents listed in it and make appropriate comments.  He therefore requested that discussions on the item be postponed to the next meeting of the Committee and that discussions then be based on the documents listed in the bibliography and focus on the key issues mentioned in the paper by Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation supported the proposal made by the representative of Kenya.
&& The Committee agreed to postpone discussions on the item until its next meeting.

PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
-	Presentation by the Trade in Services Division
&& The Chairman said that Agenda Item E related to "Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on identifying and debating developmental aspects of the negotiations, in order to help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected."  Following the Doha Ministerial Declaration, the item was a standing item on the Agenda of the Committee on Trade and Development.  From the 45th Session, the Committee had successively invited the Agriculture and Commodities Division and the Market Access Division.  As agreed at the last meeting, it had been decided that the Trade in Services Division be invited to make a presentation of the developmental aspects of the services negotiations.  Members had, at the last meeting, expressed the desire that the discussions on the Agenda item concern, in deeper detail, the link between the ongoing negotiations and sustainable development.  In order for Members to prepare themselves and to facilitate such a discussion, and following Members' wish, a written note relating to the oral presentation to be made had been faxed to Members the previous week.
&& The Secretariat said that it would speak about the development dimension of the services negotiations as provided for in paragraph 15 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  It would not repeat what was included in the written note already sent to Members.  The Secretariat would rather make some thematic points regarding the services negotiations and how far the negotiations had come.  The services sector was a sector of paramount importance to the economy of developing countries.  Services were important as they represented a large part of the GDP of any economy today.  Figures ranged from a little more than 40 per cent of GDP up to 85 per cent of the GDP in some countries.  The services share in GDP increased with the level of development of the economy.  Developing countries had achieved higher growth rates in services than in any other sector of their economies.  Apart from its sheer size, the services sector was strategically important as it was the biggest creator of employment opportunities, the largest generator of foreign exchange and the fastest growing sector.  More importantly, services also defined the quality of life in a society.  The services consumed related to how people lived their lives, whether it was telecommunications, health care, transportation, water or electricity supply.  There was an added strategic dimension for developing countries as the services sector played and important role for the development of other sectors of the economy.  It was almost impossible to have a competitive agriculture sector without the backup of a competitive services sector.  The same was true for manufacturing or mining for example.  Because of the importance and complexity of the services sector, developing countries faced particular challenges in their process of development.  The largest challenge recognized by the GATS was that of regulation.  Developing countries needed to develop their regulatory structures in a way that would help them achieve their development objectives.  The GATS recognised Members' right to regulate.  It also recognized that developing countries, when they liberalized services, had to do so in a way which was commensurate with their development situation, and most importantly, commensurate with the level of development of their regulatory structures.  The GATS did not contain the traditional concept of special and differential treatment (S&D) found in the GATT and in goods trade.  The GATS did not see developing countries as a homogenous group.  It rather referred to individual developing countries.  That recognition of individuality in terms of development concerns and priorities was reflected in the structure of the agreement itself, which admittedly, was quite complex and not very user friendly.  It was nevertheless designed that way in order to cater for the differences in each country in terms of its capacities, priorities and ability to develop.  Various provisions of the GATS, particularly those related to the negotiations and the process of progressive liberalization, reflected those development concerns.  Article IV related to "Increasing Participation of Developing Countries", Article XIX gave developing countries the flexibility to liberalise fewer sectors and fewer types of transactions.  The GATS also contained the flexibility for developing countries to conclude economic integration agreements and various safeguard mechanisms, such as the balance-of-payments safeguards.  The different parts of the GATS Agreement showed that it was designed to cater for the development specificities of each country.
&& The Secretariat went on to say that the challenge of regulation was not an easy one.  It was not a challenge that the WTO could assist with to any large extent.  The WTO could always advise developing countries about how to be consistent with their obligations under the GATS.  However, the Secretariat was not equipped to competently advice them on how to introduce, for example, regulations for their financial services, safety regulations for their transport sectors, or qualification requirements for lawyers and accountants.  The aim of the negotiations to liberalize services was to liberalize in a way that did not hinder the ability of developing countries to regulate a growing market and a dynamic trade environment.  The services negotiations had begun in January 2000.  What had been achieved so far reflected the same faithfulness to the development objectives as in the GATS.  The adoption of the negotiating guidelines in March 2001 was an important step in that process.  The guidelines, contained in document S/L/93, emphasized the development concerns of developing countries and the flexibility that the GATS contained was reemphasized with respect to the negotiations:  the flexibility to liberalize less, the right to choose the sectors in which commitments were to be undertaken, the particular attention that the negotiations must give to sectors and modes of supply of export interest to developing countries, the due attention to small economies and small service suppliers, the attention given to the process of assessment of trade in services in terms of clarifying the role that liberalisation could play in the process of development, and to ensure that the negotiations take place in a way which do not disadvantage the interests of developing countries.  The guidelines also provided, in paragraph 15, that while assessing progress in the negotiations, Members had to consider ways and means of operationalising GATS Article IV on "Increasing Participation of Developing Countries".  Prior to the conclusion of the negotiations, the guidelines called upon Members to assess the results of the negotiations in terms of the achievement of the objectives set in GATS Article IV.  After the guidelines had been adopted, two modalities had been adopted by the Council for Trade in Services:  one on the treatment of autonomous liberalization and one, adopted just before the Cancún Ministerial Conference, on the modalities for the special treatment of the LDCs.  Taken together, the three completed the negotiating architecture within which the current round of negotiations was taking place.  
&& The Secretariat continued by saying that the process of requests and offers had started, as provided for in the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  Members would recall that paragraph 15 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration called upon participants of the negotiations to submit their initial requests by 30 June 2002 and initial offers by 31 January 2003.  That process of submitting requests was purely bilateral in nature.  The Secretariat did therefore not have any formal means of detecting how many requests had been exchanged and to what extent they covered areas of interest to developing countries.  However, the process of submitting offers was of a different nature.  Offers were submitted to the Secretariat and circulated to all Members.  Thirty-nine offers had been submitted.   He said that, attached to the written note that he had sent to Members prior to the meeting, there was a chart reflecting the number of offers.  That chart was slightly outdated as it reflected 35 offers while 39 offers had actually been submitted.  The chart still provided Members with a rough view of the sectoral coverage of those offers.  That chart was rough and aggregated in terms of assessing the offers submitted.  The role of developing countries in pursuing their interests in the negotiations and provide focus on the areas of interest to them was markedly advanced compared to previous negotiations.  If what happened during the Uruguay Round, or even the extended negotiations, on financial services, telecommunications, mode 4, or maritime transport was compared with the current services negotiations, it was clear that developing countries had moved several steps ahead in further understanding the role of services in their economies and further defining their priorities and having a clear vision about where they wanted to go with the process of liberalising the services sector.  There was a large interest in the further liberalisation of mode 4, i.e. the supply of services through the presence of natural persons.  Developing countries had realised that they had a comparative advantage in achieving further liberalization of mode 4 services transactions.  The way the subject was being treated was also remarkable, as for the first time there was serious consideration of how the regulatory frameworks in areas such as immigration and labour were interfacing with governments' trade policies.  That developing countries had done a lot of work in that area was displayed in the proposals submitted.  There was for the first time common interest between developed and developing countries in that area, even though the ambition differed between the categories different groups of countries wished to liberalize.  
&& The Secretariat further said that there was a clear indication that developing countries had a keen interest in pursuing further liberalization of services.  That interest was not only shown in terms of securing export opportunities for exports from developing countries, but developing countries also showed growing interest in liberalizing their own services sectors.  The Secretariat said that he did not believe that it had been common to negotiations in trade in goods that Members had been prepared to unilaterally bind tariff concessions.  That had repeatedly been the case in the services negotiations.  Members had unilaterally bound market access and national treatment in important sectors such as financial services and basic telecommunications.  For example, Egypt had about a year earlier unilaterally bound the liberalization of basic telecommunications.  One could wonder why Members choose to do so.  The answer was clear.  Within the domestic reform agenda, there was a more recognized role for liberalization of services, and important infrastructural services in particular.  That had led, not only to autonomous liberalization of those sectors, but also to binding that liberalization because of the role such guarantee played in attracting foreign investment and foreign technology.  The Secretariat hoped that the more thematic view of what was happening in the negotiations that it had presented orally would complement the information in the written note to complete the picture of the developmental aspects of the services negotiations.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that the Government of Djibouti, in collaboration with the WTO Secretariat, regularly organized regional seminars in the area of services for French speaking countries, including Haiti.  His Government had requested that a similar seminar be organized in 2004, and he hoped that that seminar would take place.  He said that developing countries, and particularly African countries, found it difficult to undertake specific commitments as it was difficult for them to see what they would gain from doing so.  The Secretariat could assist Members in understanding what they would get in return if they opened up their services sectors.  In addition, it was difficult for Members to understand how, and withled for in the other market access negotiations.  The bilateral request/offer process was the starting point for the services negotiations.  His delegation had been encouraged by the number of services offers submitted to date, half of which came from developing countries.  He said that it was fair to say that after the Cancún Ministerial Conference, Members had engaged intensively in efforts to build a package of specific commitments.  His delegation also recognized the particular importance of mode 4 for developing countries, as expressed by others at the meeting, and as expressed during meetings of the Council for Trade in Services.  His Government took developing countries' concerns over mode 4 seriously.  However, he also underlined the wider importance of mode 4 commitments for all Members, including developed Members.  Mode 4 commitments had been one of the important elements of the market access and national treatment package his Government was seeking in the current round of services negotiations.  Real progress in the services negotiations would depend on how well the participation of all Members was maximized, on how Members responded to deeply held interests in market access and rule-making, and how Members sought to build commitments that reflected the central role of services in all areas of their economies.  That was true for both developed and developing country Members.  In that regard, he said that his delegation remained somewhat disappointed that a number of developing countries, important in terms of world trade, had not submitted their offers, and his delegation encouraged them to do so.  However, his delegation also appreciated that a number of developing countries faced institutional constraints and acknowledged the amount of work required in producing an offer.  TA for developing countries was important.  His Government was therefore considering how it might support further capacity building in the services sector.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that her delegation wished to mark the fact that there had been growing participation of developing countries in the services negotiations in terms of the kind of interest, input, and hard work that had been involved in preparing first the road-map and then the negotiating guidelines, followed by the guidelines for autonomous liberalization.  That had helped all Members to better understand both the importance of the service sectors for individual economies and the interests of individual partners.  Members had also seen a large number of negotiating proposals being put forward by developing countries, covering a vast range of subjects and showing that many had begun to develop niche areas of expertise.  It was clear that the interests were as wide as there were developing countries.  She said that it was true that some developing countries still needed assistance to identify their areas of interest and to develop the supporting structures which could help them continue to grow.  Her delegation was interested in contributing with TA in that regard.  There were a number of services sectors which in themselves could help an economy to grow.  Services were not only individual products but were constitutive of a broader freedom to export other goods.  A large number of requests had been received from developing countries but she said that some of them had unfortunately arrived after her delegation had prepared its initial offer and had therefore not been taken into account at that stage.  However, that had been an initial offer and as the negotiations advanced there would be further time to discuss with partners about interests they had and interests that her delegation had in the negotiations.  Her delegation also noted that it continued to receive requests from individual developing countries and encouraged those who had not yet put in requests to do so.  The sooner her delegation received such requests, the more they could be taken into account.  She said that her delegation also wished to highlight that while there was a large number of offers from developing countries, there were still a number which were outstanding, particularly from larger developing countries which would not be expected to have much difficulty in assessing their own interests in the negotiations.  Her delegation would continue to work with partners to ensure that gains for all parties could be achieved in the negotiations.  Her delegation looked forward to conti what future interest in mind, developing countries should choose to liberalize certain sectors and not others.  The Secretariat had also mentioned mode 4.  However, many Members were not even aware of what the final goal was with mode 4.  More seminars had to be organized, either in Geneva or in the field, regarding the legal aspects of the services negotiations, which was a difficult area, particularly for African and LDC Members.  That would enhance those Members' understanding and assist them make use of the opportunities presented.
&& The representative of Canada said that her Government was involved in all aspects of the GATS negotiations, including those related to development.  Her Government believed that the market access negotiations for services were proceeding well.  Given the wide variety of requests made by both developed and developing countries it was clear that all Members had market access interests in the services negotiations.  Participation was critical to help create a balanced overall package and to advance the interests of all Members.  Her Government was committed to promoting and facilitating the participation of developing and least-developed countries in those negotiations and recognized the special economic situation and capacity difficulties faced by those members, especially in attempting to assess their own services economies in preparation for the bilateral negotiations.  In that regard, and as noted in the presentation, her Government had provided funding to the ITC to fund several phases of its assessment work in ten developing countries, including one LDC.  The ITC would work in those countries to identify services capacity and demand, and to identify services industry associations and companies.  She said that her delegation encouraged developing country Members, including LDCs, to contact the ITC and continued to encourage donor countries to consider funding similar projects in services.  Her delegation hoped that through that and similar exercises developing country Members, and LDCs in particular, would be able to more fully participate in the negotiations through the development of services requests and offers.
&& The representative of India said that many of the dimensions mentioned had to be viewed from the perspective of the overarching importance of GATS Article IV and the overriding objective of increasing participation of developing countries in world services trade.  One way to increase the participation of developing countries was through improved market-access commitments in areas of interest to them.  There were two aspects to that.  The first aspect was the articulation of that interest.  As had been mentioned by the Secretariat, there was improved articulation of developing country interests.  However, there were still a large number of Members, including LDCs, who had not been able to finalize their requests.  In spite of the improved articulation of specific requests in sectors and modes of importance to developing countries, there was thus still a gap to be filled.  The second aspect was the responses to the requests that had been made by developing countries and the reflection in the various initial offers of the requests that had been made.  Particular reference had been made to mode 4 and it was well known that it was one of areas identified by developing countries as an area of comparative advantage which they wished to see reflected in the offers.  One way of considering the development dimension would be to view the offers in terms of the requests made by developing countries, not only in mode 4, but also in other sectors and modes where specific interests had been articulated.
&& The representative of Australia said that his delegation agreed that, since the Doha Ministerial Conference, Members had worked hard to put in place the architecture for the services negotiations to proceed smoothly, including the development of the services negotiating guidelines and the agreements reached on modalities for autonomous liberalization and the modalities for the special treatment of developing countries.  He said that it was useful to recall that the architecture was in place for the services negotiations, and there was no need to develop new negotiating modalities or frameworks as calnue the negotiations.  Some technical work would be carried out the following week, and her delegation also looked forward to the contribution that that could make to the negotiations.
&& The representative of Panama said that a large part of Panama's GDP was generated by services.  Her delegation welcomed the gesture by the Government of Canada to provide TA.  That TA was useful for her Government as it involved a study of the influence of the services sector in Panama.  That would help her Government design its development policies to better take advantage of the possibilities of the services sector.  Her delegation therefore urged other Members to contribute more in terms of the offers they made.  That could assist developing countries to take better advantage of their services sectors as it had been shown that the services sector could make an important contribution to the development of developing countries.
&& The representative of Colombia said that developing countries to a large extent had liberalized their services.  They had taken measures for autonomous liberalisation in the framework of structural strategic programmes.  She highlighted the flexibility provided in paragraph 3 of Article XIX of the GATS and the need to seek appropriate mechanisms to implement GATS Article IV.  Ways and means to improve implementation had to be sought, particularly to facilitate the participation of developing countries through specific commitments negotiated in terms of sectors and modes of interest to developing countries' exports.  She said that it was fundamental to bear the concrete interests expressed in the negotiating process as well as in the requests in mind in the preparation of offers.  She also said that it was important to move discussions forward in the multilateral framework on horizontal issues such as classification, national regulations and disciplines, which apart from being fundamental, ensured the appropriate balance in the negotiations on services.  
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that the Secretariat had stated that the negotiating architecture had been completed as guidelines and modalities had been agreed.  What Members had done was to set the broad parameters.  The results ultimately depended on bilateral negotiations in the context of requests and offers.  Modalities had for example been agreed for special treatment of the LDCs in the services negotiations.  However, developmental goals would only be achieved by giving developing countries access in sectors and modes of supply of export interest to them.  The movement of natural persons under mode 4 had a large potential in that respect and his delegation hoped that there would be significant movement in that area in the days to come.
&& The Chairman asked Members on what subject they wished to hear a presentation at the following meeting.
&& The representative of Mexico suggested that, at its next meeting, the Committee consider the developmental aspects of the Dispute Settlement Negotiations which was an important part of the negotiations in the WTO.  He said that, although at present the negotiations were not going far, there were salient elements involved in the area of dispute settlement that were vital to developing countries.  
&& The Committee took note of the presentation and the statements made and agreed to invite a presentation on the developmental aspects of the dispute settlement negotiations at its next meeting.

ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the last meeting, he had referred to the "Regional High-level Conference for Africa on Electronic Commerce Strategies for Development:  Promoting an International Dialogue" which had led to the adoption of the "Tunis Declaration on Electronic Commerce for Development".  That declaration was available in the room in English and French.  He reminded Members that a preparatory process was ongoing for the World Summit on the Information Society which would be held in Geneva on 10-12 December 2003, and the second phase which would be held in Tunis on 16-18 November 2005.  A draft Declaration of Principles and a draft Plan of Action were being prepared for adoption in Geneva in December 2003.  Those documents related to a common vision of an information society based on the application of information and communication technologies for development.  He said that other conferences, similar to the regional African conference, but on a global level, might take place in the future.  The Committee could examine the possibility of getting involved in those issues.  One of the theme-specific sessions to be held was on electronic commerce and trade.  The WTO and the CTD could play a role on that particular topic.  In Paragraph 44 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration Ministers had instructed the General Council to consider the most appropriate institutional arrangements for handling the Work Programme, and to report on further progress to the Fifth Session of the Ministerial Conference.  From the report that the CTD had prepared in response to that request, and which had been circulated as WT/COMTD/47, it was clear that Members had not made any recent specific proposal for any further work on electronic commerce.  There had not been any interventions on the item at the last meeting.  He therefore asked if Members had any suggestions for how the Committee should continue its work on electronic commerce.
There were no interventions on this item.

TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2004  (WT/COMTD/W/119/Rev.1)
&& The Chairman said that, at the last meeting of the Committee, Members had requested the Secretariat to revise the draft Technical Assistance and Training Plan for 2004 keeping in mind the comments made by Members, and in consultation with the Members.  The revised version had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/119/Rev.1 (the revised draft 2004 TA Plan).  
&& The Secretariat said that it wished to briefly inform Members of the work it had undertaken since the last meeting of the Committee.  Following the discussions in the Committee, a series of informal consultations had been conducted with beneficiaries and donors, sometimes jointly, as well as with regional groups, to discuss in detail the draft 2004 TA Plan and the possible amendments and additions to be made to it.  Based on the inputs obtained, the draft 2004 TA Plan had been revised and circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/119/Rev.1, dated 14 November 2003.  The Secretariat proceeded to summarize the main changes contained in the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  The introduction had been strengthened to be more explicit on development issues and on the priority to be given to the LDCs.  That was also reflected in Chapter II, under the "Key Features of the Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2004", which contained a new (third) bullet on the development dimension.  The Secretariat had also added a series of regional seminars to cover the development dimension in the Annex to the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  Every effort would be made to ensure that TA activities for the LDCs were appropriately integrated with the Integrated Framework (IF) and with the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme for Selected Least-Developed and Other African Countries (JITAP), which provided the broader context of TA to LDCs.  On the issue of needs-assessment, the text had been made more explicit and included a proposal on how to carry the process forward.  It was first and foremost the responsibility of developing countries to identify their needs and to formulate their requests for TA accordingly.  Beneficiaries could be assisted by the Secretariat and by outside experts.  Such needs-assessment would relate both to the implementation of existing WTO agreements, as well as to the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) negotiations.  The Secretariat could offer its support to developing countries that required assistance in conducting needs-assessments with regard to WTO‑related TA and training.
Following suggestions by Members, the IF and JITAP had been moved from the heading "Products", to the part of the 2004 TA Plan dealing with "Partnerships".  IF missions which were assimilated to national activities, would be funded from the regular budget.  The Secretariat had strengthened the information on the selection process of candidates for training courses and the testing of their knowledge.  The revised draft 2004 TA Plan stated more clearly that the treatment of the Singapore issues would depend on decisions to be taken by the Members, as well as on the relevant discussions in the groups covering those areas.  In practice that meant that the Members and the Secretariat might have to review the 2004 TA Plan at a future occasion in light of the outcome of those meetings.  There was more detailed information on choosing the venue for regional seminars, which related to the question of geographical balance, as well as on the process of holding national seminars.  The Secretariat said that it was worth stressing, in relation to national activities, that what had changed was the time frame for requesting such activities.  It was no longer a single moment, but it was possible for Members to request such activities over the full duration of the yearly programme.  Requests made to the Secretariat for national activities would also be considered in light of relevant IF and JITAP strategies and programmes, as well as in light of other information available on individual country needs, including from Trade Policy Reviews and through the work of regular WTO Committees.  Those sources would constitute a form of needs-assessment.  The relevant paragraphs on "Outsourcing" had been strengthened and so had the paragraphs on "Trade Policy Clinics".  The revised draft 2004 TA Plan was more explicit on the question of "Monitoring and Evaluation" and on how relevant information was channelled back into the design of TA programmes.  In addition, Members had been provided with a new conference room document (Job(03)/211) which contained the revised financial data and information concerning the total costing of the draft 2004 TA Plan.  The Secretariat repeated that the budget for the revised draft 2004 TA Plan was not greater than the budget foreseen for the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan.
&& The Secretariat went on to say that the discussions held with Members had been constructive and helpful in revising the draft 2004 TA Plan.  Those discussions had revealed, however, that a number of issues raised were more of a policy nature.  They could not have been adequately addressed, still less resolved, in the five or six weeks that the Secretariat had had since the last meeting.  That was also generally recognized.  At the same time, the Secretariat was convinced that all Members agreed that it was in the best interest of the beneficiaries to proceed with the implementation of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan without further delay, and ensure that it got under way from the very beginning of 2004.  Therefore, in order to proceed with the preparation and implementation of the activities contained in the revised draft 2004 TA Plan, without, however, ignoring the suggestions made for consideration of issues requiring more reflection, the Secretariat proposed to pursue a process of consultations with beneficiaries and donors on those issues, a process which would be conducted independently of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  In addition, a timetable could be set for addressing some of the issues, including the studies to be conducted etc.  However, the Secretariat suggested that such time frames had to be agreed in the process of consultations with Members.  The issues to be addressed could include:
Consideration of a process for conducting country-by-country needs-assessments;
How the LDCs could be better and more fully associated with the TA activities;
Monitoring and evaluation, including considering the possibility of conducting an external evaluation and establishing the terms of reference for such a process;
As part of monitoring and evaluation of TA activities undertaken, a further review of how to undertake periodic assessments and how to report to Members, including through the quarterly reports;
How best to exploit partnerships with other organizations, which could be addressed in relation to outsourcing;
The strategic dimension of academic partnerships and the potential for long term capacity building;  and
Issues relating to funding and access to the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF).

That list captured the issues that Members had signalled as being of interest to them.  There would have to be agreement on priorities, i.e. in what order to address them.  The Committee, in the course of next year, could revert to them, e.g. in a mid-term review.  It might also be necessary to address some aspects of the 2004 TA Plan in light of the outcome of the senior officials meeting, scheduled for Mid‑December and more generally in light of the ongoing work by Members in the context of the negotiations.  The value of regular informal consultations with Members had been well demonstrated in the process of preparing the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.
&& The Chairman said that Members should keep in mind that the Committee needed to agree to the implementation of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan in order to allow the Secretariat to begin to prepare its implementation so that activities could be delivered from the very beginning of 2004.
&& The representative of Mauritania, speaking on behalf of the African Group, stressed the importance of TA for the African continent, and its benefits to development within the framework of the Doha Development Agenda.  More than ever, Africa was in need of such WTO programmes, and he said that he wished to take the opportunity to express the appreciation of the African Group to the donors who, through their generous contributions, had supported TA activities in Africa.  It had to be recognized that the elaboration of a TA Plan of that scope, in the context of the dynamic process created by the multilateral trading system, represented a major challenge.  Every analysis of that TA Plan had to be based on the decisions taken within the framework of the DDA.  In that vein, paragraph 38 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration should be highlighted as it confirmed that TA and capacity-building were the core elements of the development dimension of the multilateral trading system.  At the previous meeting of the Committee, members of the African Group had expressed their views, concerns and priorities with respect to the draft 2004 TA Plan.  After its members carefully had studied the revised draft 2004 TA Plan the previous day, the African Group had generally felt satisfied with the new components, particularly those relating to the consideration of the specific needs of the LDCs, as the majority of African countries were in the LDC category of countries.  The African Group had also welcomed the introduction of initiatives such as the trade policy clinics and distance learning, innovations which would give renewed impetus to TA and training.  The African Group also welcomed the clarifications and detailed information provided on needs-assessment and selection of beneficiaries of the various activities, in particular, the Geneva-based and regional trade policy courses.  It was also pleased to note that the JITAP and the IF had been incorporated in another part of the 2004 TA Plan since they represented mechanisms rather than products.
However, some concerns and reservations remained for the African Group with respect to certain sections of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan, as the latest version of the document did not provide clear answers to all the questions raised during the last meeting of the Committee.  First, the revised draft 2004 TA Plan did not explain the rationale for the change in methodology by the Secretariat.  If there had been defects, it would be useful to bring them to light in order to learn from past experience.  Second, the new mechanism suffered from a lack of transparency, while the Director-General's view of TA was precisely based on the concept of cooperation at all levels with beneficiary Members, and on transparency.  Third, with regard to national activities (paragraphs 38 to 43), the African Group welcomed the fact that the new version gave a clearer idea of the number of activities (250) to be carried out in 2004 and of their geographical distribution.  The African Group did still not believe, however, that that new approach provided any guarantees on objectivity in the approval of activities, or on the principle of transparency.  The African Group was in favour of the principle of flexibility which allowed the approved programme to be tailored to the needs of beneficiaries.  As a result, it allowed their needs to evolve in such a way that they would not be bound by programmes which were no longer of interest to them.  Moreover, such flexibility would facilitate the review of topics according to their level of urgency, and requests to be made by beneficiaries according to the manner in which negotiations developed.  Nevertheless, the new approach did not provide sufficient clarity over time, particularly given the complementarity between national and regional activities.  Fourth, the African Group regretted that the trade policy course for French-speaking African countries, which had been planned for 2003, had not taken place.  The African Group therefore urged the Secretariat to consult with the Permanent Mission of Morocco in order to ensure that all the conditions necessary for holding the 2004 course would be met.  Fifth, monitoring and evaluation of the various programmes and projects were important TA elements.  For its part, the African Group believed that the revised draft 2004 TA Plan devoted a substantial amount of attention to that aspect.  However, monitoring and evaluation should not impose additional burdens on beneficiary countries.  Sixth, on the subject of trade policy clinics (paragraph 44), the African Group appreciated the value of that innovation.  Nevertheless, the Group asked the Secretariat to include in that paragraph the necessity to also use African consultants.  That would help to build up technical capacity in African countries.  Furthermore, the African Group believed that the funding for such activities should be found from other sources.  Seventh, the trade policy course for senior government officials (paragraph 46) might be an unnecessary activity since in Africa those officials were often the trade policy decision makers themselves and were already familiar with the focus and goals of the Doha Development Round.  Eight, as far as the support programme for doctoral studies was concerned (paragraph 67(iii)), the African Group invited the Secretariat to determine the criteria for the selection of candidates, and to give that subject broad publicity, stressing the principle of equitable geographic rotation.  The African Group had noted that the revised draft 2004 TA Plan intended to offer six scholarships, and asked on what basis the scholarships had been or would be granted and from which Members the beneficiaries would come.  Ninth, regarding the participation of the Secretariat in international conferences, meetings and workshops (paragraph 87), he said that the African Group did not believe that that activity should be considered TA and that it did not fit in with paragraph 11 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  Participation in conferences and other meetings were routine functions of the Secretariat and did not constitute TA.  The costs for such attendance should therefore not affect the TA budget.  The African Group requested the Secretariat to provide clarification on those observations and hoped that all the concerns expressed would be taken into account.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the process of consultations had proven to work well.  That was something his delegation wished to see continued in the future.  He said that his delegation particularly welcomed what had been said regarding needs-assessments and the priorities of LDCs.  Regarding the needs-assessments, his delegation not only appreciated the efforts the Secretariat might undertake but also the fact that the primary responsibility for needs-assessments lay with the developing countries themselves.  It was nevertheless good to know that the Secretariat would be ready to assist those Members that requested assistance.  There were also other donors and international institutions that might be able to assist in that regard.  He said that his delegation appreciated having the new cost estimates for the revised 2004 TA Plan.  However, he suggested that it might be useful, in the future, to align the text of the TA Plan, the table and the presentation of the financial implications in a more detailed way and to provide Members with a cost estimate per product.  That was something that could be discussed in the informal consultations to be held over the coming year.  It was also important to raise the issue of prioritization of TA for non-LDCs.  The offer of WTO TA was limited as was the capacity of the Secretariat to deliver it, and there were different priorities and different priority needs among the non-LDC Members.  An issue that had not been mentioned was that of outreach activities.  He suggested that it be added to the list of policy issues mentioned by the Secretariat as issues to be taken up during future informal consultations.  He said that his delegation particularly welcomed the proposal that the implementation of the 2004 TA plan would be carried out with a parallel process of informal consultations.  In addition, his delegation appreciated the objective of setting a time-table at one of the first informal meetings at the beginning of 2004 to set the priorities and to agree on the issues to be addressed during those informal consultations.  The idea of a mid-term review was a good initiative.  It was important not only to review the informal consultation process but also to review the implementation of the 2004 TA Plan, possible decisions that might be taken in the negotiations and the implications for the implementation of the 2004 TA Plan later in 2004.  His delegation therefore suggested that the stocktaking/mid-term review be held not too late in 2004, as it might then lose its usefulness as an instrument for the consideration of the 2005 TA Plan.  He therefore suggested that the mid-term review might be held in May 2004.
&& The representative of Morocco said that his delegation endorsed the statement made by the representative of Mauritania on behalf of the African Group.  He would therefore not speak about the issues mentioned by him.  His delegation was pleased to have had a working session with the Secretariat at which the revised draft 2004 TA Plan as well as the training courses had been discussed.  His delegation had then intended to show flexibility.  However, certain last-minute events and adjustments had foiled that intention and constrained his delegation to review its position as it was not possible to hold transparent discussions if people said one thing and did another.  That was why his delegation wished to make some remarks.  He said that he would first remind the Committee of some facts and then make conclusions regarding the regional trade policy course which had been scheduled to be held in Morocco.  There were four elements to the reminder.  First, the regional trade policy course scheduled to be held in Morocco in 2003 had been deferred by the Secretariat by a unilateral decision and without consulting the Moroccan authorities or the Moroccan mission in Geneva.  Second, the reason for the postponement was not acceptable to his Government.  It was not at all the fault of the Moroccan authorities.  The reason for the postponement was a disagreement between the Secretariat and the Moroccan academic partner.  Third, that academic partner in Morocco had not been chosen by the Government of Morocco.  The academic partner that the Government of Morocco had proposed upon the request by the Secretariat had been rejected by the Secretariat.  It was following a Secretariat mission to Morocco that the Secretariat itself had chosen its academic partner.  There had unfortunately been some disagreements between that academic institution and the Secretariat two months later and the Secretariat had then, in a discretionary manner, taken the decision to postpone the course.  Following that decision, his Government and his delegation had done all it could to encourage the Secretariat to review its decision by proposing to resolve the problem with the academic partner or to find a new academic partner.  The reply/response by the Secretariat had been a clear no, and the Secretariat had not used the good offices offered by the Moroccan delegation.  The fourth element of the reminder was a letter to the Moroccan authorities in which the Secretariat stated that the regional trade policy course for Francophone African countries would be held in Morocco, but at a date which the Secretariat would communicate to the Moroccan authorities at a later date.
He said that he would continue to speak about the true facts.  The first fact was that the Government of Morocco had not, at any time, been informed about the decision not to hold the regional trade policy course in Morocco.  Since the letter it had received in April 2003 there had been a complete silence between the Secretariat and the Moroccan Mission for several months, as if the Mission of Morocco did not exist.  The Secretariat had in parallel engaged in a process of searching for other hosts to the regional trade policy course for Francophone African countries.  The second fact was that the Secretariat had taken the initiative to provoke candidates, apart from Morocco, to host the regional trade policy course for Francophone African countries, and without any official announcement.  The Secretariat could not, on its own, decide that a regional trade policy course could not be held in Morocco.  Such a decision required the Secretariat to inform all Members and to announce that it was searching for new hosts.  That would give all Members the chance to propose themselves as possible hosts, but that procedure had unfortunately not been followed.  The Secretariat had instead secretly contacted some Members by letters, telephone and in other ways provoked other Members to present their candidature against that of Morocco, while the Moroccan Government was awaiting the announcement of a new date from the Secretariat.  
The third fact was that the Secretariat had announced that it had three candidates to host the regional trade policy course for Francophone African countries:  Mauritius, Senegal and Burkina Faso.  The Government of Morocco had never officially been informed about that at any stage.  However, it had heard from others that the Secretariat claimed to have three candidates.  A meeting of the African Group had fortunately been held the previous day at which the Secretariat had been present.  The Secretariat had then confirmed that it had three candidates to host the regional trade policy course for Francophone African countries.  However, when the African Group had met alone, without the presence of the Secretariat, there had been some surprises.  The representative of Mauritius had denied having presented any candidature.  The reasons were first that the Government of Mauritius had not, at any time, been approached by the Secretariat or had officially announced its candidature.  The second reason was that the Government of Mauritius actually benefited from the regional trade policy course for English-speaking countries held in Kenya.  The third reason was that the educational university system in Mauritius was in English.  He said that he was surprised by the Secretariat's lack of knowledge of the educational systems in the Member countries which had led it to present fantasy candidates.  With respect to the candidature of Senegal he said that the Government of Senegal had told the Government of Morocco that it never had proposed itself as a candidate.  What had happened was that the Government of Senegal had been officially approached by the Secretariat to present its candidature which the Government of Senegal had declined.  It was unfortunate that the Secretariat approached some members secretly to ask them to stand up as candidates against other members.  He said that he had no information with respect to the candidature of the Government of Burkina Faso.  However, he left it to the Members and the Secretariat to compare the infrastructures of Morocco and Burkina Faso.  The last element was the candidature of Morocco.  He said that his Minister had sent a letter to the Director-General on 24 November 2003 in which he had reminded the Secretariat of its promise to inform the Government of Morocco of the new dates it had chosen for the regional trade policy course for Francophone African countries to be held in Morocco, and in which he expressed his willingness to ensure that that course could be held in Morocco as envisaged, with the necessary guarantees.  In order to avoid the errors committed and in order not to deprive the Francophone African countries of a regional trade policy course, the Minister had proposed to personally head an inter-ministerial commission.  That Commission would resolve any problems related to the regional trade policy course and would ensure that the Secretariat was not left alone with an academic partner institution with which it might be difficult to resolve problems in light of antagonisms or incomprehension.
He went on to speak about the conclusions which he said were sad.  The Government of Morocco had noted with bitterness that it had been the victim of a systematic denigration campaign orchestrated by the Secretariat regarding its capacity to organize a training course.  He asked all Members if the country that had organized the Marrakech Ministerial Conference would not be able to organize a training course, and he said that he left it to each Member to respond for themselves.  The Secretariat had to date not explained why it wished to change the venue for the regional trade policy course for Francophone African countries.  The Secretariat had never explained what it had against Morocco, neither had it stated any failure by the Government of Morocco to live up to its engagements for the successful holding of the course.  He challenged the Secretariat to state at least one mistake by the Moroccan authorities which had prompted it to choose another venue.  He said that he assured Members that his Government would then assume the responsibility for any mistake, if it existed.  The Secretariat had presented its call for other candidates as if it was an absolute right of the Secretariat and something normal.  If the courses were to change the venue annually, it should be the same for all courses.  He therefore asked if the Secretariat had initiated contacts with other partners to host the regional trade policy course for Anglophone African countries.  The course held in Kenya had been a success, but the Secretariat could of course decide to change its venue.
He further said that the second conclusion was that the Secretariat had acted in a way which interfered with national matters.  Instead of being the federator of a theme in which African Governments were interested, the Secretariat had set one Government off against another and had created friction.  The Secretariat had thereby politicized a question which originally was of a technical nature, on which ministers had decided, and which rather should help Members unite.  TA was somewhat of a bridge between the donor countries and the beneficiary countries.  The Secretariat should be the conductor of the most beautiful symphonies of TA and enhanced capacity.  Rather, the Secretariat had managed to provoke antagonism among Members and distracted their attention.  He said that he would have preferred not to have to make this intervention.  He would have preferred to make a couple of observations and then state that his delegation was satisfied.  However, the way in which the Secretariat had attacked his Government had obliged him, upon the instruction of his Government, to reveal the truth in order for the Committee to be informed about what really happened.  The information the Secretariat was circulating was apparently not correct, as had been shown by the claimed candidature of the Governments of Mauritius and Senegal for example.
He said that his third conclusion was that the Government of Morocco did not have anything against any other candidate.  It would be happy to enter into competition with any other African Francophone country as long as the candidates had proposed themselves spontaneously, would be examined in a transparent manner, and provided that the choice was based on the infrastructure and academic capacities of each candidate and not on the discretionary choice of one person or the Secretariat.  His Government claimed the right to be part of any transparent competition, not decisions behind the scenes in the Secretariat.
His last observation was addressed to the donor countries.  He said that they had a responsibility as the management of the regional trade policy courses was not the property of the Secretariat.  It was something that had to be co-managed by the Secretariat and the donors.  The donors should not have to pay when the Secretariat committed mistakes.  If a Member committed a mistake it had to answer for it.  The Secretariat also had to be responsible for its actions.  In order to avoid that similar mistakes were reproduced in the future, donors had to be more closely involved in order to ensure that there was transparency and equity in the implementation of TA activities and that the Secretariat respected the rules.  The Secretariat would otherwise risk taking the Members in an unwanted direction, such as the present situation.  What had happened was an example of the opaque system, completely lacking transparency, which unfortunately existed within the Secretariat.  His delegation hoped that the Secretariat would be brave enough and would have the intellectual honesty to learn from what had happened in order to avoid that it reproduced itself in the future.  He said that his last wish was that the message from the African Group as well as the concerns expressed by his delegation would be faithfully and factually transmitted to the Director-General.  His delegation suspected the Secretariat of not informing the Director-General of the seriousness of certain situations.  His delegation also suspected the Secretariat of not being honest in the way it reported on the debates in the Committee and of transmitting disinformation to the Director-General.  His delegation therefore appealed to donors to engage.  He said that his Government was ready to accept the verdict.  His delegation demanded the involvement of the Director-General in order to stop the catastrophe.  Finally, he said that his delegation was not in a position to adopt the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation could go along with the revised 2004 TA Plan.  Nevertheless, his delegation had one comment regarding future planning which related to evaluation and monitoring.  As mentioned before, his Government considered monitoring and evaluation as important in terms of implementing effective TA.  His delegation therefore appreciated the more detailed description of that part in the revised 2004 TA Plan.  His delegation also welcomed the suggestion by the Secretariat that the effectiveness of monitoring and evaluation systems should be discussed at future follow-up meetings.  His delegation was interested in studying the possibility of having external evaluations.  As his delegation was fully aware of the budgetary limitations of the WTO TA programme, it requested the Secretariat to study how to introduce an external evaluation and estimate the costs of its introduction.  Based on that assessment, Members had to discuss how much money they should spend on monitoring and evaluation in order to keep the whole programme effective and efficient, and consequently, how many programmes Members would have to deduct in order to introduce external evaluation.  He said that his delegation looked forward to discussing that issue with all other delegations at a future follow-up meeting.
&& The representative of Rwanda said that his delegation had read the revised 2004 TA Plan with satisfaction and was in favour of its adoption.  His delegation endorsed the statement made by the representative of  Mauritania on behalf of the African Group.  He commended the changes made to the revised draft 2004 TA Plan which, as far as possible, took into account the recommendations made by Members at the previous session of the CTD.  His delegation welcomed the fact that development issues and criteria for evaluation according to predetermined indicators had been included among the priorities of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  Priority was given to LDCs, in particular by helping them, via the IF, to mainstream trade more effectively into their national development and poverty reduction plans by boosting trade and growth.  It was urgent to extend the IF programme to applicant LDCs which met all the selection criteria.  The revised draft 2004 TA Plan featured specific characteristics relating inter alia to quality, development and regional balance, and above all flexibility that enabled Members to apply for TA at any moment in time.  That new approach was both innovative and useful, the more so since TA needs might rank differently depending on progress in the negotiations or on when a need was actually identified.  The products proposed were designed to suitably enhance institutional and human capacity in the beneficiary countries.  His delegation noted, moreover, that the Secretariat had given due prominence to the strengthening of strategic partnerships with the beneficiaries, on the one hand, and the donor community and the other regional and international training institutions, on the other, in order to optimize expertise.  As concerned the issue of partnership with the academic community for regional courses, his delegation deplored the fact that the course for French-speaking African countries had not yet taken place.  He urged the Secretariat to make swift contacts in order to resolve that matter without delay.  The selection of the venue for such courses should be based on objective criteria aimed at maximizing the interests of the beneficiaries.  In conclusion, he said that his delegation recommended that the CTD adopted the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  It was essential that assistance be available as of early 2004.  Any delay would obviously hamper the Plan's speedy implementation.
&& The representative of India said that he acknowledged the diligent process of consultations undertaken by the Secretariat in the past weeks after the first round of discussions in October 2003.  However, his delegation had unfortunately been unable to attend some of those sessions.  He said that there were some issues in the revised draft 2004 TA Plan that had to be reconsidered.  That most of all concerned the section on "Outreach Programme for Parliaments and Civil Society" contained in paragraphs 83-86.  His delegation was not convinced that outreach activities belonged to a TA Plan.  If such activities should be undertaken at all under the TA Plan, they might be considered under the national activities, if Members made specific requests for such activities.  However, there was otherwise no justification for a component of outreach activities in the TA Plan.  In terms of the mechanics of the outreach activities, there was a need for close involvement of the Member Governments and the Geneva-based missions in the practical conduct of such activities in order to organise the logistics better and avoid any misunderstandings.  Paragraph 80 related to TA within the Trade Policy Review Mechanism (TPRM).  The language used in that paragraph needed to be tightened to conform with the agreed language of the purpose of the TPRM.  There should be no departure from that language.  His delegation noted the statement made by the representative of Morocco.  The issue of transparency was an important one and a key prerequisite for the delivery of the TA Plan.  The CTD should therefore consider how transparency with respect to the WTO TA Plans could be further strengthened.
&& The representative of Senegal said that his delegation associated itself with the statement made by the representative of Mauritania on behalf of the African Group.  The draft 2004 TA Plan would enable African countries to attain substantive training objectives.  With respect to the regional trade policy courses he said that he wished to make an official clarification on behalf of his Government.  His Government had never taken any initiative to ask to host the regional trade policy course for French-speaking African countries.  His Government had not made any official request to that effect.  His Government was interested in seeing that the course was held as soon as possible as it realized how important those courses were in enabling African trade officials to acquire the necessary expertise in order to effectively defend African interests in general, and the interests of their particular Governments within the framework of the multilateral trade negotiations.  In keeping with its tradition, his Government wished to see a solution for the holding of the regional trade policy course for African Francophone countries which would preserve the unity and solidarity of the African Group.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that the revised draft 2004 TA Plan was an improvement over the first draft and that several issues had been clarified.  His delegation had commented on the first draft of the 2004 TA Plan at the October 2003 meeting of the CTD and at an informal meeting held in mid-November 2003.  He hoped that his delegation's earlier comments had been duly noted.  He would therefore not repeat all of them.  However, he would raise two closely interlinked points.  First, he emphasised that needs-assessments was an essential element of WTO TA.  Paragraph 9 stated that "The Secretariat has, however, never been requested to undertake country by country needs-assessment."  That was true, as was the fact that such an undertaking would be resource intensive, but there was internal WTO know-how which came from the Trade Policy Reviews etc.  He said that his delegation therefore wished to invite the Secretariat to put further thinking into that matter and to work out how needs better could analysed and be taken into consideration in the future.  Second, his delegation welcomed the flexibility that had been introduced into the national activities by allowing for requests at any time.  Nevertheless, there was also a risk that ad hoc activities would be requested without real justifications.  Paragraph 40 of the revised 2004 TA Plan stated that "It is the responsibility of the beneficiary country making a request to ensure that this request reflects a national priority."  However, the Secretariat had to be able to evaluate the justification for such requests.  His delegation was prepared to go along with the proposal by the Secretariat to proceed with the implementation at the 2004 TA Plan as presented in the revised document and to continue discussions and reflection separately.
&& The representative of Thailand said that her delegation welcomed the revised draft 2004 TA Plan and the flexibility introduced for national activities.  However, it was not clear how the Secretariat could ensure transparency with respect to both national and regional activities and she asked the Secretariat to shed more light on that.  Her delegation had on previous occasions stated that it was interested in the issue of partnerships.  She therefore requested information on the criteria and procedures for the selection of partners.  Like the delegation of India, she said that her delegation also noted the statement made by the representative of Morocco, in particular with respect to transparency.  Her delegation also supported what had been said by the representative of India on the "Outreach Programme for Parliaments and Civil Society".  That should not automatically be part of the 2004 TA Plan, but should only be included upon specific requests made by Members for such activities.
&& The representative of Canada requested that the introductory comments made by the Secretariat be circulated to Members in writing.  She said that her delegation fully supported the suggestion for a parallel process of consultations which would cover many of the areas which delegations had raised during the informal consultations already held.  That parallel process should commence quickly.  She suggested that in that process it might be possible to tackle the questions of transparency, selection criteria for institutions and other points mentioned by the representative of Mauritania on behalf of the African Group and by the representative of Morocco, supported by the representative of India and others.  She said that her delegation supported the inclusion of the "Outreach Programme for Parliaments and Civil Society" in the 2004 TA Plan.  While other delegations  might  not consider them as capacity building activities, her delegation believed that they constituted and important element of capacity building.  Her delegation would nevertheless defer to the developing countries in that regard since it was more of their concern than that of her Government.  Given that funds were required, it was important for the Director-General to provide donors with a letter in which he identified the additional funding required, highlighting updates of what was currently available and what was needed.  Such information would be useful for Members in order for them to provide funding.
&& The representative of Australia said that her delegation had heard a number of recurring themes during the discussions, not only in relation to the revised draft 2004 TA Plan, but also in relation to previous TA plans.  The Secretariat had outlined those themes and the representative of Canada had summarized some other themes that might be included in future consultations.  There was a genuine need to keep all of those issues under consideration.  Further informal discussions should be held on them as Members moved forward with the implementation of the 2004 TA Plan.  Some of the specific requests made by her delegation at the last meeting, in particular the inclusion of programmes targeting the Pacific region, had been included in the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  There were also some interesting inclusions in the section on "Monitoring and Evaluation".  It was important to state who would be setting out the objectives and how they would be set out in order to set the foundation for proper follow-up and evaluation.  Her delegation, like others, was interested in keeping the idea of an external evaluation under serious consideration.  The idea of a mid-term review was also a timely one.  Her delegation noted that the paragraph on outsourcing had been strengthened, but it was an issue her delegation wished to keep under future consideration.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation accepted the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  It was a marked improvement over the first draft.  Her delegation also welcomed the Secretariat's willingness to have a parallel process of consultations and she supported the suggestion that that process should begin soon.  While the revised draft 2004 TA Plan was good, there were some longstanding policy issues which remained unresolved which had been on her delegation's mind as Members had gone through the process of coming up with a TA Plan for 2003.  Her delegation would welcome an opportunity to work with others, both donors and recipients, to address some of those issues.  First, her delegation wished to have more discussion on and greater clarity with respect to how the evaluation process would work, as well as on the question of whether a needs-assessment had been carried out before a training programme was designed, or how the success of a programme was monitored.  Her delegation welcomed the references in the revised draft 2004 TA Plan to examining existing resources to facilitate needs-assessments, including by WTO Committees.  That would fill an intelligence gap, particularly the work done by the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade which had focussed on TA in the review of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT).  In addition, her delegation welcomed the additional paragraphs on monitoring and evaluation in the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  That showed that assessment was a major focus of the Secretariat, and that was appropriate.  However, her delegation sought further details regarding the strategies that the Secretariat would employ in practice.  That involved more detail on how the Secretariat might attempt to leverage tools already in place, such as the WTO's Technical Assistance Evaluation Briefing Kit, or adopt methods for evaluation established in the development field, including the use of performance indicators, objective testing, interviews, and focus groups.  Her delegation would also appreciate more details, in the course of the consultations, on how the outsourcing process would work as her delegation was concerned, that procurement rules restricted some Member Governments from giving any contractor the approval or imprimatur without a competitive process, simply because there was no way of guarding against nepotism and mischief.  Therefore, it would be hard for Members to pick the best "TA providers" without a major competition process.  In addition, the recruitment letter distributed to Members by the Secretariat for selection needed more clarity.  The particular concern of her delegation related to the SPS and TBT fields where there was a distinct difference between the use of the term "standards" and the regulation and the regulatory processes which were governed by those Agreements.
She went on to say that her delegation had continued to raise questions about how the Trade Clinics would operate, and had understood that it was an evolving process.  However, the description that the Secretariat had used over the course of 2003 had varied in terms of where the priority would be given.  Members had on the one hand heard that it would be on countries emerging from a catastrophic situation, and on the other hand on helping Members with their services offers.  Those were two different kinds of assistance.  Her delegation would therefore welcome a dialogue on that issue.  She said that her delegation welcomed the Secretariat's attempt to be more flexible in the provision of national TA and training activities as well as the Secretariat's plan for national activities to be channelled through official representatives in Geneva.  That would help to ensure accountability in the myriad of requests coming from a variety of actors.  Her delegation therefore hoped that the Secretariat was mindful that conducting that TA, and maintaining a database to keep track of requests, would take effort, resources and much planning.  It had to be ensured that the dialogue that would be undertaken would also take place with other multilateral institutions in order to ensure that the envisioned system would work and the Secretariat should explore with others how they could fill in the gaps in training.  She said that her delegation welcomed the points raised by the representative of the European Communities on ongoing deliberations that the Secretariat was willing to pursue, and said that her delegation remained committed to that process.  Nevertheless, government officials had a responsibility for due diligence to ensure that the money they were granting through the WTO for TA purposes were well spent and was kept under active review.
&& The representative of Cuba said that her delegation understood that the 2004 TA Plan, under the new approach, would be open to improvement and adjustment, taking into account the evaluation, in particular by beneficiary Members, of the efficiency of the innovative products on offer.  Her delegation wished for the issues and modalities of priority interest to African and least-developed countries to be taken into consideration in the adjustment process.  Her delegation had, at the previous meeting of the CTD, expressed its desire to see the new development-related issues, such as technology transfer and the relationship between trade, debt and finance, included in the 2004 TA Plan.  Furthermore, her delegation wished to ensure that the modalities for offering TA would be adjusted according to their contribution to Members capacity.  A more in-depth review of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan had drawn her delegation's attention to some activities which broadened the spectrum of beneficiaries of TA.  In that respect, she shared the concern expressed by the delegations of India and Singapore with regard to the outreach activities and considered that, given that the WTO's resources were limited in relation to the demand for TA, assistance should be geared towards institutions which were directly involved in trade negotiations and the process of legislative transformation, as well as in the trade decision-making process.  Her delegation also believed that the 2004 TA Plan should be reconsidered during periodic evaluations in 2004.
&& The representative of Venezuela said that her delegation endorsed the revised draft 2004 TA Plan and the suggestion to proceed with its implementation as soon as possible.  Her delegation was also in favour of a parallel process of consultations on what the Secretariat had referred to as "policy issues".  Her delegation was particularly interested in the process of evaluating TA activities, country by country, and in long-term capacity-building, subjects which were covered by the above-mentioned policy issues, and her delegation would be grateful if the Secretariat would invite it to join the consultations.  She reiterated the relevance of the comments made during the previous meeting of the CTD as her delegation attached importance to the evaluation of TA and training.  However, her delegation was concerned by the fact that some Members regarded the process of internal and external evaluation as a means of reducing TA activities.  With regard to paragraph 68 on distance learning and information technology, her delegation believed that it was important to include a module on special and differential treatment and on what, in WTO terms, was known as development issues.  Finally, her delegation attached special importance to outreach activities organized for parliamentarians and civil society representatives.  However, it was necessary for the Missions in Geneva to be informed of the dates, objectives and participants of such events in order to guarantee their monitoring, evaluation and that they had a positive impact.  She therefore requested more detailed information, in writing, on that subject.
&& The representative of Kenya said that his delegation welcomed the changes that had been made in the revised draft 2004 TA Plan based on Members' comments during the consultation process over the previous few weeks.  He said that he wished to express his delegation's support for the adoption of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan as he believed that any outstanding issues could be resolved in the course of its implementation.
&& The representative of Colombia highlighted the efforts involved in designing activities that involved national associations which was a positive step towards achieving the transfer of knowledge on WTO issues.  Better high-quality regional TA activities were interesting, however national activities were necessary as they made it possible to focus on the specific needs of each Member.  She asked the Secretariat what criteria it used when distributing the venues of regional activities and whether an effort was made to balance venues throughout regions.  She said that she had been prompted to ask that question as the Latin American region had been left out from a number of themes.  Non-agricultural market access was such a theme and customs valuation another.  However, those were issues of interest to her Government.  She said that her delegation supported the delegations of Thailand, Morocco and others on the need to improve transparency.  It was important to establish criteria and procedures for the presentation of requests and for the allocation of specific activities at the regional level.  The revised draft 2004 TA Plan still lacked clarity in that respect.  It was not clear which Members would host the various activities.  That information would be useful for Members before adopting the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  She said that her delegation was interested in participating in any future informal consultations on the issue.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that, as previous speakers had pointed out, TA was important for African Member countries, particularly the LDCs.  He said that his delegation welcomed the sections of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan relating to evaluation and follow-up.  As had been stated by the representative of Mauritania, his delegation would prefer that the Committee adopted the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  A solution had to be found between the Secretariat and the Government of Morocco.  However, other Members' requests for TA were also important and there were other issues related to TA that needed to be discussed and there were a number of organisational issues that had to be addressed rather than to only focus on a three month regional trade policy course.  Members would soon attempt to restart the negotiations and being prepared for them was too important for Members to get caught up in a logistical issue.  He therefore hoped that a solution to the problem would be quickly found.  
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that as a group the LDCs had not had the opportunity to discuss the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  However it was an improvement from the initial draft and his delegation was pleased with the special attention that had been accorded in it to the LDCs.  He said that the revised draft 2004 TA Plan was a broad framework of TA with the details still to be worked out and that the process of continuing consultations was important for the implementation of the Plan.  The Plan possessed many positive elements such as the component on institution building which was key to developing indigenous capacity.  However, there were a number of concerns which he believed were not insurmountable and which could be addressed with transparency and trust.  He said that the representative of Morocco had raised certain concerns, which he was certain the Secretariat would be able to address.  TA was a recurrent theme in the Doha Declaration and in view of the ongoing workload and the ambitious DDA it was becoming increasingly vital for developing countries.  The revised draft 2004 TA Plan had attempted to incorporate views of all Members and the sooner the Secretariat began with implementing it the better it would be for all beneficiary Member countries. 
&& The Secretariat assured Members that the Director-General would receive a full report on Members' discussions on the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  He said that he was pleased with the support shown for its implementation.  All the staff involved, whether in the Institute for Technical Cooperation and Training or in the operational divisions, would be encouraged by knowing that the efforts that they deployed in delivering quality TA to beneficiary countries were appreciated.  The Secretariat would deal with Members' comments by issue and without attribution.  As requested, the Secretariat's speaking notes had been circulated and along with the comments that he was about to make, would form an integral part of the minutes of the meeting.  Members recognised that the revised draft 2004 TA Plan was innovative and that many of the changes were welcome improvements.  The changes which had been introduced were designed to improve the effectiveness, efficiency, relevance and sustainability of the TA programme.  If something was not broken, it had not been fixed.  The Secretariat said that Members who had read the 2001 and 2002 Audit Reports would recall that it was those four elements against which TA activities would be measured when they were evaluated.  Everything that was included in the 2004 TA Plan was aimed at achieving those objectives.  The Secretariat had been somewhat surprised over the concern regarding transparency.  With respect to the regional activities, he said that, in previous TA Plans, the majority of the venues chosen for the courses were always indicated as venues "to be confirmed";  in that respect things had not changed.  The Secretariat had noted the desire expressed by a number of delegations for a balance in the geographical distribution of the venues for such activities.  In selecting those activities the Secretariat had engaged in an interactive process with Members and regional groups to find the best venue for a particular activity.  That had to respond to a number of criteria which included the partners with which the Secretariat worked and it was often the partners who decided where the activity would take place because they had the infrastructure in the place to carry out that activity.  There were also logistic concerns in terms of how easy it would be to get the participants to a particular venue.  A venue could not be chosen if the air connections were unreliable or non-existent.  As far as national activities were concerned, the only change was in the time-frame.  Countries would be able to request national activities throughout the year and not just once.  There would be a de facto control of those activities as Members could obtain information from the quarterly reports on where those activities had been held and what they related to.  That was one of the reasons why Members had requested that the Secretariat prepare quarterly reports.  The Secretariat would write to all the beneficiary Member countries urging them to consider their priorities for possible national activities for 2004.  Some might be ready could do so, while others might prefer to wait for the evolution of the negotiations or wait to make requests in light of their evolving needs.  Those requests would be taken into account and the Secretariat would not be constrained by requests that had been made earlier.  That would also involve an interactive process between the Secretariat and the beneficiary Member countries.  
&& The Secretariat He continued by saying that the Secretariat had noted the suggestion made that further consideration be given to outsourcing in the framework of the consultations that were to take place.  That being said, the Secretariat assured Members that that did not involve an enormous innovation as some of the remarks might have led an uninformed observer to believe.  The WTO had been outsourcing activities for years although there had been no structured process for it.  However, when deemed necessary consultants had been called upon to help in the delivery of activities.  Among other reasons, outsourcing had been necessary because there were times when the Secretariat did not have available the expertise for a particular activity, or in some cases the Secretariat did not possess the necessary specific expertise.  The secretariat said that it was important to distinguish between outsourcing to individuals and outsourcing to institutions.  For outsourcing activities to institutions, the Secretariat would need to reflect further.  However, many institutional partnerships already existed and in many instances those institutions took on a significant part of the burden of carrying out the TA activities.  That burden was either logistic, substantive or both.  With respect to outsourcing to individuals, the only consideration for the Secretariat was to ensure that the individual's qualifications and competence was what the Secretariat was looking for and to ensure that they matched the quality of resource persons from the Secretariat.  The Secretariat assured Members that it had and would continue to call on experts from every region.  The Secretariat would examine contracting, tendering, and what had been referred to as due diligence in the framework of the ongoing consultations.  Members should not think that the Secretariat only contracted individuals from certain regions.  The Secretariat had outsourced activities to locally based consultants in Nairobi and West Africa who were knowledgeable in WTO issues.  The Secretariat would continue to do so in the future.  
&& The Secretariat went on to say that there was no intention to enhance the monitoring and evaluation function at the expense of TA activities.  Even at the present time the monitoring and evaluation function was not financed by funds designated for TA and that would remain the case.  As regards the outreach activities, the Secretariat  said that some delegations had expressed concern that the outreach activities per se might not be a proper form of TA, and even if they were they would be better carried out on a national basis.  Regional outreach activities had already been part of the WTO TA programme and had been viewed as highly successful by the beneficiary countries.  The Secretariat  therefore proposed that it continue as planned and moved forward the outreach activities to the beginning of 2004 to enable a review of their implementation in the middle of the 2004, as agreed to by Members.  Geneva-based delegations would be closely involved in the planning of those activities and he hoped that that would be acceptable to Members.  Some Members had remarked on the Secretariat's attendance at conferences and symposia saying those were not really TA activities.  The Secretariat only attended such activities if they possessed a clear TA component and that was often at the request of beneficiary countries.  Those requests were made by the beneficiary countries either individually, or as a group, or through their regional institutions.  An example was the Post-Cancun Expert Group Meeting for African Trade Negotiators and Officials taking place in Accra at which the Secretariat had been invited to provide resources to delegations that would be attending the meeting.  There was also the example of the series of mini-Ministerial meetings that had taken place prior to the Cancun Ministerial Conference and to which the Secretariat had been asked to send its experts as resource persons.  The Secretariat could not have responded to those requests if such activities did not form part of the TA programme.  With respect to the funding for the 2004 TA Plan, the Secretariat would be sending letters to donors asking them to provide the financial resources needed to implement the 2004 TA Plan.  The financial basis on which the revised draft 2004 TA Plan had been developed was contained in Job(03)/211.  With respect to the trade policy clinics, that was an issue which Members could discuss in the consultations.  Any subject that Members wished to have on the agenda of those ongoing consultations would be taken on board.  There had been a request to cover transfer of technology and trade debt and finance in the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  Although it was not specifically mentioned, the activities related to trade and development which had been added would cover that.  One Member had raised the issue of the criteria for allocating certain subjects to particular regions.  That had been raised in the context of the activities on NAMA and Customs Valuation not being foreseen for certain regions.  The Secretariat had been told by the relevant divisions that those activities had taken place in those regions recently and it therefore did not seem appropriate to reschedule them there so soon.  However this could be reviewed.  
&& The Secretariat  continued by recalling that the trade policy courses had been introduced as a new product in 2002 but that they had been introduced in less than optimal conditions.  At the time the Secretariat had not possessed sufficient resources to implement them, even when the concept was almost finalized.  The regional trade policy courses were part of the regional capacity building activities and they fulfilled the Secretariat's aims of an integrated approach towards partnerships for training and capacity building, the first of which was to expand the capacity of the WTO's capacity building.  The Secretariat was moving from four three-month trade policy courses a year, which were all held in Geneva, to eight three month courses in 2004.  That was a significant increase in the number of people that could benefit from those activities.  The second was to reinforce institutional partnerships; that had been achieved successfully in the Nairobi regional trade policy course that had been running over the past two years.  The third was to engage in joint lecturing, i.e. reinforcing the capacity of individual resource persons who worked with the Secretariat in delivering those courses, thereby enabling them to become a part of regional resources.  The fourth aim was to establish academic networks among regionally-based institutions and individuals.  The partners which the Secretariat sought to work with were universities , not Governments, and they needed to fulfil certain criteria.  They needed to possess faculties of law and economics with recognised resident expertise in WTO matters;  a good network with other resource persons and academic institutions in the region;  they needed to be willing to engage in a partnership with the WTO and accept an important role in the management of the course both in terms of substance and logistics.  There also had to be a satisfactory infrastructure available at the venue.  The process was not a beauty contest.  The activity should not be merely seen as a training activity.  It was aimed at building capacity in the region and the specifications were accordingly more complex.  There had been no undertaking with any of these regional institutions that they would be partners for life.  As long as conditions were satisfactory the Secretariat would continue with the partners they were currently working with, if not then a change could always be considered.  Even with respect to the partnership with the University of Nairobi, the Secretariat had experienced some difficulties and had at one point even considered that if those difficulties were not removed, it would look for another partner for the regional trade policy course for Anglophone African Member countries.  The Secretariat confirmed that the Senegalese Government had not put itself forward as a host for a regional trade policy course.  In some instances the Secretariat had taken advantage of its presence in a country to explore with universities in that country whether there were any prospects of partnering with that institution.  That was the case for Mauritius and Burkina Faso.  In a few days the Secretariat would be going to Senegal with the same intention to see whether it could develop a partnership with the  HYPERLINK "http://www.ucad.sn/fst.html" Université' Cheikh Anta Diop in Dakar.  The Secretariat had noted the Government of Morocco's proposal concerning delivering the course in collaboration with another institution in Morocco.  That institution would be given the same rigorous and objective consideration as would any other candidate that was being considered to host a regional trade policy course.  The Secretariat  reiterated that the regional trade policy course for Francophone African countries would be held in 2004.  It was important to move forward and begin implementing the activities outlined in the revised draft 2004 TA Plan without losing any time.  The Secretariat looked forward to the consultative process that would take place to elucidate some of the complex issues that Members had identified.
Another representative of the Secretariat said that he would address the points raised on monitoring and evaluation.  The Secretariat agreed that some of the comments made would require further discussions.  With respect to the external evaluation, he said that the Secretariat had noted Members interest in studying the issue.  That would mainly involve the costs associated with such an initiative as well as the kind of evaluation that would be appropriate.  The Secretariat would work on that and keep contact with delegations for that purpose.  A reference had been made on the objectives and a question asked as to who was responsible for that.  The Secretariat assumed that Members were referring to paragraphs 108 and 109 of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan and said that the TA providers would set out objectives for each activity before it took place, as well as indicators to measure the achievement of such objectives.  Those had to be in line with the general objectives set out in the Plan for each product.  The strategy put in place to carry out the evaluation was a combination of self evaluation and evaluations carried out on-site by the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit.  The Secretariat had also begun to plan the activities in advance with the TA providers while setting the objectives and indicators of achievement that would allow the effects of the activity to be measured.  A process was also underway to revise some of the forms as well as the practical exercises and questionnaires that were used to test effectiveness during the implementation of a TA activity.  The briefing kit could also be improved but the Secretariat would need more practical experience before attempting that.  Finally, the Secretariat would begin to work on post-facto evaluations with a view to expanding the coverage of its work to include sustainability, something that was mentioned in paragraph 111 of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  The Secretariat would report to Members on that.
&& The representative of Morocco said that he agreed that the regional trade policy courses were not part of a beauty contest.  He stressed that TA was not the private property of the Secretariat.  TA was a triple partnership involving the donors, the Secretariat which was charged with the modules and organizational aspects, and the organising countries.  Since the Secretariat had given up the old system, it had taken over and politicised TA and capacity building for its own purposes.  The African Member countries continued to believe that what was given with one hand should not be taken away by the other.  TA needed to be delivered in the context of the rights and obligations of each Member.  The Secretariat was there to serve the Members, and if an organising country had to be blamed for something then that needed to be done in a transparent manner.  He agreed that the Secretariat did not have an eternal union with its partners.  However, if problems arose, then they had to be addressed with respect and in transparency.  The Secretariat should not just give up on its partners.  The Secretariat had neglected its responsibility in that respect.  
He further said that his delegation was not trying to host the regional trade policy course for French-speaking African countries at any price; his delegation was fighting for the sake of principle and transparency.  The Ambassador of Morocco should have been invited by the Secretariat and given the details of why the course could not be held in Morocco.  The Government of Morocco would then have drawn the lessons and withdrawn its candidacy.  Instead, it appeared that there was a campaign behind the scenes to shift the course from Morocco.  He said that he was pleased to hear that the Secretariat had used its presence in certain countries to contact universities in those countries.  The Secretariat could nevertheless not deny that letters had been sent to Trade Ministers or that telephone calls had been made to some Trade Ministers urging them to accept to host the regional trade policy course for Francophone African countries.  He said that the Secretariat had acted irresponsibly and interfered inadmissibly.  The respect between the Secretariat and the Members had to be re-established, as had the Secretariat's respect for its role.  The Secretariat was there to implement policy.  TA should remain a uniting issue between developed and developing countries in order to allow developing countries to better integrate into the multilateral trading system and prepare them to negotiate better.  The Secretariat was making TA a subject of dissension and was setting countries off against one another.  His delegation did not insist on hosting the regional trade policy courses.  If there had been an open competition to host the regional trade policy courses, then his Government would have put forward its candidacy like other Governments.  However, there should be no secret campaign.  Certain Members could not be ignored and later be told that the selection was no beauty contest.  All Members were sovereign, paid their contributions and had to be respected.  The Secretariat had to keep to its neutrality.  However, it had failed to do so with respect to the selection of host for the regional trade policy course for French-speaking African countries.  The Secretariat had rather used the matter to undermine the reputation of his Government by questioning its capacity to organise the course.  It was for the principle of transparency that his delegation was pursuing the matter.  His delegation was therefore seriously considering a reform of the Secretariat.  He concluded by saying that his delegation requested the intervention and arbitration by the Director‑General, that the donors got involved, and that the question be resolved before the revised draft 2004 TA Plan could be adopted.
&& The Chairman said that a number of delegations had urged Members to adopt the revised draft 2004 TA Plan in order to allow the Secretariat to begin its implementation.  He suggested that the Committee take note of the issues that needed to be resolved.  He said that he would approach the Director-General in an attempt to facilitate the consultations with a view to reaching a satisfactory solution, particularly on the issue of the regional trade policy courses.  An amicable solution needed to be found on the issue and Members needed to keep up the spirit of dialogue, coexistence and friendship between themselves and the Secretariat, and also the general atmosphere in the negotiations.  
&& The representative of India said, with respect to the proposed solution on how to treat the outreach activities, that in the 2003 TA Plan the outreach activities had been adopted but not as part of the Plan.  They were contained in an Addendum to the 2003 TA Plan and carried a footnote which referred to a review of whether those activities should be included in future TA Plans.  Since that review had not been carried out, a way out would be to treat the activities as they had been treated in 2003, i.e. that they again be adopted in the form of an Addendum to the 2004 TA Plan and that the requested review be carried out as soon as possible.  He supported the suggestion made by the representative of the European Communities that informal consultations be carried out on the review, a suggestion he hoped would be acceptable to all.
&& The representative of Morocco said that he noted the Chairman's intention to consult the Director‑General and appreciated that the Chairman offered his good offices.  Notwithstanding that, his delegation was still not in a position to adopt the revised draft 2004 TA Plan.  The question of the regional trade policy courses had raised a systemic question which went beyond the question of whether Morocco could or could not host the regional trade policy course for the Francophone African Member countries.  He said that what had happened should serve as a lesson.  That was why his delegation insisted that the Director-General intervened to settle the matter.  He said that there was no rush as the implementation of the 2004 TA Plan would not begin before January 2004.  Nevertheless, he assured Members that his delegation would take all Members' interests into account and was ready to partake in consultations to settle the issue.  
&& The Chairman said that Members were faced with a time constraint because the Committee had to forward the 2004 TA Plan to the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration so that it could in turn make a recommendation to the General Council for funding the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF).  
&& The representative of Mauritania said that the African Group had a special interest in the implementation of the 2004 TA Plan, and was particularly impatient to see it adopted.  The African Group was ready to assist the Chairman in facilitating his task.  As he wished for the revised draft 2004 TA Plan to be adopted in its entirety, he suggested that the meeting be suspended until the following day to allow Members to continue consultations with the Chairman.  
&& The Chairman said that he welcomed that suggestion but that the Director-General was currently in Latin America and would not be available in Geneva the following day.  
&& The representative of Canada suggested that all the regional courses be included in an Addendum to be dealt with at a later stage and that the rest of the revised draft 2004 TA Plan be adopted as it was.
&& The representative of Morocco said that he accepted the proposal made by the representative of Canada.
&& The representative of Mauritania said the Francophone African region had not benefited from a regional trade policy course in 2003.  He therefore hoped that the proposal that had been made would not delay the organisation of the course.  He hoped that the Francophone African Member countries would not lose out again in 2004.  The objective should be for a solution to be found quickly so that the regional trade policy course for French-speaking African countries could be held early in 2004.  
&& The Chairman suggested that the Committee authorise the Secretariat to transmit the revised draft 2004 TA Plan, excluding the sections relating to the regional trade policy courses and the outreach activities, to the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration who would make a recommendation to the General Council regarding the financing of the DDAGTF.  He said that the question of the regional trade policy courses was still before the Committee and he would continue consultations with all concerned so that a satisfactory solution could be found.
It was so agreed.
Report on the Implementation of the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan  (WT/COMTD/W/120)
&& The Chairman said that the second sub-item related to the Second Quarterly Report on the Implementation of the 2003 TA Plan  (WT/COMTD/W/118/Rev.1) which the Secretariat had revised following comments made at the previous meeting of the CTD and the Third Quarterly Report on the Implementation of the 2003 TA Plan  (WT/COMTD/W/120).
There were no interventions on this sub‑item.
&& The Committee took note of the documents.  

I	OTHER BUSINESS
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation earlier in 2003 had submitted questions to the delegations of India and Sri Lanka regarding their free trade agreement (FTA) and the notification they had made to the Committee.  Her delegation had since received responses to those questions in writing.  She said that her delegation believed it would be useful for the entire Membership if those responses were provided in a multilateral context.  That information would be of interest to other Members of the Committee.  She said that trade with the United States accounted for only about 15 per cent of those Members' trade outside of their FTA.  Other Members who accounted for the remaining 85 per cent of the trade might be interested in that agreement.  Her delegation believed that a review by all interested WTO Members was required under the Enabling Clause and that that transparency exercise was desirable.  That experience had convinced her delegation that Members concerns could best be channelled through the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) where appropriate procedures could be developed in that regard.  
&& The representative of Japan informed Members that his Government was in the process of contributing Sw F 600 000 to the DDAGTF as it had pledged at the informal Ministerial meeting held in Tokyo in February 2003.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation's position on the notifications under the Enabling Clause to the CRTA was well known.  However, since it had been brought up he reiterated that the existing notification procedures for FTAs under the Enabling Clause were satisfactory and his delegation saw no need for any changes or requirements of such notifications to be considered in any other WTO body other than the CTD.  With respect to the questions that had been raised by the Government of the United States on certain aspects of the India - Sri Lanka FTA, he said that responses to those questions that had been sent to the delegation of the United States were strictly in a bilateral context.  His delegation was not ready to accept any further obligation to provide additional clarifications in any other forum in the WTO because the notification requirements of that FTA had already been met.  
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that he agreed with the statement made by the representative of India.  His delegation had already provided responses to the questions raised by the delegation of the United States.  However, his delegation reserved the right to make additional comments at a later stage on that issue.  
&& The Committee took note of the statements made.


Reconvened Session on 28 November 2003


ADOPTION OF THE ANNUAL REPORT (WT/COMTD/W/122/REV.1) 
&& The Chairman said that the 2003 Annual Report covered the activities carried out in 2003 in the CTD in Regular Session, the CTD in Dedicated Session which covered the issue of small economies and the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  He recalled that the last meeting of the General Council in 2003 was scheduled to take place on 15-16 December and the Committee would have to adopt its report before that meeting.  He said that the revised draft annual report contained in document WT/COMTD/W/122/Rev.1 was available to Members in the room.  
&& The representative of Morocco said that he wished to comment on paragraph 5 of Section A which related to Technical Cooperation and Training, particularly the sentence relating to the regional trade policy courses.  He said that his delegation had made a concession as requested by the representative of Canada of allowing the Committee to adopt the revised draft 2004 TA Plan with the exception of the regional trade policy courses.  At the outset his delegation had reservations on the entire revised draft 2004 TA Plan but in order not to prevent the Secretariat from beginning with its implementation or depriving African and other developing countries of the benefits of the delivery of the national and regional activities, his delegation had limited its reservations to the regional trade policy courses.  The Chairman had himself clarified that the proposal by the representative of Canada applied to all the regional trade policy courses which, according to his understanding, would not be adopted.  His delegation therefore did not agree with the wording as it appeared in paragraph 5.  However, his delegation could accept any wording stating that the revised draft 2004 TA Plan was accepted with the exception of the chapter relating to the  regional trade policy courses which would be the subject of adoption subsequent to consultations by the Chairman and the Director-General, and the good offices of some donors.  His delegation did not wish for things to get out of hand.  The situation was clear as far as his delegation was concerned.  The delegations of Senegal and Mauritius had stated that they had not requested to host a regional trade policy course.  The African Group had requested the Secretariat to consult with the delegation of Morocco on the matter as a matter of urgency.  There was a roadmap which his delegation wished to follow.  His delegation was ready to consult with the Secretariat and other partners, but insisted that the Director-General intervene in the matter.
&& The Chairman said that, at the previous day's meeting the Committee had agreed to adopt the revised draft 2004 TA Plan with the exclusion of the regional trade policy courses which would be subject to consultations carried out by the Chairman with the Secretariat and the delegation of Morocco.  
&& The representative of the European Communities said that it had a suggestion to make in connection with the revision of the TA section of the revised draft annual report.  He said that his delegation had been encouraged by the outcome of the consultations that the Secretariat had undertaken with Members during the six weeks since the last CTD meeting.  His delegation therefore welcomed the Secretariat's intention to continue the consultation process with all Members in the early part of 2004.  Members appreciated that and considered it to be worthwhile and had agreed to carry out a review in the middle of 2004.  He asked whether the Committee could agree to include a sentence at the end of paragraph 5 or 6 along the lines of the Committee welcoming the intention of the Secretariat to pursue a process of consultations with all Members in the early part of 2004 on a range of issues concerning TA and along the lines of the Committee setting itself an objective of taking stock of those discussions in the spring.  That was something that would be included in the minutes of the meeting but it would also be worthwhile for anyone considering the report of the Committee in isolation from the minutes to get that idea in terms of future process.  He said that he would not insist on its inclusion, but if other Members agreed he thought that that addition would improve the report. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation supported the suggestion made by the representative of the European Communities and agreed that it would be opportune to have the prospective consultations reflected in the report.
&& The Chairman said that, in view of the suggestions that had been made by the delegations of Morocco and the European Communities, he proposed two amendments to the revised draft annual report.  The first related to paragraph 5 of Section A on Technical Cooperation and Training.  He said that on the sixth line after the document symbol the sentence would read "The Committee authorized the Secretariat to proceed to implement the 2004 Technical Assistance Plan as presented in that document, with the exception of the regional trade policy courses, which will appear in an Addendum pending the consultations to take place under the good offices of the Chairman of the Committee and will be adopted at a later date.  The outreach activities will be treated as had been done in the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan, i.e. they will be moved into a separate Addendum with a footnote stating that "Within the context of a full review of technical assistance and capacity building, a decision will be taken on the inclusion of such regional activities in technical assistance and capacity building for subsequent years."  He said that the second amendment would be included at the end of paragraph 5 and would read "The Committee welcomed the intention of the Secretariat to pursue a process of consultations with Members on a range of issues concerning technical assistance and agreed to undertake a stocktaking exercise after the first quarter of 2004."
&& The representative of Morocco said that his delegation supported both amendments but with respect to the first amendment wished to add the word "all" after the words "with the exception of" so that the phrase would read "with the exception of all of the regional trade policy courses".  
&& The Committee adopted the revised draft 2003 Annual Report with the suggested amendments.  

__________



 The Declaration of Principles (WSIS-03/GENEVA/DOC/4-E) and the Plan of Action (WSIS-03/GENEVA/DOC/5-E) can be found on-line at  HYPERLINK "http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-s/md/03/wsis/doc/S03-WSIS-DOC-0004!!PDF-E.pdf" http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-s/md/03/wsis/doc/S03-WSIS-DOC-0004!!PDF-E.pdf  and  HYPERLINK "http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-s/md/03/wsis/doc/S03-WSIS-DOC-0005!!PDF-E.pdf" http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-s/md/03/wsis/doc/S03-WSIS-DOC-0005!!PDF-E.pdf  respectively.


WT/COMTD/M/47 Page  PAGE 28



	WT/COMTD/M/47 	Page  PAGE 29













