WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/53
5 July 2005


(05-2923)


Committee on Trade and Development
Fifty-Third Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 11 MAY 2005

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Gomi Tharaka Senadhira (Sri Lanka)

 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805226" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC107805226 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805227" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC107805227 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc107805228" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc107805228 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc107805229" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc107805229 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805230" C.	Report on the 38th session of the Joint Advisory Group on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XXXVIII)/204)	 PAGEREF _TOC107805230 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805231" D.	Work Programme for 2005 (WT/COMTD/53)	 PAGEREF _TOC107805231 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805232" E.	Notification under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC107805232 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc107805233" -	Notification from Norway (WT/COMTD/N/6/ADD.3)	 PAGEREF _Toc107805233 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805234" F.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC107805234 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805235" G.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in Order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC107805235 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805236" H.	Electronic Commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC107805236 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc107805237" -	Presentation by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU)	 PAGEREF _Toc107805237 \h 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805238" I.	Graduation of the Maldives from LDC Status (WT/COMTD/52)	 PAGEREF _TOC107805238 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805239" J.	Participation of Developing Countries in the Multilateral Trading System (WT/COMTD/W/136/Rev.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC107805239 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805240" K.	Presentation by the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) Secretariat	 PAGEREF _TOC107805240 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805241" L.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC107805241 \H 24
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc107805242" (i)	Annual Report on Training and Technical Cooperation, 1 January to 31 December 2004 (WT/COMTD/W/139)	 PAGEREF _Toc107805242 \h 24
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc107805243" (ii)	Technical Cooperation Audit Annual Report for 2004 (WT/COMTD/W/138)	 PAGEREF _Toc107805243 \h 24
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc107805244" (iii)	Terms-of-Reference for the Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance Activities (WT/COMTD/W/140)	 PAGEREF _Toc107805244 \h 32
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC107805245" M.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC107805245 \H 33

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman recalled that the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in document WTO/AIR/2553 circulated on 14 April 2005 and a revision issued on 2 May 2005. 
&& The Committee adopted the agenda.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman  recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the African Union;  the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the Pacific Islands Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, those organisations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that those organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman recalled that at its last meeting, the Committee had agreed to revert to the  requests for observer status from the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) and the League of Arab States (LAS) at the present meeting.  In particular, the CTD was to consider whether it could agree to having the two organizations attend sessions of the CTD on an ad hoc, meeting‑by‑meeting basis.  With regard to the OECS' request, the Chairman said that he had been informed that the OECS was still holding consultations and preferred not to have its request addressed at the present time.  He said that the OECS would inform the CTD as to when it would like to have the matter discussed again.  With regard to the LAS' request, he understood that there was no change in Members' positions. 
&& The Committee took note of this information. 
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of  requests for observer status.  He said that if  there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note, and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
REPORT ON THE 38TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XXXVIII)/204)
&& The Chairman said that the report on the 38th session of the Joint Advisory Group on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO was contained in ITC document ITC/AG(XXXVIII)/204. He said the Committee had the pleasure of having in attendance Mr. Georg Jürgens, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Germany, and Mr. Denis Bélisle, Executive Director of the ITC.  He invited Mr. Jürgens to introduce the report.
&& Mr. Jürgens made the following statement: 
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished Members,
The Joint Advisory Group on the International Trade Centre held its thirty-eighth session from 18 – 22 April 2005 and the report of the meeting is contained in document ITC/AG(XXXVIII)/204.  On behalf of the Chair, Ambassador Sarala Fernando, it is with great pleasure that I submit this report to you this morning with a few remarks on the proceedings.
In his opening statement, the Director-General of WTO noted that ITC’s success could be seen in the consistent and growing demand for its services.  WTO particularly appreciated ITC's initiatives to inform and educate business communities in developing countries on the multilateral trading system and Doha Development Agenda and its efforts to encourage their engagement in WTO processes.  The representative of the Officer-in-charge of UNCTAD emphasized ITC's trade for development contribution to building supply side capacities, its role in poverty reduction and it's work towards fulfilling the Millenium Development Goals.  The Managing Director of Kotra in Zurich also addressed the group as a winner of the first global awards for trade promotion organizations and outlined the positive role of these institutions in economic development. 
In his statement to the Group the Executive Director, Mr. Bélisle, described the year 2004 at ITC, developments since the beginning of 2005 and ITC's vision for the future.  Trade was increasingly recognised as an important tool for development and ITC was well placed to help countries build their capacity to supply world markets with its forty years of experience, technical expertise, cost-effective tools and targeted programmes.  2004 had been a year of consolidation when special efforts had been made to forge new strategic alliances and to communicate better with stakeholders. 
The four most important challenges for ITC in the year ahead would consist in attracting the best people possible to form the new senior management team;  moving further in ITC's niches without falling into the trap of over-stretching its human resources; achieving greater synergy between ITC's programmes and tools;  and achieving managed growth with predictable and timely transfer of donor funds. 
During its deliberations, the Group called upon ITC to help least-developed countries to build capacity to supply international markets and reverse a trend of marginalization.  Many spoke of the difficulty in adjusting to the "erosion of preferences" and the move towards liberalization without having competitive export structures in place for goods and services.  ITC's work in poverty reduction, services exporting, national export strategy development, public-private partnerships, textiles and clothing, market analysis, South-South trade, e-trade and sensitisation on WTO issues were among trade development areas of interest most frequently singled out by representatives.  The Group encouraged ITC in its current "managed growth" strategy to ensure that both countries and ITC would develop the capacities to sustain and absorb growth.  Some representatives complimented ITC for being referred to as a model for other organizations in the United Nations system by the Office of Internal Oversight Services in its inspection report on ITC.  
The Group was also informed of the status of the Joint Evaluation of ITC.  The final report would be available in June or July 2005 for a possible discussion at the Informal Joint Advisory Group meeting in November 2005. 
Before concluding, Mr. Chairman, allow me also to mention that at the 38th session, as is the practice each year, government representatives announced voluntary contributions to ITC.  On behalf of the Group I would like to express our thanks to the Governments of Canada, China, Denmark, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland for their support to the organization.    
Mr Chairman, this covers the main issues discussed during the JAG session.  The Executive Director and I shall be happy to reply to any questions from members.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
&& The Chairman thanked Mr. Jürgens for his statement, and opened the floor for questions and comments.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation was particularly pleased by the way in which the Annual Report of ITC was being constantly improved.  Her delegation was a strong supporter of ITC in terms of its relevance for trade and development.  She said that her delegation had high hopes for the joint evaluation, which was already showing some interesting results, and was looking forward to the institutional strengthening and management handover. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation recognized the important need that ITC was fulfilling.  She said that the United States would continue to try to partner with ITC in a number of different areas.
The Executive Director of ITC, Mr Denis Bélisle, said that demand for ITC's services continued to increase.  Thanks to the generosity of donors, the organization was in a position to respond to a great deal more requests than in previous years.  He also said that the WTO Secretariat had been very supportive of the work of ITC.  
&& The Committee took note of the report on the 38th session of the Joint Advisory Group and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption.
WORK PROGRAMME FOR 2005 (WT/COMTD/53)
&& The Chairman said that the proposed Work Programme of the CTD for 2005 had been issued as document WT/COMTD/53.
&& The representative of China sought clarification as to why the agenda item on "Participation of Developing Countries in the Multilateral Trading System" was included as an agenda item for the present meeting, as it had been on the agenda of a number of previous meetings of the CTD.
&& The Chairman clarified that the document WT/COMTD/W/136/Rev.1 had not as yet been fully discussed by the Committee, and that Members had requested that it be discussed at the present meeting.
&& The Committee adopted the Work Programme.
NOTIFICATION UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& Notification from Norway (WT/COMTD/N/6/ADD.3)
&& The Chairman said that Norway had issued a notification – contained in document WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.3 – relating to its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP).  He invited the representative of Norway to introduce the notification.
&& The representative of Norway said that the Norwegian system had come into effect in 1971, and that the consolidated version had been notified to the WTO in 2001.  The Least-Developed Countries (LDCs) had been granted duty-free and quota-free market access as of 1 January 2002 for all products when fulfilling the regular formal requirements.  The exception list had been reduced as of 1 January 2005, as the products listed in the notification document could now be imported duty‑free from all developing countries for which the Norwegian GSP was implemented.  Norway was presently undertaking a review of its GSP system in order to consider further improvements.
&& The Committee took note of the notification.
&& The Chairman recalled that at the last meeting of the CTD the notification on "Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and China" – contained in documents WT/COMTD/N/20 and WT/COMTD/51 – had been considered.  He recalled that a number of delegations had raised questions on the notification and the Agreement.  He inquired whether the representatives of ASEAN and China were in a position to respond to those questions at the present meeting.
&& The representative of Malaysia, on behalf of ASEAN, said she had no additional information to provide at the present meeting. 
&& The representative of China said that he was under the impression that the review of the notification had been completed at the last session of the CTD.  He said that questions from individual delegations had been referred to his capital.
&& The representative of the European Communities said his delegation was among those that had posed questions at the last meeting in relation to the notification of ASEAN and China.  He said that his delegation was still awaiting responses from the parties, and hoped that responses could be provided at the next meeting of the Committee, if not at the present meeting, so that the Committee could take note of them collectively.  He said that the process of review was a collective one, rather than a bilateral one between specific interested parties and the notifying parties.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had also asked some questions on the notification by ASEAN and China.  She said that her delegation viewed the exercise of reviewing the agreements that fell under the ambit of the work of the CTD to be not simply a pro forma announcement process, but a true discussion.  Those who posed questions had a right to have answers provided to the Committee.  Her delegation looked forward to having these responses provided at the next meeting of the CTD, and to further discussion if necessary on the responses.  
&& The representative of China said that a discussion of the notification by ASEAN and China was not on the agenda for the present meeting.  He said the understanding of his delegation was that the process of consideration of agreements between developing countries notified under the Enabling Clause was different compared to those considered by the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements.  His delegation did not believe that it had an obligation to respond to questions, though it could be willing to provide responses on a bilateral basis.
&& The representative of Malaysia said the understanding of her delegation was that at the last meeting the Chairman had closed the discussion on this topic.  She said that the ASEAN countries would relay the contents of the present discussion to their respective capitals and seek their views on whether  responses were required to the questions raised.
&& The Chairman said that at the last meeting of the CTD, the Committee had taken note of the notification and of all statements made, and some of those statements contained questions.  That was why the issue had been raised at the present meeting. 
&& The representative of the United States said there was a substantial difference between the types of questions that had been posed at the last meeting of the CTD and the types of detailed questions that were posed during a formal review of a regional trade agreement.  She drew the attention of the Committee to document WT/COMTD/W/114, which indicated that Members should  have the opportunity to ask questions and have them answered by the notifying countries of a regional trade agreement notified under the Enabling Clause.
&& The representative of China said that if any information was provided by his capital relating to the questions that had been raised at the previous session of the Committee, he would like to provide the information bilaterally, and not in the Committee.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation joined the delegation of the United States in expressing a strong hope and expectation that the process of review of the notification by ASEAN and China would take place in the Committee.
&& The representative of Malaysia said she would appreciate it if those delegations that had posed questions provide them in written form, so that they could be forwarded to the capitals.
&& The representative of China wondered if the Secretariat could provide some clarification on the procedure relating to notifications of agreements between developing countries under the Enabling Clause.  In particular, he sought clarification as to whether there was a requirement to provide answers in the CTD to questions raised on these agreements. 
&& The representative of the United States drew the attention of the representative of China to paragraph 57 of document WT/COMTD/W/114. 
&& The Chairman said that the CTD was the appropriate forum for discussion of notifications under the Enabling Clause.  While a response in some form was expected to the questions directed to ASEAN and China, he said that consultations could be held to decide how these responses would be provided.  He proposed that the Committee take note of the discussion, and that he hold consultations with the relevant parties.
It was so agreed.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that he wished to start discussion on this item by giving a brief summary of the Committee's recent work.  He would then open the floor to hear the views of Members on how they felt work on this item should proceed.
&& The Chairman said that at the 50th Session of the CTD, the Common Fund for Commodities had made a presentation on its work and on some of the challenges facing commodity-dependent countries.  In the ensuing discussion following the presentation, the possibility of other organizations working on commodity issues being invited to present their work was discussed.  Also discussed was the possibility of Members being invited to relate to the CTD their experiences in managing their commodity trade. 
&& The Chairman said that at the two last meetings of the CTD, the Committee had listened to two very interesting presentations, one by Malaysia – a Member that had experienced success in managing its commodity trade – and one by UNCTAD.  The Committee had also been able to have some very rewarding discussions on the issues raised in the two presentations.  He said that he believed that at the last meeting of the CTD, it had been agreed that at the present meeting the Committee would try to find an organization that could provide assistance in identifying where the WTO could add value to the work being done in commodities, and also to hear from a Member that had experienced difficulties as a commodities exporter.  However, as the incoming Chairman, he felt that he wanted to consult once more with Members on where they would like to go with this agenda item. 
&& The Chairman listed some possible ways forward for the Committee's work on this item, based on discussions that had taken place at the last meeting.  One possibility was to invite the Common Fund for Commodities once again to discuss in greater detail the problems faced by commodity-producing countries.  A second possibility was to invite another international organization to present its work on commodities.  Names that had been discussed by the Committee included notably the FAO, the World Bank, and ITC.  A third possibility was to invite other Members to relate their experiences with commodities.  One suggestion, in this regard, was that a Member that had had a less than positive experience could be invited.  Another suggestion was that two presentations could be made – one from a Member that had faced difficulties, and another from a Member that had enjoyed success.  A final possibility was to invite one or more private institutions to discuss their work on commodities.  He opened the floor to hear Members' views on how the Committee should proceed with its work under this agenda item.
&& The representative of Kenya said that after hearing a success story, it would be useful to hear from a country that had faced difficulties due to declining prices of commodities.  In that regard, she recalled the subject of document WT/COMTD/W/113.  She said that a negotiating proposal on this subject would soon be ready for submission.  A copy of the proposal would be forwarded to the CTD after it had been tabled in the relevant negotiating bodies.
&& The representative of the United States said that discussion under this item had been very fruitful at the last meeting.  She said that her delegation would be interested to hear from a country that had had difficulty in managing its commodity trade, as that might help add further depth to the discussion.  She said that it was important that the discussion focus on where the WTO had a particular relevance, and what the Organization could and could not do on the issue.  She said that while she had no objection in hearing from another international organization, it would also be useful to hear from a private institution active in the field of commodities.  She welcomed the information provided by the delegation of Kenya that a proposal would soon be tabled, and inquired whether the proposal would be tabled in the NAMA negotiations as well as in the agriculture negotiations. 
&& The Chairman inquired whether the representative of the United States had any specific proposals about which private institutions could be invited to the CTD.
&& The representative of the United States said that she would be happy to provide a list of possible institutions. 
&& The representative of Australia said that her delegation had found the presentation from Malaysia very useful and informative.  Her delegation would be comfortable to continue the process by listening to presentations by other countries that had had different experiences.  Her delegation was flexible as to whether another international organization or a private institution could be invited to make a presentation, and would be willing to discuss further as to which institution would be most appropriate for that purpose.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation wished to continue the interesting dialogue that had recently taken place under this agenda item.  She said that an institution that could possibly be invited was the International Task Force on Commodity Risk Management.  The institution had, among other activities, been piloting the use of market-based risk management instruments to help developing country producers mitigate the impacts of commodity shocks. 
&& The representative of Kenya, in response to the question from the United States, clarified that the proposal she had mentioned earlier would also address the NAMA negotiations, given that the classification of some commodities changed through processing.  With regard to the presentation by the Common Fund for Commodities at an earlier session of the CTD, she wondered whether this had been a detailed presentation, or simply an overview of the work of the institution.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that, based on the discussion that had taken place, his delegation was flexible about which institution could be invited to the CTD.  The proposal of Canada to invite the International Task Force on Commodity Risk Management was certainly welcomed.
&& The representative of Egypt supported the idea of having a presentation from a country that had had a less than positive experience in managing its commodity trade.  He also supported the other proposals that been made, in particular the possibility of inviting the International Task Force on Commodity Risk Management, as well as a private institution.  He welcomed the tabling in the agriculture and NAMA negotiations of the proposal mentioned by the representative of Kenya.
&& The Chairman said that he would continue consulting with Members about how to move forward with this agenda item.  He proposed inviting for the next meeting a country that had had difficulty in managing its commodity trade, a private institution or an international organization. 
It was so decided.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& The Chairman said that, as incoming Chairman, he wished to once again seek the input of the Membership on how the Committee should move forward with this agenda item. 
&& The Chairman said that debate and discussion had continued for some time on how the issue should be treated in the CTD.  The Secretariat had been invited to make presentations on the developmental aspects of the WTO's work in a number of areas.  The most recent examples of presentations included the developmental aspects of the Dispute Settlement negotiations, the developmental aspects of the Negotiating Group on Rules, and the developmental aspects of the negotiations on Regional Trade Agreements.  He said that, in the final analysis, the Committee's work should be Member-driven.  He, therefore, sought Members' inputs on how to move forward with this item in the CTD.  More specifically, he proposed that all delegations could communicate with their respective capitals, and that the agenda item be re-visited at the next meeting of the Committee.  He said that inputs from the capitals would certainly provide guidance on how to proceed with the item and would also enrich the Committee's discussion.  He opened the floor to hear the views of Members on his proposal, and more generally on how to proceed with the agenda item.
&& The representative of Kenya said her delegation would have no problem in consulting with the capital on this agenda item.  She also wondered whether it would be useful to explore how paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration could assist Members in reflecting the developmental components of the negotiations in the July approximation.
&& The Chairman said that the difficulty he foresaw in the proposal by the delegation of Kenya was the time constraint.  Several delegations would also be overworked in the coming weeks in the process of finalizing the July approximation.  He, however, certainly recognized the importance of the CTD's mandate in paragraph 51.
&& The representative of the United States said it was unlikely that the Committee would be able to do much on this agenda item before the fall.  However, in preparation for a bit more of an oversight in the fall, she said that it might be useful for the Committee to have before it for its next meeting a summary and explanation of all the development-related issues that were being discussed in the different groups to see where and how they were being addressed.  Some of the development-related issues were being addressed in a number of places, but perhaps with different perspectives.  Some issues were being addressed and raised by developing countries in one negotiating group or another.  It would be useful, therefore, to have an overview of what issues had been raised in order to sort out the status of the discussions.  This would allow the Committee, at its next meeting, to have a more holistic discussion from a development perspective. 
&& The representative of Kenya said that the idea of a summary was a good one, but she wondered what the objective of the summary would be.  A focus on market access issues would be useful, as her delegation attached a lot of importance to those issues.  The summary could, therefore, look at the developmental aspects of NAMA, agriculture and services before the finalization of the July approximation.  She also sought clarification from the Chairman on what delegations were expected to consult their respective capitals about.  
&& The Chairman said that in his view it would be much better for the delegations to take a pro‑active role in the discussion under this agenda item.  As he understood it, the Secretariat had up to now been providing the Committee with information, and not much detailed discussion had taken place.  He believed that this was the time to get instructions from capitals on how to go forward with this item.  This would make the exercise more Member-driven, rather than Secretariat-driven.  Even if a summary of the developmental aspects of the negotiations in the various bodies were provided by the Secretariat, he believed that it was still necessary to get instructions from capitals to get an idea of the views of Members.  It was also necessary for the exercise to be a strongly Member-driven one from the present time onwards if the CTD was to be successful in fulfilling its mandate under paragraph 51.
&& The representative of the United States clarified that her proposal was not to prepare the summary just for the purpose of having a summary.  The Committee had had a report from each negotiating group over the course of a year and a half, and the issues in those groups had evolved substantially.  She said that the summary did not have to cover the entire negotiations, and that the suggestion of Kenya to just focus on NAMA, agriculture and services might be appropriate.  She said that her idea was to focus on the progress that had been made since the Committee talked to Secretariat representatives from the different groups.  The point was to see if the CTD could have a deeper discussion on some of those issues.  She recognized that it was difficult for many in the CTD to have a deep discussion on the precise proposals that were tabled in the various negotiating bodies, as not all representatives were experts in those areas.  Nevertheless, she suggested that the Committee could at least see if there were some common themes or some issues where it could have a more in‑depth and broader discussion, not just from a precise negotiating perspective, but also from a developmental perspective.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that all delegations were in the same position of asking how the mandate given to them could be better fulfilled.  From the perspective of his delegation, this was certainly an exercise whose potential had not been fully realized.  His delegation certainly wanted to utilize that potential more fully.  He believed that at the last Committee meeting, the suggestion had been made to go back to the series of individual presentations that had begun some time ago, in order to see what had changed in NAMA and other groups.  He was certain that this was an idea that his delegation would not reject. He said that the representative of the United States had come up with a different idea, a more ambitious idea in terms of tracking or identifying the different strands of the negotiations.  He said that the idea of the representative of the United States certainly merited strong consideration, though he believed that, being a new idea, delegations would need to reflect on it.  He said that delegations would be negotiating intensively between now and the Committee's next meeting in October, and would also be negotiating intensively in the run-up to the Ministerial Conference in December.  The Committee was, therefore, looking at a moving target, but had to accept this and see what it could do in providing its own consideration and input on the development-related aspects of paragraph 51.  He did see some immediate merit in the idea of the United States to have a stock-taking before the Ministerial Conference, but whether it could actually be put together in a way that was useful might need a certain amount of reflection.  
&& The representative of Haiti said that his delegation believed that there was a problem of methodology, as development and sustainable development were very complex concepts.  He said that in his view the Committee needed to have a debate on the concept of sustainable development in order to look at the various aspects of this concept and the tools that could be used to achieve and to build on it.  In relation to the request of the Chairman for delegations to consult their respective capitals, he said that different Members had different viewpoints as to what was sustainable development.  He  believed, therefore, that delegations should give some guidelines to their capitals before asking them to provide specific answers.
&& The Chairman said that the CTD's mandate on paragraph 51 had not been fully realized, and that the Committee had not been moving very fast on this issue.  His proposal was that the Committee request a presentation from the Secretariat on the developmental aspects of the main market access negotiations, which included NAMA, agriculture and services.  He also proposed that delegations request a detailed brief from their capitals on the development dimension in the three areas.  This would allow the Committee to have a detailed discussion about the developmental perspectives of the negotiations.  He said that the other issue to settle was when the discussion would take place.  A date had been blocked in July for the CTD to meet, but the question remained as to whether a meeting in July would lead to a productive outcome, given the intensity of the negotiations that were anticipated around that time.  The other possibility was to take the July approximation into account, and have the discussion at the CTD meeting scheduled in October. 
&& The representative of Brazil wondered if the topic could be enlarged beyond the traditional market access areas like NAMA, agriculture and services, to other areas of the mandate.  There were other tracks where the developmental aspects were quite strong, for example in the implementation area.  He suggested that the Secretariat could pick up on all the areas where there were developmental elements, including the Special Session of the CTD in which there were several proposals related to development.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation was thinking along the same lines as  Brazil.  She said that when the delegations reported to their respective Ministers, they would have to  report on the developmental aspects at large.  October would be a better time to hold the discussion, as the discussion would then cover a broader area.  She said that inclusion of discussions taking place in the Dedicated Session on Small Economies would allow a more complete feeling of what was going to be accomplished in the development area.
&& The Chairman proposed that a very comprehensive review be undertaken at the next meeting of the Committee in October. 
It was so decided.
&& The representative of Haiti inquired whether delegations were expected to request the responses from capitals before October, or if they were supposed to wait until the debate in October.
&& The Chairman said that delegations should get instructions from capitals, and that a comprehensive discussion would take place in October.
It was so decided.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
-	Presentation by the International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
&& The Chairman recalled that the Committee had earlier agreed to invite the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) to make a presentation on the role of electronic commerce in development, particularly in the context of preparations for the second phase of the World Summit of the Information Society, which would take place in Tunisia later in the year.  He was pleased to inform the Committee that a representative of ITU, Mr. Alexander Ntoko, Chief of the E-Strategies Unit in the Telecommunications Development Bureau, had kindly accepted the Committee's invitation, and was in attendance at the present meeting.  He invited the representative of ITU to make his presentation.
&& The representative of the ITU said that in the area of information and communications technologies (ICTs) and their relation to development, ITU's objectives included exploring ways to use ICTs to reduce the social divide, improve the quality of life and facilitate entry into the information society for developing countries;  leveraging the potentials of Internet as a low-cost channel for the delivery of societal applications for various sectors;  creating favorable conditions in policies, strategies and e-legislation to foster the development and use of ICT applications;  and building awareness and enhancing trust and security in the use of ICT applications.
The ITU was addressing the technical and policy issues related to the development of Internet and e-applications through projects and events;  by coordinating the design, development and implementation of projects on e-commerce, e-government, e-health, e-security, e-learning and e‑agriculture, etc.;  by providing guidance in the elaboration of national and regional policies, strategies and e-legislation through workshops and seminars;  by implementing multipurpose community telecenters (MCTs) projects to enable affordable access to ICTs applications and services;  by promoting the development of solutions to enhance trust and security through project implementation and by building basic awareness of ICTs potentials for policy makers and the general population.
The ITU's work in ICTs was governed by the Strategic Plan of the ITU adopted by 189 Member States of ITU at the 2002 Plenipotentiary Conference (PP02), and the various decisions of ITU Member States adopted at the World Telecommunication Development Conferences.  There were three main purposes and six main priority areas.  The three main purposes were to reduce the social divide;  improve the quality of life and facilitate entry into the information society.  The six main priority areas were:
Internet Protocol: Policy and technical aspects of Internet Protocol (IP) networks and services; 
ICT Applications:  E-services/applications (e.g. e-government, e-commerce, e‑agriculture, e-health, e-learning, e-cinema, tele-working);
MCTs and multipurpose platforms (MPPs); 
E-legislation:  Favorable legal environment for the development of e‑services/applications; 
E-Security:  Enhancing security and confidence in the use of public networks for ICT applications;  and 
 ICT Awareness:  Enhancing ICT literacy and building public awareness.

Recent additions to the ITUs work in ICTs had come out of the decisions taken at the last World Telecommunication Development Conference, which had taken place in Istanbul.  The additions included an extension of ITU activities to new areas such as e-agriculture, e-government and cyber security; the identification of very strong synergies with the adopted World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) Plan of Action, notably in the domains of ICT Applications,  HYPERLINK "file:///D:\\..\\Fiji\\ITU-WSIS%20Internet%20Governance%2016%20November%202004.doc" \t "_blank" Internet,  HYPERLINK "file:///D:\\..\\Fiji\\ITU-WSIS%20Security%20Rev3%20November%202004.doc" \t "_blank" Cyber Security, and Access to ICTs for All;  the endorsement of the Purpose and Objectives by the WSIS Plan of Action;  and specific projects for people with special needs.
The ITU was undertaking projects in e-government with objectives that included increasing government transparency, enabling transaction-based e-government services, and having secure document transmission between government agencies. In the area of e-business, projects had the purpose of assisting countries in the design, development and implementation of e-business solutions. Similarly with regard to e-payment, projects aimed to assist in the design, development and implementation of infrastructure for credit card-based e-payment solutions for e-commerce and e‑government transactions. 
The ITU's work in e-health was concerned with providing a forum for the exchange of best practices in the implementation of e-health projects;  developing guidelines and elaborating strategies at the global level in fostering e-health services;  and working with industry partners, international organizations and governments to assist developing countries in e-health projects.  The ITU was also working in e-medicine by using ICTs to bring access to medical services such as remote diagnostics and tele-radiology. 
In the area of e-education, the ITU's work was enabling youths to gain access to a wide range of information via the Internet, while enhancing knowledge-building and ensuring their active participation in the information society.  In e-agriculture, the  ITU was assisting with the use of ICTs applications and infrastructure to enhance agricultural activities and gain access to information on better farming methods, up-to-date prices of produce and information on business partners. 
In the field of e-security, the ITU was working on advanced security solutions using digital signatures and finger print biometric authentication for critical e-government transactions.  The ITU was working in the building of e-trust through the development of models to build trust in a virtual world, thereby enabling people to conduct critical transactions which they would otherwise not be willing to do. 
The ITU was also involved in projects in the area of e-environment, as a supporting organization for the industry-led Global e-Sustainability Initiative (GeSI), and in undertaking activities with UNEP aimed at addressing the environmental effects of telecom and ICTs;  in addition, ITU was working with Member States to develop strategies on the use of telecommunications and ICTs for the protection of the environment.  In e-employment, ITU was working to improve social conditions by increasing income through the provisioning of ICT-enabled remunerated remote translation and document processing services.  The ITU was also assisting several countries in establishing harmonized e‑legislation and elaborating national legislation on ICTs.
The ITU organized several events to bring together its Member States to address regional policies and strategies for ICTs.  The organization also provided training materials to address technical and policy issues in Internet Protocol (including IP telephony), and issued case studies and best practices on the elaboration of national and regional strategies for communications in rural and remote areas.
A non-exhaustive list of ITU activities for 2005 was as follows:
Internet and e-Applications: 
e-Government:  Barbados, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Bhutan, Cameroon, Jamaica, Kyrgyzstan, Papua New Guinea, and Rwanda. 
	Internet:  Oman, Lebanon, Burkina Faso and Rwanda
	e-Health:  Ghana, Venezuela and Turkey
MCTs:  Afghanistan, Malawi, Niger, Romania, Solomon Islands and Samoa. 
e-Commerce:  Legal issues for Tanzania, Training for Mongolia and project implementation for Cameroon. 
Seminars and Workshops:  Cyber Security Seminar for Europe, Cyber Security Seminar for Latin America, WSIS Thematic Meeting on Cyber Security in Geneva.
Publications:  Internet Protocol Policy Manual, Road Map for ICT Development for Americas Region, Guidelines for the Implementation of E-Health Projects, Cyber Security Manual for Developing Countries.

&& The Chairman thanked the representative of ITU for his presentation, and opened the floor for questions and comments.
&& The representative of the United States inquired whether the ITU in its work had come across cases of countries that had used ICTs to develop export capacity, but had not been successful in integrating that capacity and the knowledge gained into the domestic economy, thereby leading to losses to the domestic economy and to productivity growth.
&& The representative of ITU said that ITU itself did not have the mandate or expertise to explore trade-related issues.  The ITU had, however, recently launched an initiative with a number of other international organizations with expertise in various fields, including trade.  The objective was to develop certain indicators to better understand the impact that ICTs had had on the economies of various countries, and how countries could better integrate ICTs  into the economy.
&& The Committee took note of the presentation and of the intervention by the United States.
&& The Committee agreed to revert to the agenda item concerning electronic commerce in the future only if requested to do so by Members.
GRADUATION OF THE MALDIVES FROM LDC STATUS (WT/COMTD/52)
&& The Chairman recalled that this item had also been on the agenda of the previous meeting.  However, since the delegation of Maldives had not been able to travel to Geneva to be present at that meeting, it had been decided that the issue would be taken up again at the present meeting.  He invited the representative of Maldives to take the floor.
&& The representative of Maldives said that his delegation had in 2004 put to the Committee the issue of the graduation of Maldives from LDC status.  In particular, his delegation had highlighted in document WT/COMTD/W/128 the benefits of preferential treatment that Maldives enjoyed as an LDC and the consequences of graduation, particularly with regard to the loss of these preferences.  Possible approaches that could be taken by the WTO, as well as by Maldives' most important trading partners, had been discussed.  His delegation had informed the Committee that the relevant body of the United Nations was most likely to recommend the graduation of Maldives.  On that basis, his delegation's submission to the WTO called for the establishment of a transition mechanism through which trade preferences that had been granted to Maldives could remain in place for some time.
&& The representative of Maldives said that the tsunami that had struck his country in December 2004 had changed many things.  He said that it had set back his country's development by at least a decade.  In his delegation's recent submission (WT/COMTD/52), the difficulties faced by Maldives as a consequence of the tsunami had been highlighted.  In light of the effects of the tsunami, Maldives was of the view that it was not appropriate for it to be graduated from LDC status at the present time.  Maldives would be in need of plenty of resources, support and time before it could once more be at the stage of development it had reached before the tsunami struck.  In view of the circumstances, his delegation did not feel it was appropriate at this time to continue discussion on the content of document WT/COMTD/W/128. 
&& The representative of Maldives said that his delegation appreciated that graduation was not a decision to be taken by the WTO.  Nevertheless, as laid out in document WT/COMTD/52, it was felt that there were certain things that could be done in the WTO context.  In particular, the Organization could acknowledge that Maldives was not ready for graduation, and was, therefore, not in a position to lose its trade preferences.  His delegation also welcomed discussion on any other action that could be taken by the WTO.
&& The Chairman thanked the representative of Maldives for his statement, and opened the floor for questions and comments.     
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation appreciated that the Government of Maldives needed to re-think its position in light of the tsunami.  Her delegation was ready to work with others to consider whether there could be an appropriate WTO response.  Her delegation also appreciated that Maldives had presented to the Committee issues relating to its graduation from LDC status.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation understood the situation faced by Maldives.  He brought to the attention of the Committee the United Nations ECOSOC resolution of November 2004, which called upon all trading partners of a graduating country to consider extending trade preferences previously made available as a result of its LDC status, or reducing them in a phased manner in order to avoid their abrupt reduction.  The tsunami had, however, struck after this resolution was passed, and his delegation was keen to work with Members to see how the WTO could help Maldives.
&& The Chairman also recalled that the Director-General of WTO had sent a letter to all Members after the tsunami, asking that they explore how they could help Members affected by the tsunami.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation had great sympathy for Maldives and other tsunami-affected countries.  Canada was heavily involved in the reconstruction efforts in these countries.  With regard to the issue of Maldives' graduation, she said that that was a decision to be taken by the relevant body of the United Nations.  Her delegation was, however, prepared to work with Members to find ways to help Maldives in the WTO context.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation understood the situation faced by Maldives.  He said that if a decision to graduate Maldives was to be taken in the relevant body of the United Nations, so must a decision to reverse that process.  His delegation was appreciative of the information provided by Maldives on its graduation.  He said that it was in the interest of WTO to support a smooth graduation process so that LDCs were not put off by the prospect of graduating in recognition of successful economic development.
&& The representative of Thailand said that his delegation was sympathetic to the situation faced by Maldives.  His country had also been gravely affected by the tsunami.  His delegation was willing to work with Members to find ways to help Maldives within the WTO framework.
&& The Chairman summed up by remarking that there was much understanding and sympathy in WTO regarding the difficulties Maldives was going through.  There was, however, also a recognition that WTO was not the correct forum to discuss graduation from LDC status.  That being said, certain initiatives on the trade side could certainly be considered in the WTO.
&& The Committee took note of the statement by Maldives and of all interventions.    
PARTICIPATION OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN THE MULTILATERAL TRADING SYSTEM (WT/COMTD/W/136/REV.1)
&& The Chairman recalled that the Secretariat had prepared a note last year circulated to Members as document WT/COMTD/W/136/Rev.1.  The note had been prepared to assist the Committee with its requirement to keep under continuous review the participation of developing economy Members in the multilateral trading system.  At the last meeting of the CTD, it had been agreed that discussion on the paper would be deferred, so as to allow Members time to read it in more detail.  He invited the Secretariat to present the paper.
The Chief of the International Trade Statistics Section made the following presentation:
The paper highlights salient features of developing economy trade, focusing mainly on the period 2000-2003.  The Appendix contains a series of specific tabulations that are not referred to in the text, but that delegations may find useful.
I.	Main results
I would like to refer to Chart 1. Developing economies experienced a more than twofold increase in their merchandise trade over the period 1990-2000.  Both their exports and imports grew faster than world trade, increasing the respective shares in global trade from 23 per cent to 30 per cent and from 21 per cent to 26 per cent for imports.  
While the developing economies' share in world trade dropped slightly from 2000 to 2001 due to the burst of the IT bubble, it recovered moderately in 2002.  In 2003, the  dollar value of developing economies' exports soared by 17 per cent, reaching US$2.2 billion, and bringing their contribution to world exports back to 30 per cent, the 2000 level.  In 2004, strong commodity prices and the recovery of trade in office and telecom equipment resulted in a further surge of the share to 31 per cent -- the highest level since 1950.
While developing economies' imports experienced a decrease in 2001 followed by a recovery afterwards, their share in world imports remained steady at about 26 per cent throughout the period.
Behind these aggregate figures, the performances of developing regions and economies varied widely:
As you can see in Chart 2, within the developing economies exports, developing Asia's share increased while that of Latin America decreased.  While the IT bubble collapse worsened the trade performance of a number of Asian economies as mentioned earlier, this was more than compensated by China's buoyant export growth.  
Depressed economic conditions in Latin America affected a majority of economies in the region, whose annual export growth decreased, or was sluggish at best.  
While Latin America's contribution to developing economies' total exports shrank by two percentage points, the shares of exports from Africa and the Middle East in total developing economy exports remained virtually unchanged (8 per cent and 14 per cent respectively).
For Africa, fuels remained by far the main component of the region's exports. Sub‑Saharan countries account for a large majority of the region's agricultural exports.  Manufactures is still a small component of their exports.  
For the Middle East, fuel continues to be the dominant component of exports. 
Chart 3 shows that between 2000 and 2003, the share of South-South trade in developing economies' total exports increased to 38 per cent, and developing Asia became the largest market for developing economy exports.  This reflected China's growing demand for foreign products, as well as the sluggish increases in exports to major developed partner regions, namely North America and developed Asian economies. 




In Chart 4, you can see that the product composition of developing economies' exports did not change significantly between 2000 and 2003.  Non-fuel primary commodities, fuels and manufactures accounted respectively for about 12 per cent, 20 per cent and two thirds of total exports.  
While developing economies have been net exporters of merchandise to the rest of the world since 1998, they have been importing more commercial services than they export.  Over the period 2000-2003, the share of developing economies in world trade of commercial services has declined (from 23 per cent to 21 per cent on the exports side, and from 26 per cent to 25 per cent on the imports side).  This contrasted with the 1990s, where the developing economies' share in world trade in services was increasing on average.
New calculations actually show that the share of commercial services exports of developing economies remains constant at about 22 per cent on the export side during the 2000/03 period and for imports the share in 2004 increases again to 26 per cent -- roughly, one fifth of the exports and one quarter of the imports. 
II.	Least-Developed Countries (LDCs)
Following five years of steady growth, the participation of LDCs in world trade, measured as their share in world exports, decreased slightly to 0.6 per cent in 2003. The latest figure for 2004 is 0.7 per cent.  The aggregate export performance of LDCs in 2002 and 2003 has been positive, with growth rates of 8 per cent and 13 per cent respectively.  
However, the aggregate growth rates hide a substantial variation in export performance across LDCs.  The growth rate of oil exporters, the most important export group, was 16 per cent and that of exporters of manufactures and commodity exporters was 9 per cent and 12 per cent respectively.  
&& The Committee took note of the report prepared by the Secretariat.
PRESENTATION BY THE NEW PARTNERSHIP FOR AFRICA'S DEVELOPMENT (NEPAD) SECRETARIAT 
&& The Chairman, in introducing this item, said that NEPAD was a development policy framework which had been adopted by African Heads of State and Government in July 2001.  It was a commitment by African leaders to eradicate poverty and to place Africa on a path of sustainable growth and development.  He recalled that the Head of the NEPAD Secretariat had been invited to make a presentation to Members at the 41st Session of the CTD in July 2002, and that this had been considered to be very useful.  In recent contacts that had taken place between the WTO Secretariat and the NEPAD Secretariat, it was considered that it could again be useful to have such a presentation given to the CTD by the NEPAD Secretariat.  With this background, the Chairman gave the floor to the representative of NEPAD, Ambassador Ibrahim Ali Hassan, Egypt's Personal Representative in the NEPAD Steering Committee. 
&& The representative of NEPAD made the following statement:
Mr. Chairman, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates,
I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to the WTO Secretariat for giving me this opportunity to speak on behalf of the NEPAD Steering Committee and to be here today to share with you some of the developments with regard to the Initiative.
First of all, I would like to introduce myself.  My name is Ambassador Ibrahim Ali Hassan, Egypt's Personal Representative in the NEPAD Steering Committee.  For those who are not familiar with the NEPAD Governance Structures, the NEPAD Steering Committee is a body that is comprised of the personal representatives of the twenty NEPAD Heads of State and Government Implementation Committee entrusted by the AU Summit to promote and follow up the implementation process of the NEPAD.  The Steering Committee acts as a clearing house and provides support to the Heads of State Implementation Committee, in terms of decision making and taking, insofar as NEPAD is concerned.
Our meeting today is the first to be held with the WTO Committee on Trade and Development since July 2001 when my colleague Prof.  Wiseman Nkhulu, in his capacity as the chairman of the NEPAD Steering Committee, was given the opportunity to brief this very body on the Initiative.  I need not remind you that, at that time, the initiative had just seen the light after its endorsement by the African leaders in what was then the Organization of African Unity.  In this regard, I think a comprehensive update on the initiative would be in order.
It is also an opportunity to have an honest and genuine exchange of views as to how we, as the NEPAD Steering Committee, could assist and compliment your work so as to ensure that Africa's interests are ultimately achieved and realized.  We have had a very constructive conference in October last year, to assess the impact of NEPAD after three years of its inception.  Basically, we were trying to reach out to our stakeholders, i.e. civil society, academia, the private sector and even our development partners, with a view of having a critical assessment of what NEPAD has and has not been able to achieve so far.  One cannot think less of the interaction that we have today.  It will surely help in guiding the vision that we all have a stake in making it a success.
When NEPAD was first conceived on the eve of the new millennium, it was evident that a comprehensive and radical approach was needed to reverse the backwardness that Africa has suffered from for decades.  Our continent has been plagued by the entrenchment of a vicious cycle, in which economic decline, negative rates of growth, reduced capacity, and poor governance reinforce each other, entrenching Africa's peripheral and diminishing role in the world economy and world affairs in general.
In such circumstances, it was imperative that African leadership assumes its responsibility, realizing that, if Africa is to claim the 21st century, an integrated and coordinated plan that tackles the root causes of Africa's underdevelopment should be formulated.  A plan that would speak realistically to the problems of Africa, having the principle of ownership engrained in its fabric, and ensuring an international engagement in the problems of Africa, based on the principle of partnership, instead of the old donor-recipient relationship.
As we stand here today fours years after, we could say that through the NEPAD, we have been able to put Africa back to its rightful place on the international agenda, after being relegated to the back seat in the "lost decades".  For the first time, the International Community and the United Nations System have been invited to structure their support, all of their support, to an African-made, African-owned and African-led Development plan, which is NEPAD.  In 2002, the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) adopted three resolutions formally recognizing NEPAD as the framework for development in Africa.  UNGA resolutions 57/7 calls upon all United Nations Programs and Specialized Agencies, together with developed countries and all other regional and international institutions operating in Africa, to work within the context of the NEPAD policy framework and to coordinate their activities according to the NEPAD priorities.
In devising this very important initiative, we reckoned that Africa needs to achieve a growth rate of 7 per cent at least from 2001-2015, in order for Africa to be put on a path of sustainable development.  Even though, this has not been the case in the past four years, an increasing number of countries are moving in that direction.  It is estimated that Africa needs additional resources to the tune of 64 billion US Dollars annually, in order to provide the necessary investments to attain this ambitious goal of 7 per cent growth.  So, the question is where will the resources come from?  Our strategy perceives 4 primary resources:
Increased Official Development Assistance (ODA).  After a relative period of decline, ODA towards Africa has witnessed some increase in the past few years to reach 21 billion dollars in 2003, but still not enough.  While hoping that this trend will further strengthen, we are also calling for better aid effectiveness.
Increased Foreign Direct Investment to the continent.  As it currently stands, FDI to the continent has risen to 12 billion US dollars.  A figure which is still disproportionate to the African Potential.
More Debt relief.  This could be achieved through the enhancement of the HIPC initiative.  Surely, improvements in the initiative could release additional resources needed to finance development programs.
Increased Market Access.  It is obvious that Africa would benefit from increased market access, in terms of increasing incomes and thus alleviating poverty in Africa, especially in the rural sector.
NEPAD has highlighted, right from the beginning, the fact that for any development plan to succeed in Africa –no matter how well thought out it is– it has to address the issue of peace and security, as well as improving the status of governance on the continent.  That is why consolidating Peace and Security in Africa tops the agenda of NEPAD.  We have developed, together with the AU Commission, the AU/NEPAD Peace and Security Agenda, according to our African priorities.  The establishment of the Council of Peace and Security in the African Union, is another manifestation of Africa's solid determination to strengthen peace and security in the continent.
Moreover, we have established the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM), which is considered by some as one of the most prominent achievements of the NEPAD process.  For the first time, African countries are committing themselves to a self‑monitoring mechanism, intended to foster the adoption of policies and practices that will lead to political stability, high economic growth, sustainable development and accelerated sub-regional and continental economic integration.  Twenty‑five AU member states have so far acceded to the APRM, and the review process which started in July 2004 will produce its first reports in early June 2005 in a process which will eventually cover all participating states according to an agreed timetable.
This leads me to my second point which is our strong focus on rural and agriculture development.  We know that most of our economies are rural economies and depend largely on the agriculture sector.  We, therefore, deem that for any meaningful development to take place in Africa, agriculture should be at the forefront.  The central role that agriculture plays in African economies, is clearly illustrated in its contribution to the African GDP at 25 per cent, its share in export earnings which stands at 40 per cent, and its absorption of about 70 per cent of the African labor force.  It is, therefore, only reasonable that NEPAD should focus first and foremost on agricultural development.  We have formulated the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Program, commonly known as the CAADP, as our response to this challenge.  The CAADP sets out four key areas for action:  (a) extending the area under sustainable land management and reliable water control systems (increasing the area under irrigation – new and rehabilitated – to 20 million hectares and improving land management of the same area);  (b) increasing food supply and reducing hunger with a special emphasis on emergencies and disasters that require food and agricultural responses or safety nets;  (c) improving rural infrastructure and agricultural market access;  (d) enhancing agricultural research and extension.  The CAADP has been formulated to deliberately focus on investment into those four mutually reinforcing "pillars" that can make the earliest difference to Africa's dire situation.  We have just concluded recently an implementation roadmap for this ambitious strategy, whereby each sub-region in the continent has identified a number of priority regional projects, in line with the priorities of the CAADP.  These detailed and costed regional projects are grouped into categories;  the first are quick‑win projects to be ready for implementation within the next twelve months.  The second group of projects is of a more medium and long-term nature.
Another key sector that has a direct bearing on trade is infrastructure.  I am sure that all of you know that improvements in this sector would help improve Africa's trading capacity, not only with the developed countries but also with itself.  That is why we have developed a plan for Infrastructure Development called STAP with the assistance of the African Development Bank.  It aims at implementing major regional infrastructure projects in the areas of energy, transport and water.  Some of these projects have already been underway but are now stalled because of political reasons,  lack of implementation capacity or lack of finance.  This plan looks at all these aspects and tries to resolve them.  So far ten projects in the plan have gone to the implementation phase.  To name only a few, the West Africa gas line, the Southern African power pool, the Inga Dam project, the East Africa submarine cable for telecommunications, and the Nile Basin Initiative.
Other priorities, that are also high on our agenda, include health and education, as they are the underlying foundations for poverty reduction and for ensuring that the trickle-down effects of growth sink through to the poor.
This year is a very critical year for Africa due to a large number of events and activities that are taking place.  These are:
1.	The G8 Gleneagles Summit which will take place in the UK in early July.  Two major documents will be discussed at this summit:  the Blair Commission Report, which I am sure you are familiar with, and the three-year review of the Africa Action Plan, which was endorsed by the G8 Summit in Kanansakis in 2002, in support of NEPAD.  I will share with you, briefly, our thinking on these two reports.
As far as the Blair Commission is concerned, we have tried, right from the start to engage the work of the commission on the levels of the NEPAD Secretariat and the NEPAD Steering Committee, conveying a clear message that the report should be in line with the priorities that Africa has identified for itself and with the Development Framework that Africa has embraced, and reflected in the NEPAD.  In this connection, it is important to note that the report took into consideration the priorities and concerns of NEPAD, but what is more important, is that the report does not become only a UK report, it should also be a G8 report and its conclusions sponsored by other developed countries.  We also need to see the commitments included in the report translated into concrete actions and that a follow-up mechanism is established to ensure the fulfilment by all parties of their commitments.  This assessment was clearly reflected in the discussion which the heads of state and government implementation committee had in their meeting last month in Sharm El Shiekh,  Egypt.  And they have mandated accordingly, the NEPAD SC and Secretariat to prepare an assessment study of the Report, to be presented to the African leadership at their next summit in July.
Linked to that is the Review for the Africa Action Plan.  Since its adoption in June 2002, we have been extensively engaged with our development partners – the G8 Africa personal representative – to ensure the speedy implementation and fulfilment of the Plan.  This engagement has been enlarged in the form of the newly established Africa Partnership Forum.  This is a body that is constituted from the NEPAD Steering Committee PRs, and the Africa Personal Representatives from the OECD countries that contribute more than 100 million dollars of Aid annually to Africa, as well as the President of the World Bank, the managing director of the IMF, and the Director-General of the WTO.  Also in attendance is the UN Secretary General's Special Advisor on Africa, and the executive directors of Regional Economic Communities in Africa.
2.	A second important event is the five-year Review Summit that will be held in New York in September this year.  This review is especially important for Africa, as evidence clearly shows that Africa is the only continent that is far worse off today than it was in 1990, as far as the MDGs are concerned.  Most of the NEPAD strategies and programmes were tailored in a fashion to ensure the attainment of the MDGs.  In fact, there is a process unfolding on the continent where NEPAD is trying to assist the African Union in formulating an African response that will be presented to the AU Summit in July this year.  The objective of this strategy is to give the African leadership a coherent and consistent approach to the very imposing question of attaining the MDGs.
3.	More important is the Hong Kong Ministerial that will be held in December this year.  We realize that this is a major milestone not only for Africa but for all the participants in the multilateral trading system.  We fully understand the stakes at this conference for Africa.  That is why, from our side, we will try to exert every effort possible to assist you in realizing Africa's interests in the run-up to that Conference.  We believe strongly that the international community must aim for an ambitious outcome at that meeting.  An outcome that fully realizes the Doha Round development promises, including in particular a major reform of agricultural trade policies in developed countries.
Equally, "aid for trade" should be scaled up substantially to help poor countries address behind-the-border constraints to trade capacity, including through investments in critical trade-related infrastructure.  We have to aim at more policy coherence and consistency from our partners in terms of their trade and aid policies.  Linked to that, more policy space should be given for African countries, especially LDCs, in implementing their commitments in the multilateral trading system so as to ensure that we all, rich and poor, gain equal benefits from it.
NEPAD is not seeking to duplicate the work of the WTO. We are only trying to complement it, using whatever means we have, especially in playing an advocacy role in our interactions with the development partners on the level of the heads of state within the G8 annual summit mechanism and on the level of the personal representatives in the Africa Partnership Forum.
As I have shared with you some of the progress we have achieved so far, I would like also to elicit some of the challenges that lie ahead in the NEPAD implementation process.  Bold actions are, therefore, required to address these challenges, in particular in the following areas:
1.	Strengthening further the sense of 'ownership' of NEPAD, throughout all of Africa.
2.	Ensuring the credibility of the NEPAD, through the speedy implementation of some specific projects, to show and prove that NEPAD is well functioning.
3.	Integrating the NEPAD's priorities and programmes into the national development plans of African countries.
4.	Enhancing the role of the planners and implementers of NEPAD's programmes.  In this regard, the weak capacity to plan and implement socio‑economic development programmes at regional levels must be strengthened measurably through capacity building, including in the field of trade.  We will not be able to develop Africa while we are dependent on others for policymaking, planning and implementation.  
5.	Increasing the effectiveness of the role of UN agencies in Africa, through a greater coherence, cooperation and harmonization, and wider allocation of funds needed for the implementation process.
6.	Accelerating the ongoing dialogue with Africa's development partners, to achieve concrete progress towards honouring their commitments to reach the Overseas Development Assistance target of 0.7 per cent of their Gross Domestic Product (GDP), addressing the problem of foreign indebtness, supporting African efforts to attract additional foreign investments, as well as achieving substantial market access for African exports.
In conclusion, let me underline once again that NEPAD is a long-term process.  Transformation of a continent, as you are certainly aware, is by no means an easy task.  Thus, when assessing what NEPAD has achieved in the very short time of its existence, it should be understood against this backdrop.
&& The Chairman thanked the representative of NEPAD for his statement, and opened the floor for questions and comments.
With regard to development in Africa, the representative of Japan said that in 1993, Japan had initiated the Tokyo International Conference for African Development (TICAD).  The philosophy of the TICAD process was based on equal partnership with African countries.  Japan had articulated its intention to support NEPAD at the Third TICAD meeting held in September 2003, and welcomed its implementation.  For example, a Japanese expert had been dispatched to the NEPAD Secretariat. Japan had also signed the TICAD-NEPAD Joint Policy Framework and the common policy guideline for promoting trade and investment between Africa and Asia.  Japan would deepen its cooperation with the NEPAD Secretariat in the near future. In his speech at the Asia-Africa Summit in April 2005, the Prime Minister of Japan announced that in the three years to come, Japan would double its official development assistance to Africa, with grant aid continuing to be its central feature.  As a member of the G8 group of countries, Japan was committed and willing to contribute to African development in the near future.  
&& The representative of Haiti said that the representative of NEPAD in his statement had mentioned that in order for Africa to reach a growth rate of 7 per cent, there was a need for $64 billion per year.  However, in 2003 the international community had granted $21 billion. He wondered how the gap of $43 billion had been filled.  He also asked what problems NEPAD had encountered in terms of implementation.
&& The representative of the United States asked whether NEPAD had encountered any difficulties or challenges in having trade policy and the benefits of trade integrated into national development strategies.
&& The representative of Egypt said his delegation believed that it was always useful to have dialogue with regional groupings or organizations responsible for development.  On the issue of coherence, he said that NEPAD did not wish to replace other organizations, but to complement them.  He suggested that for purposes of technical assistance, the Secretariat could explore ways to get feedback from organizations working on a regional basis.  He said that interaction on an annual basis between NEPAD and the CTD would be a very beneficial exercise.  He asked what the representative of NEPAD thought could be done in the WTO to have more cooperation with NEPAD.
&& The representative of Kenya said she was interested to hear more about the market access pillar, and specific elements that could be incorporated in the negotiations on the road to the next Ministerial Conference.  She also supported the proposal of the representative of Egypt for more frequent interaction between WTO and NEPAD.
&& The representative of the European Communities said he was interested in how the objectives and priorities coming out of the NEPAD process were reflected in national plans, and how this was translated into support from the donor community in terms of development investment for projects and other activities.  He said that coherence and coordination between donors was important in order to avoid duplication.
&& The representative of FAO asked about the key elements of interaction between NEPAD and the United Nations system.
&& The representative of NEPAD thanked all delegations for the interest shown in what NEPAD was doing to promote the development process in Africa.  With regard to the intervention made by the representative of Japan, he said that NEPAD was working very closely with TICAD, and cooperation between the two initiatives was deepening.  He said that NEPAD was appreciative that TICAD was attempting to align its programmes with the priorities of NEPAD.  He said that NEPAD welcomed Japan's support, not only as co-sponsor of TICAD, but also as a member of the G8.
With regard to the question of the representative of Haiti, the representative of NEPAD said that while there was a need for $64 billion for the financing of projects, official development assistance was not the only source of funds.  For example, efforts were being made to make Africa more attractive for foreign direct investment.  Increasing African trade through enhanced market access was another possible way to gain resources for financing.  With regard to constraints that were being faced in implementing NEPAD projects and plans of action, he mentioned the need to strengthen the awareness and sense of ownership among the African people.  He also mentioned the need to build capacity and capabilities of the regional economic communities, these being the implementers and designers of the NEPAD projects.
With regard to the point raised by the representative of the United States about integrating NEPAD policies within national strategies, the representative of NEPAD said that one of the main characteristics of NEPAD's programmes was that they were regional in nature, with the objective of promoting  regional integration.  National-level projects were not directly part of NEPAD's work.  The need for  NEPAD policies and strategies to reach the national level was nevertheless recognized.  Work in this direction was being undertaken at the level of the regional economic communities, as well as on a continent-wide basis within the AU sectoral meetings.  For example, it had been decided that at least 10 per cent of every national budget should be allocated to the agricultural field.  Within the regional economic communities, projects to be implemented on a short, medium and long‑term basis were identified by the countries themselves through the regional communities they were part of.
&& The representative of NEPAD agreed with the representative of Egypt on the need for more frequent interaction between WTO and NEPAD.  He said that NEPAD was obtaining tangible support from the WTO Secretariat in terms of trade negotiations capacity building, and he believed cooperation would be deepened and strengthened in the future.
With regard to the comment made by the representative of Kenya, the representative of NEPAD said that the market access pillar was high on NEPAD's agenda.  NEPAD was continuing its dialogue in this area with developed country partners in fora such the Africa Partnership Forum (APF).
&& The representative of NEPAD thanked the European Communities for its active participation in dialogue with NEPAD in a number of fora, including the APF.  He also expressed his appreciation for the support given by FAO for the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural Development Programme.
&& The Committee took note of the statement of the representative of NEPAD and of all interventions.     
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Annual Report on Training and Technical Cooperation, 1 January to 31 December 2004 (WT/COMTD/W/139)
Technical Cooperation Audit Annual Report for 2004 (WT/COMTD/W/138) 
&& The Chairman said the first two sub-items under this agenda item were concerned with the annual reports for 2004, namely the Annual Report on Training and Technical Cooperation – document WT/COMTD/W/139 – and the Technical Cooperation Audit Annual Report – document WT/COMTD/W/138.  He proposed that the Committee consider the two reports together.  The Secretariat would, therefore, briefly introduce the reports, after which the floor would be opened for questions and discussion.  
&& The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Co-operation introduced the Annual Report on Training and Technical Cooperation.  He said that the report covered the activities of the Institute of Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) in 2004.  He recalled that a new approach to Trade-Related Technical Assistance (TRTA) had been approved at the end of 2003 and put in place as of 2004.  The approach was articulated around a series of products with objectives attached to them, including quality, impact, sustainability, geographical balance – but with an emphasis on identified DDA target groups (for example, LDCs and small and vulnerable economies) – flexibility, and reliance on partnerships.  Even with all of these objectives the programme remained demand driven in its essence. 
&& The Director of the ITTC recalled the process of informal consultations that was inaugurated in 2004 and which had provided a useful framework for working through issues of concern to Members and to the Secretariat.  One outcome of the consultations was the bi-annual system of reporting that was now in place.  In the middle of last year, there had been a mid-term review which had been an occasion to report on the outcomes of the informal consultation process on a number of policy oriented issues, such as needs assessment, the focus on LDCs, and the partnership programme with academic institutions.  This process of informal consultation was continuing in 2005, and the first consultation had been held on 7 April.
&& The ITTC Director proposed to highlight a number of features of the Annual Report which he thought were important. Paragraphs 9 to 13 of the document provided a broad overview.  A total of 501 activities had been conducted, with over 28,000 participant days in those activities.  This was about 90 per cent of what had been foreseen at the outset of the programme.  Breakdowns by geographical region, type of activity and nature of substance dealt with were also provided.  A tabular summary was to be found in the annex.
The report went on to provide a qualitative summary of the activities for 2004, providing a flavour of what was done under the various product categories.  One activity worth mentioning was the Regional Trade Policy Courses (RTPCs).  These were having a growing success and impact in the programme:  more people were being trained, and capacity was being built up in partner institutions and in individuals working with the WTO to provide a regional focus.  The Director of the ITTC paid tribute to the academic partners for 2004, namely the University of West Indies, Hong Kong University, University Mohammed V Souissi Campus in Morocco and the University of Nairobi.  This section of the report provided descriptions of the thematic activities in some detail. 
Paragraphs 83 to 91 dealt with training activities with academia – either academic institutions or individuals operating in academic institutions.  It was felt that these activities held great promise in terms of their sustainability.  They included the RTPCs already mentioned, as well as other activities designed to give beneficiary country academics and their institutions more capacity to train in WTO matters.  This led to a higher degree of ownership of these activities in the beneficiary countries.  In addition, the e-training programme was re-launched on a new platform and a successful first course had been held last year.  The aims of the e-training programme were to act as a springboard for more advanced training, as well as to serve as stand-alone training at a more basic level.  The programme offered opportunities to those who could not be physically present at training activities, either in Geneva or in the regions. 
Information on Geneva-based support activities was provided in paragraphs 99 to 100.  Such activities included the Geneva weeks and internships, including the programme of support for missions that acted as coordinators for the various groups that existed in the WTO.  Resources for mission internships had been exhausted at the end of 2004, but had been partly replenished, and the programme was continuing in 2005.  The ITTC Director confirmed that the Government of the Netherlands had undertaken to sponsor a revised Netherlands trainee programme and that the programme was now underway.  He offered his thanks to the Government of the Netherlands for its support of internship programmes in the WTO.
Paragraphs 101 to 131 dealt with partnerships, including sections on JITAP and the Integrated Framework.  Flourishing partnerships with some international agencies were also worth mentioning, including with ESCAP, Agence de la Francophonie (which was particularly active in Africa), International Development Law Organization, UNIDO, and the Inter-American Development Bank in Latin America (in particular its training arm, the INTAL).
The report contained only a short section on monitoring and evaluation, as there was a separate report on that subject. 
Information on the funding situation was contained in the last paragraphs of the report.  The  financial situation in 2004 had been good, and 82 per cent of the budget for the year had been spent.  In addition, 82 per cent of the regular budget had been spent.  The latter information had been inadvertently left out of the report, and a corrigendum would be issued. There was a comfortable cushion to begin 2005, but the situation for the year was still a matter of preoccupation. CHF 18.7 million had been received in cash and pledges, while the target was CHF 28 million.  On the spend side, CHF 17 million had been spent or committed.  There was hardly any money to carry out the balance of the programme.
All in all, 2004 was a source of satisfaction.  There was a feeling that the Secretariat had been  able to respond to the needs of Members in a timely and flexible way, that inroads had been made on the question of sustainable capacity building, and that the money Members had entrusted to the Secretariat had been well used. 
The Head of the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit (TCAU) made the following statement introducing the Technical Cooperation Audit Annual Report:
Mr. Chairman.  The Committee has before it in document WT/COMTD/W/138 the fourth Annual Report of the Technical Cooperation Audit.  In fact, the report covers the period from 1 January to 31 December 2004.
Judging from the repeated references that have been made in the Committee by Members to the importance of the transparency of and accountability for our technical assistance programme, this report, I believe, responds to a priority need that has been identified by Members.  I hope that Members will find the report useful, and that it can serve as a basis for discussion and guidance from Members both for our future technical assistance activities and for the evaluation thereof.
I will confine my introductory remarks to highlighting four main points.  
The first concerns what I would call the context or, if you prefer, the background.  The report recalls that 2004 was the first year of the implementation of Technical Assistance on the basis of the new planning framework.  The transition from the old planning framework was smooth and we have found that the Members received even more TA than in 2003.  It was characterized by an impressive number of activities (501 in 2004), coupled with the continuously high number of beneficiaries and the short duration (somewhat less than three days, on average).  This is not a new observation. It would seem that the Secretariat continued to deliver activities for the benefit of as many people as possible and to satisfy the maximum possible number of requests.  This might lead to the conclusion that, overall, the quantitative approach still prevailed over a more qualitative one.  The new planning framework which grouped the TA activities and training programmes facilitated Members' understanding of what WTO could offer.  The flexibility built into the Plan helped tailor activities to specific Member needs.  All this pointed to gradually following a more qualitative approach in delivering activities in the future. 
The Audit Unit appreciates that the 2004 TA and Training Plan made specific references to the recommendations made in last year's report.  It demonstrates that the Secretariat has started considering the recommendations, which were based on evaluation findings and conclusions, for implementation. 
Our second observation on the planning and design of TA activities was that further efforts to have activities better adapted to the identified needs of the Members may require the development of more specific and in-depth activities that are better prepared and that are maybe of longer duration.  We have also observed some improvement in the preparation and design of the activities and training programmes which are now driven by clearer objectives.  However, further efforts are needed in this area until all the staff providing TA fully master the basic concepts and tools.  One of the immediate tasks concerns the formulation of performance indicators and targets not only at the level of the individual activities but also for the products that are included in the Plan.
Our third observation on the results-based implementation and evaluation of the TA and training activities point to the continued satisfaction of the participants with the quality of TA received.  We introduced last year a kind of a success-rating of the activities, which showed that more than 90 per cent of them were considered successful or very successful.  In this regard, I would also mention that female participants are still outnumbered by male ones, the latter representing some two‑thirds of the beneficiaries.  We feel it is important that women should get equal opportunities and treatment when it comes to being selected for participation in WTO TA activities. 
The Audit Unit believes that a good results-based management should not only measure the performance on the basis of monitoring information but manage the performance by utilizing evaluative information.  Although the internal evaluation system is gradually consolidating, there is still a lot to do in making evaluation findings better used and recommendations followed-up.  Reporting about TA and training results is an important evaluation management tool.  In this regard, the Audit Unit has observed an improvement, as witnessed by the increasing number of self‑evaluation reports (BTORs) received (last year we received 224 BTORs and 35 Memos).  However, some 36  per cent of the reports did not reach the Audit Unit.
Fourthly, and in summary, the overall quality of the assistance delivered remained high in 2004.  The TA providers in general demonstrated an impressive command of their subjects, and a thorough professionalism in delivery.  It should also be noted that apart from a few occasional complaints about too much workload, the Audit Unit did not identify a teaching/training fatigue.  However, it is not excluded that the consistently high level of success rates might lead to a kind of complacency.  It is true that the WTO Secretariat has a certain comparative advantage over other agencies in delivering TA by being "advocates" of the WTO agreements.  But one should not forget that teaching about WTO agreements and building trade-related capacities is a free market also open to other agencies.  Hence is the major lesson that one should not rest on one's laurels but should make continuous efforts for improvements in the teaching methods, presentations and also in paying more attention to applying participative methods and systematic collaboration with fellow-colleagues both in the Secretariat and in the regions.
In closing, I would call your attention to some typos in the report.  In paragraph 57 (penultimate line) the cross-reference paragraph number is not 116 but 117 and in paragraph 123, the referenced paragraph numbers should read 21 and 39 (in lieu of 22 and 40).
Those, Mr. Chairman, are the few remarks by way of introduction to this report on the TA activities for 2004.  I am sure Members have comments and observations to make about this report, and perhaps about my remarks, and I am ready to answer any questions or comments that Members may wish to make.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
&& The Chairman thanked the Secretariat for the presentations, and opened the floor for questions and comments.
&& The representative of Japan said his delegation appreciated that recipient countries could make their requests when the need arose, as stated in paragraph 5 of the Annual Report.  The number of activities was satisfactory, given the scarcity of human resources in the WTO.  It was appreciated that some 90 per cent of the participant days had been achieved, as stated in paragraph 9.  His delegation was, however, of the view that more details on participating rates would be useful, on a project by project basis if possible.  Turning to the Audit Report, his delegation welcomed the fact that the  recommendations of the Audit Unit had been duly reflected in the TA Plan, as mentioned in paragraph 17.  With regard to the recommendation in paragraph 27 that TA planning be brought in line with the biennial planning of the regular budget-financed activities, he said that his delegation was not opposed to discussing this issue, but that the broader picture of TA after the conclusion of the DDA should be kept in mind.  His delegation supported the proposal made in paragraph 33 that staff Members of ITTC should join Trade Policy Review (TPR) missions as appropriate.  He also noted that a workshop in Geneva could cost between 500,000 and 1 million CHF, and suggested that this be discussed seriously in the context of the TA Plan for 2006.  Finally, he announced that the Government of Japan had decided to make a financial contribution of CHF 1 million to the DDA Global Trust Fund for the present year.
&& The representative of the European Communities noted that the ITTC Director had mentioned that the implementation rate in terms of funding was 82 per cent. He inquired whether the Secretariat could shed some light on what had caused the shortfall.  His delegation had also been expecting that additional information would be included on the financial aspects linked to particular activities, and wondered whether Members would receive any information of that nature in due course.  He inquired whether the Secretariat would be able to give some information on the number of activities which were pre-programmed in the Plan, and those which were undertaken on an ad hoc basis.  With regard to the Audit Report, his delegation was interested in the recommendations that were made, and was willing to discuss them further.  His delegation had noted that the report seemed to suggest that needs assessments were not yet being used as actual tools, and sought clarification from the Secretariat on this.  His delegation was also interested in the recommendation of looking closely at the operation of the reference centres; this was part of the process of transferring a function from WTO to nationally or regionally based activities, and sustainability was therefore an important consideration.    
&& The representative of Canada asked whether the Secretariat might have some ideas on how to improve on the implementation rate.  She also asked for clarification on what the percentages in Table 2 on page 26 of the Annual Report referred to, as they did not add up to 100.  With regard to the Audit Report, her delegation could support the recommendations made.  However, it was felt that a little more analysis of the implications of some of the recommendations should be undertaken;  for example, what would be the implications of a shift to a two-year TA Plan.  She also noted that the Audit Report contained some comments with little or no recommendations, for example in relation to the qualitative elements, with regard to the saturation with WTO TA, or selection of candidates.  There was also the issue of communication between missions and capitals which needed to be discussed.  She appreciated the information given on participation of men and women, and the recommendation of equal access for women.  She also suggested that the costs of the consultant who was engaged to work on the annual audit be put on the regular budget, given the importance of carrying out the monitoring and auditing function on a regular basis.
&& The representative of Egypt said that the establishment of the RTPCs had been an extremely positive step in the provision of TA, and had had a positive impact on the beneficiary countries.  On the subject of participation in TA activities, he said that problems still existed in the area of communication and timing.  In particular, after the notice of an activity was issued, there was frequently not enough time for countries to make appropriate preparations for a representative to attend. With regard to the quality of the courses, he felt that there needed to be an upgrade in the content and structure of the material to better cater to the practical needs of officials working on WTO issues. 
&& The representative of Bangladesh inquired whether there was a system in place to measure and reduce the gap between training received and training not fruitfully utilized.  Alternately, was there a system to measure the degree of relevance of the field of training to the field of subsequent placement, and was any feedback on this received from recipient countries.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation would welcome examples of successful TA activities over the year.  On the WTO-UNIDO Memorandum of Understanding, she inquired whether there were needs assessments taking place that replicated what was being done under the Integrated Framework (IF).  With regard to the Audit Report, her delegation appreciated the recommendations for improvement, and welcomed more discussion on the implications of the recommendations.  Her delegation believed that the monitoring and evaluation function was critical for the success and evolution of TA, and supported Canada's proposal that this be handled from the regular budget.  Her delegation also supported the goal of being more specific in the indicators.  She also recognized the need to address through TA the practical needs of officials working on WTO issues. 
&& The representative of Australia said that her delegation considered the reports, and especially the Audit Report, responsive to many of the questions that had been raised in the past.  Her delegation looked forward to working with others to refine the indicators and targets. 
&& The representative of Switzerland suggested that a table of contents at the beginning of each report would be helpful.  His delegation, like that of the European Communities, had been expecting an annual financial report to be presented.  The progress made by the Secretariat in enhancing the quality of the TA activities was recognized, but his delegation continued to have some concerns about the quantitative approach that still prevailed.  It was noted that more than 60 per cent of activities concerned workshops of three days or less.  His delegation was not opposed to the recommendation in the Audit Report to have a two-year planning period, but wanted to highlight the fact that multi-year planning documents had been prepared prior to adopting the annual approach to planning;  it had been decided to set aside the multi-year approach because of the ad hoc activities that came up through the course of the plan.  In addition, he pointed out that an independent evaluation was going to be carried out soon; before moving to a two-year plan, therefore, it would be useful to have the results of the evaluation.  With regard to the recommendation in the Audit Report concerning the reference centres, his delegation suggested that it would be better to wait until the results of the independent evaluation were available before establishing such centres within universities.  His delegation supported the RTPCs, as the quality of the courses was high, and they were easy to monitor and evaluate.  What was, however, more difficult to evaluate was the impact at the national level, and his delegation had some concerns about the measurement of this.  His delegation had noted that three-month courses would no longer take place in Nairobi, and in that context inquired about the future of RTPCs in English-speaking Africa.  His delegation expressed concern that the financial situation of the Audit Unit was not assured, and supported the inclusion of that Unit in the regular planning and budget for each year.
&& The representative of Guinea said that TA activities were very important for LDCs, as they contributed to the strengthening of human resources.  He noted the high cost of organizing an activity in Geneva, and suggested that a detailed examination be carried out to explore the possibility of having more activities outside of Geneva in order to cut costs.  He agreed with the representative of Egypt that problems were often faced from an organizational and administrative point of view if the notice of a TA activity was issued too soon before the actual event.  He also brought to the attention of delegations the visa problems faced by officials from his country when coming to Geneva for TA activities.
&& The representative of Morocco commended the Secretariat for the RTPCs.  He noted that  RTPCs would no longer be held in Nairobi, and that the Secretariat's partnership with the University of Nairobi had entered a new phase.  He inquired whether this was a strategy adopted by the Secretariat that would also apply to other current venues for these courses.  In particular, he inquired whether the RTPC currently hosted by his country would also eventually advance to another phase.
&& The Chairman noted that paragraph 12 of the Annual Report mentioned that regional seminars were the most demanding in many ways, including in terms of cost.  He wondered if this statement also applied to RTPCs, since presumably from a costing point of view organizing activities outside of Geneva would be less expensive.
&& The Director of the ITTC, in response to the question from the representative of Japan about measuring implementation rates on a project by project basis, said that this was possible for regional activities;  such information had been provided in the previous year.  With regard to the point made about ITTC staff joining TPR missions, he said that this was already happening.  About the relatively high cost of organizing events in Geneva, he cautioned against suggestions to move all events to the regions;  since the Geneva-based activities were often subject-specific, organizing several subject‑specific activities in each of the regions would not necessarily bring down costs.  As there were already several activities taking place on a regional basis, what was perhaps of more fundamental importance was to examine the value of the Geneva-based symposia. 
&& The ITTC Director said that for activities financed from the Global Trust Fund, the reasons for the reported implementation rates were the same as they had always been.  After the plan was put in place, several factors contributed to a less than 100 per cent implementation rate.  Some reasons might have included the inability of finding an appropriate venue, a shift in emphasis by countries in a region, or a lack of demand for national activities.  With regard to the regular budget, the reasons were clearer.  In 2004, the four trade policy courses organized in Geneva had cost quite a bit less than had been budgeted.  A programme of activities with universities had also been included, and this had not been fully utilized.  He said that in 2005 less had been budgeted for the trade policy courses, and in addition there would be no surplus for the university programme in 2005.  As for what could be done to improve the implementation rates, he suggested that this was something that could be discussed during the informal consultations.
With regard to the request of some delegations for a financial report, the ITTC Director said that this request would be transmitted to the Administration and General Services Division (AGSD).  He said that the AGSD was undergoing some changes in relation to management of funds for TA, and that could explain to some extent why there was less financial information in the report than some delegations might have expected.
&& The ITTC Director said that the tables in the annex of the Annual Report gave a general idea of the split between what had been programmed and what had not.  Regional and global activities had been programmed. National activities were not programmed by definition.  With regard to other activities (conferences, etc.), he said that some had been known about in advance, and some had not. 
In addressing the point made about the need for Members to be given sufficient advance notice of TA activities, the ITTC Director said that there was usually a nine to ten week lead time in the preparation of a regional activity.  He said  that letters were sent out about one month to one and a half months in advance of an activity, which seemed to allow sufficient preparation time.  He urged beneficiary countries to improve and speed up their internal processes. 
With regard to the point raised by the representative of Egypt on the need for improved quality of the TA activities, the ITTC Director said that this was related to the issue of basic training versus more advanced training.  He said that the current objective was to look for more advanced and sustainable types of training.  Among the Geneva-based programmes, a number of activities were moving to an advanced level.  He also pointed out that  participants in a TA activity typically had very diverse backgrounds, and it was, therefore, not always possible to focus only on advanced training.  He was, however, willing to work with Members to improve the process of selecting participants.
&& The ITTC Director said it would certainly be possible to include some examples of successes in the Annual Report, as had been suggested by the representative of the United States.  Some examples of when things had not gone so well might also be useful.  He also said that it would not be a problem to include a table of contents in the report. 
On the question of the future of RTPCs for English-speaking Africa, the ITTC Director said that RTPCs for this group of countries would still be held, and only the venue would change.  The next course would be held in Namibia, beginning in June 2005.  He also said that from the start the idea behind regional courses had been for the courses to be held in a venue only long enough for the academic partner to take on board in a sustainable manner what was being offered by the WTO.  The WTO would then move on to hold courses in other venues.
In response to the question by the Chairman, the ITTC Director clarified that a regional seminar or RTPC was heavier in terms of logistics, and a longer lead time was required.  A national activity, on the other hand, could be organized in a very short time frame.
&& The representative of Kenya said she wished to comment on the relocation of RTPCs to new venues.  She said that before moving to the next phase of collaboration between WTO and a local partner, it was important that the capacity be appropriately built in each hosting country.  Her delegation suggested that a tool was required to measure whether the appropriate capacity had been attained in each venue before moving the RTPCs to other countries. 
It was confirmed by a representative of ITTC that the percentages in the Annex table did not add up to 100, which was an error.  This would be corrected. The absolute numbers on the activities were, however, correct. 
With regard to the question by the representative of the United States on the scope of the  WTO-UNIDO Memorandum of Understanding, the representative of ITTC said there were some similarities between the WTO-UNIDO collaboration and the IF, and UNIDO was involved in a number of IF-related programmes.  However, the WTO-UNIDO collaboration was much narrower in its focus than the IF, and was more targeted on specific issues.
The Head of the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit said that the issue of quality versus quantity was a key consideration.  The issue touched upon questions relating to the number of activities per year, the process of selecting participants, the agenda and scope of activities, and the duration of activities.  If efforts were made to improve on some of these elements, the balance between quality and quantity would necessarily be affected. 
With regard to indicators and targets, the Head of the TCAU said that these needed to be improved further.  He believed that this could be done not only at the level of individual TA activities, but also at the product level. 
The Head of the TCAU, in relation to the recommendation of putting in place a planning schedule of more than one year, said that this would allow a little more planning to take place in advance, and may also make it easier to get resources. 
With regard to the recommendation for an evaluation of the reference centres, the Head of the TCAU said that what had been thought of was an internal thematic evaluation.  On the idea of extending the reference centres to universities, he said that TCAU was only thinking about the universities that had been partners in the preparation of the RTPCs.
The Head of the TCAU said there were currently sufficient funds allocated to TCAU to finance a consultant until June 2005.  If monitoring and evaluation were to be considered as a separate budget line in the next TA Plan, this would only be effective from January 2006.  An immediate need was for more funds to cover the period from September to December 2005. 
&& The Committee took note of the reports and the interventions made. 
Terms-of-Reference for the Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance Activities (WT/COMTD/W/140)
&& The Chairman recalled that the subject of a review of WTO-provided trade-related technical assistance was briefly discussed in the CTD in 2004.  Some donor countries, in light of the increasing WTO technical assistance activities, had suggested the possibility of proceeding with an external evaluation.  The Secretariat had subsequently been requested to prepare a first draft of the Terms‑of‑Reference for interested delegations.  The document WT/COMTD/W/140 served as a compilation of different contributions and suggestions made by delegations in meetings held on 12 April and 2 May 2005. He said that the exercise would be fully financed by separate contributions by donor countries, and that the Secretariat had already received a contribution from one Member.  He called Members' attention to paragraph 12 of the document that referred to the composition of the Steering Committee which would be monitoring the exercise, and also to the overall request before the CTD to adopt the Terms-of-Reference for the Strategic Review (TOR).  He said that one of the main issues to be addressed by the CTD after adopting the TOR was the appointment of the Steering Committee;  in that regard, he proposed to follow the normal practice in WTO bodies, which was for the Chairman to select the Steering Committee.  
&& The representative of Egypt agreed that the Chairman could conduct information consultations and select the Steering Committee, which would then be approved by the CTD.  He asked when the CTD would meet for this purpose.  
&& The Chairman said that there were two ways of approving the Steering Committee.  One way was for him to send out a fax once the names of the participating Members were available.  An alternate way was to briefly convert the CTD in Dedicated Session into a meeting of the Regular Session.  
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation was comfortable with the TOR.  She also said that her delegation was agreeable to the Chairman sending out a fax to inform of the names of the participants in the Steering Committee.
&& The representative of Norway said that his delegation was comfortable with the TOR.  His delegation was looking forward to the outcome of the Review.  He said that his delegation would use the Review, in parallel with the Annual Report and the Annual Audit, as a tool when discussing work in progress over the coming years 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was comfortable with the TOR.  With regard to the appointment of the Steering Committee, she said that her delegation would accept any logical procedure suggested by the Chairman. 
&& The representative of China said that his delegation welcomed the Chairman's proposal on the selection of the Steering Committee.  He wondered whether the TOR could be adopted with the understanding that the composition of the Steering Committee would be decided after consultation.
&& The Chairman said that further consultations would certainly be held on the selection of the Steering Committee. 
&& The Committee adopted the TOR, and agreed that the Chairman could, after further consultations, appoint the Steering Committee through a fax. 
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman reminded Members that the next meeting of the CTD was scheduled for 5 and 6 October 2005.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________


 Data published in this document (except where otherwise indicated) are derived from the WTO's International Trade Statistics Report 2004 and the online WTO's Statistics Database (http://www.wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/statis_e.htm). 
 Defined as agricultural products plus mining products, excluding fuels.  The product classification used in this report is based on the one applied in the WTO International Trade Statistics 2004 (except where otherwise indicated).  Among others, the definition of agricultural products differs from the definition applied in the WTO trade negotiations on market access in agriculture.  One of the major differences is the inclusion of fish and fish products in the former but not in the latter.

WT/COMTD/M/53 Page  PAGE 32



	WT/COMTD/M/53 	Page  PAGE 33













