WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/75
28 September 2009


(09-4529)


Committee on Trade and Development
Seventy-Fifth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 15 JULY 2009

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)

 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC241554009" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC241554009 \H 1
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC241554010" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC241554010 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc241554011" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc241554011 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc241554012" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc241554012 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC241554013" C.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC241554013 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc241554014" (i)	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2008 (WT/COMTD/W/168)	 PAGEREF _Toc241554014 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc241554015" (ii)	Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2008 (WT/COMTD/W/169 and WT/COMTD/W/169/Rev.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc241554015 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC241554016" D.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC241554016 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc241554017" (i)	Communications on the Generalized System of Preferences scheme of Norway (WT/COMTD/65 and Add.1 to Add.3)	 PAGEREF _Toc241554017 \h 8
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc241554018" (ii)	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union (WT/REG222/N/1 and Corr.1, WT/COMTD/N/25, WT/COMTD/66 and Add.1 to Add.3)	 PAGEREF _Toc241554018 \h 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC241554019" E.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (WT/L/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC241554019 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC241554020" F.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC241554020 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC241554021" G.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC241554021 \H 11


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 75th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3391/Rev.1 issued on 9 July 2009.  He said that he wished to add a matter under "Other Business" concerning the CTD's reporting requirements in light of the Seventh Ministerial Conference, which would be held later in 2009.
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.
It was so agreed.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2008 (WT/COMTD/W/168)
Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2008 (WT/COMTD/W/169 and WT/COMTD/W/169/Rev.1)
&& The Chairman said that there were two reports for consideration under this agenda item, namely the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training (TA Report) for 2008 – circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/168 – and the Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2008 – circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/169.  A revision of the Audit Report, in English only, had been issued.
He said that the WTO's technical assistance (TA) activities were related to the mandate on Aid for Trade.  The Second Global Review on Aid for Trade, which had been held on 6 and 7 July 2009, dealt with the coordination aspect of the WTO's work on Aid for Trade.  The present agenda item was concerned with the delivery aspect of the WTO's Aid-for-Trade work.  He said that discussion under this agenda item would begin with introductory remarks by the Director-General.  This would be followed by brief presentations of the TA Report and the Audit Report by the Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) and the Head of the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit (TCAU), respectively.  The floor would then be opened for questions and comments.
&& The Director-General said that the Second Global Review on Aid for Trade had been a success in a number of ways.  The presence of the UN Secretary-General, as well as the heads of international organizations, regional economic communities and regional development banks, had provided a clear signal of their political commitment to the Aid-for-Trade agenda, and of their recognition of its potential to help developing countries enhance their capacity to trade.  The Review had also reaffirmed the commitment of donors to deliver on their pledges, and had provided a clear picture of Aid-for-Trade flows and their positive trend.  Developing countries had reaffirmed their commitment to the mainstreaming of trade into their development strategies.  Key areas had been highlighted that would constitute the WTO's Aid-for-Trade agenda moving forward.  These included the need to enhance the regional dimension of Aid for Trade, the need to maintain momentum on commitments, the need to enhance the role of the private sector in Aid for Trade, and the importance of devoting attention to evaluating the impact of Aid-for-Trade interventions in developing countries. 
All of this demonstrated the role of the WTO as the coordinator of the Aid-for-Trade initiative.  The WTO, however, also had another role, which was that of a provider of Aid for Trade.  The WTO's TA programme represented the organization's core Aid-for-Trade contribution in this regard.  The present meeting was a welcome opportunity to assess how the organization was delivering on this mandate and to hear from Members on how the impact of TA could be enhanced. 
He indicated that efforts to improve the content, delivery and scope of the WTO's TA activities had yielded results.  The regional dimension of TA had been strengthened by expanding the organization's network of regional partners.  The WTO now delivered more TA with regional economic communities and institutions, in line with the general trend of Aid for Trade.  The organization had expanded ways to deliver TA, in particular by enhancing the e-training programme, thereby ensuring that TA reached more recipients in a cost effective manner.  The e-training programme was one of the most dynamic domains of activities of the WTO.  It was being expanded to cover more areas of the WTO's work.  It was also being used as a prelude to the advanced training programmes, thereby maximizing efficiency and impact.  The organization had achieved positive results from widening the scope of the recipients of TA to include not just government ministries, but also legislatures and civil society.  The WTO was continuing to make efforts to match its activities with Members' priorities.  By ensuring consistency with priorities, the TA activities would remain relevant and would achieve the desired results.
On the evaluation side of the WTO's TA programme, the focus had shifted from evaluating input to evaluating output.  A continuous evaluation of the impact of the organization's TA activities would ensure that the WTO was able to demonstrate more clearly the results of its interventions.  The focus on evaluating output was also in line with the global direction that the Aid-for-Trade initiative would take.  While important progress had been made, there was also scope for improvement.  In the Technical Cooperation Audit Report, a number of areas had been identified where further work was required to enhance the TA programme.  Those included the need to redouble the WTO's efforts on assessing the needs of Members, making wider use of information technologies like video conferencing, and improving performance measurement.  The Audit Report also highlighted elements of  the Regional Trade Policy Courses (RTPCs) that required improving.  He concluded by saying that the WTO's TA activities could not be implemented without the continued support of the donor community.  This support was highly appreciated.  Given the current global economic realities, it was needed more than ever.  The WTO was fully aware of the budgetary constraints within which donors were operating, but urged them nevertheless to continue their support.
&& The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) said that 42 per cent of the 496 activities implemented in 2008 had benefited the least-developed countries (LDCs). Africa had benefited from 33 per cent of the activities.  He explained that the reforms that had been undertaken in TA since the beginning of 2008 had the objective of bringing TA activities in line with the directions that had been set in the Aid‑for‑Trade context.  In this regard, he said that he wanted to emphasize six points in particular. 
His first point concerned the regional dimension of the TA activities.  He explained that significant efforts had been made to favour the regional dimension in the implementation of the activities.  In 2008, a total of 148 regional activities had been carried out, which was a major increase relative to previous years.  Secondly, he highlighted the need to strengthen cooperation with regional partners.  He expressed his satisfaction that almost all regional activities in 2008 had been organized and implemented with regional partners.  This had been appreciated by Members, since it had provided a regional aspect to the activities.  His third point concerned coordination between TA providers, on which substantial progress had been made.  He recalled that he had informed the CTD at  an earlier meeting of a mechanism which had been put in place to coordinate the activities of agencies involved in trade-related TA.  In this context, a database of planned TA activities was being set up, and would likely be operational before the end of the year.  The CTD would be informed on progress made on the database, which he believed would be a useful coordination tool.
He said that his fourth point related to the process of opening up to new actors.  Small steps had been taken in this direction in recent years, but initiatives had been strengthened in 2008.  For example, activities had been organized in almost all the regions to promote awareness among parliamentarians of issues relating to international trade and trade negotiations, particularly in the context of the current economic crisis.  Activities had also been organized with academics, the media and the private sector.  The fifth point was concerned with the identification of needs.  In particular, he informed the Committee that significant efforts were being made to put in place new mechanisms which would allow a clearer identification of country needs.  Broad-based consultations on needs had been carried out recently in the context of preparations of the TA work programme for 2010 and 2011, so as to ensure that the TA activities reflected the priorities that had been expressed by Members.  Finally, he indicated that the evaluation of TA activities was also a priority.  He explained that this would ensure that TA really did contribute to building capacity in developing countries. 
&& The Head of the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit (TCAU) said that the Audit Report focused on three topics, namely the recommendations that had been made in past annual reports, the ex-post evaluation done for the RTPCs, and the Trade Facilitation Self-Assessments of Needs and Priorities (TFSANP) programme.
On the first topic, he said that many recommendations from previous years had been followed by the Secretariat.  This had led to a better management of TA and a higher quality of activities. Improvements had been observed in the assessment of government priorities prior to national activities, as well as on the selection of the participants.  Through more interactive training methods and a better measurement of performance, there had additionally been an improvement in the delivery of the activities.  Progress was, however, still needed in a number of areas.  For example, there was a need for a better assessment of Members' needs for planning and organizing regional activities, and for more use of video-conferencing.  In addition, improvements were required in reporting, performance measurement and the training of trainers.  Work to make improvements in these areas was receiving particular attention in 2009.  The TCAU's overall assessment was that, while significant progress had been made, further improvements were required.  
On the evaluation of the RTPCs, he said that a number of specific recommendations had been  made to improve the WTO's partnerships with regional academic institutions.  One objective was to maximize the regional partners' ownership of the activities.  In addition, there was a need to reinforce the WTO's cooperation with regional partners on course design and pedagogy, to improve joint teaching arrangements, to strengthen the management of the activities – in particular through better reporting – and to facilitate networking among RTPCs partners.  These recommendations were designed so that the RTPCs would fulfil their objective of building training and teaching institutional capacity in the regions.  Most of these recommendations had already been implemented.
Finally, he turned to the TFSANP programme, which had been launched late in 2006, and was financed through a dedicated trust fund.  Even if certain recommendations were made in the Audit Report, the programme was seen as a source of inspiration for other TA activities.  It had fully achieved its two main objectives, which were to draw up preliminary findings of national trade facilitation needs and priorities, and to contribute to a more effective participation of Members in the Trade Facilitation negotiations.  The programme, which covered 55 countries by the end of 2008, had remained within the allocated budget.  It was considered highly effective and efficient.  
&& The representative of Egypt said that a number of developing countries and LDCs did not have the necessary capacity to follow the work of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS).  In this light, he wondered whether it would be possible to put in place a mechanism for funding the participation of one of the enquiry points from such countries – at least from the LDCs – in the SPS Committee's meetings.  A mechanism of this nature, which would be of great benefit to some countries, could possibly be implemented in coordination with regional organizations.  He indicated that his delegation would continue to explore the idea with the Secretariat and in the SPS Committee. 
&& The representative of Sri Lanka expressed particular appreciation for the WTO's internship programme, which he saw as being of great benefit to Members with small missions.  He expressed hope that this programme would continue, and be enhanced.  He also suggested that there could be a broadening of the subjects covered by the e-training programme, and generally encouraged more enrolment in e-training activities.  Specifically with regard to the TA work programme for 2010 and 2011, he said that Sri Lanka was very keen on benefiting from an e-training course on non‑agricultural market access negotiations. 
&& The representative of the European Communities encouraged the Secretariat to continue its TA work in light of the recommendations that had been made, in particular those concerning monitoring, reporting and the measurement of impact.  She added that her delegation would appreciate it if contributions made by donors could be given greater visibility, including through the prompt issue of a press release.  This would help the EC maintain its commitment internally to the WTO's TA activities. 
&& The representative of Angola proposed that some TA activities be delivered in Portuguese.  While recognizing that Portuguese was not an official WTO language, his delegation was making this proposal after having seen that many officials from Portuguese-speaking African countries encountered serious linguistic difficulties when they participated in training activities that were provided in French or English.  Angola could help to organize activities in Portuguese.  He observed that his country still had considerable difficulties in accessing e-training programmes, since it lacked much of the necessary equipment.
&& The representative of China said that the recently-held Second Global Review on Aid for Trade had highlighted the essential role that Aid for Trade could play in helping developing countries cope with the economic crisis.  His delegation called for increased, high quality, technical assistance and capacity building, which would need the collective efforts of the Secretariat and of all WTO Members. China was pleased to have contributed financially to this process.  In particular, in 2008 China had for the first time made a donation to the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF).  It was China's intention to make a further contribution shortly.
&& The representative of Canada appreciated the Secretariat's efforts to improve the management of its TA activities, including through the selection of higher quality activities and through initiatives to better measure performance.  In this regard, he encouraged the ITTC to develop a performance management framework.  He also appreciated the efforts that had been made with regard to e-training, and in strengthening the regional dimension of the TA programme.  The regional  focus, which was of great importance in addressing capacity issues, implied a greater role for the WTO's regional desks.  He noted that the evaluations that had been summarized in the Audit Report were useful to his delegation, and also welcomed the reporting on the implementation of past recommendations.  His delegation looked forward to the WTO's TA programme for 2010 and 2011, which he believed would be comprehensive and well appreciated.
&& The representative of Senegal welcomed the recent innovations in the WTO's approach to TA, including the focus on e-training and on the regional dimension.  He noted that the planned work for 2010 and 2011 brought in the Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF), which he saw as very positive.  In terms of evaluation and assessment, Senegal was pleased to see that the Secretariat was considering adopting relevant and objective evaluation criteria.  With regard to the WTO's outreach activities, he noted that mention had been made of the media.  He said that public opinion on the activities of the WTO was often in the hands of the press.  He observed that it would be useful if programmes could be instituted to help journalists understand the fundamental principles that governed the WTO.  This would help them reflect the work of the organization as objectively as possible.
&& The representative of Oman said that her country, as a member of a customs union, supported the regional dimension to TA and a strengthening of cooperation with regional partners.  At the same time, in view of specific needs in certain areas, she also highlighted the importance of focusing on capacity building activities in individual countries.  She said that Oman was working in both directions, and hoped that the Secretariat would maintain the national approach in parallel with the regional approach.  
&& The representative of the Philippines said that his country had benefited from the various national, regional and e-training programmes that had been made available to developing country Members.  He expressed appreciation for the consultations that the ITTC had held with delegations from the Asia-Pacific region with regard to the TA programme for 2010 and 2011.  He encouraged continued efforts to ensure that TA would continue to be demand-driven, and in harmony with Members' priorities.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that the Director-General's presence served as a reminder that TA was an integral part of the Doha mandate to build the capacity of developing countries, particularly LDCs.  He observed that TA initiatives were more visible than initiatives relating to market access.  Bangladesh benefited from most types of TA activities, both in Geneva and outside.  He cited as examples the three national activities that were held each year, the internship programme and the upgrading of reference centres.  On possible ways to improve the WTO's TA, he suggested that a training programme for Geneva-based delegates could be instituted.  He also noted that there had previously been a programme in place in the WTO which allowed Geneva-based delegates from LDCs to take part in some national activities.  This had helped build the capacity of the Geneva-based delegates and had also allowed better coordination with the various ministries and agencies in the capital.  His delegation wanted to know the status of this programme.  He also indicated his delegation's interest in benefiting from a seminar devoted exclusively to Aid for Trade.  Finally, he noted that the regional activities in 2008 had almost all been held in non-LDC locations. He suggested that more LDCs could be chosen as venues for future activities. 
&& The representative of Nepal associated his delegation with the interventions made by Bangladesh, Egypt and Sri Lanka.  He emphasized the importance of having interns attached to small missions like his own, and requested continued support in this regard.  He also called for more regional activities to be held in LDCs.  He indicated that an activity in Nepal would not only build capacity, but would also help the country emerge from a conflict situation.  As a third point, he requested assistance for LDCs in identifying their technical needs, as it was not always easy for this group of countries to know where their priorities should lie.  Finally, he pointed to the usefulness of having the participation of Geneva-based delegates in national activities.  This participation would help the Geneva-based officials to not only be aware of the needs of their countries, but also to negotiate in Geneva.
&& The representative of Guinea said that her delegation was particularly appreciative of e‑training initiatives, as they allowed large numbers of people to be trained in a cost-effective way.  In this regard, she indicated that existing WTO reference centres needed to be modernized in beneficiary countries, and new reference centres needed to be established in universities.  She also appreciated the inclusion in the WTO's TA programme of activities related to the EIF.  She expressed her delegation's interest in the trade policy courses given in Geneva and in universities, and suggested that more such courses could be held, particularly in French.  More frequent courses on SPS and technical barriers to trade (TBT) were particularly welcome.  With regard to Guinea's TA needs, she pointed in particular to  negotiation techniques, trade facilitation and Aid for Trade. 
&& The representative of Tonga observed that TA activities were yielding more tangible benefits for some countries than those coming from market access initiatives.  He pointed to the benefits of the internship programme for small Pacific Island countries, and encouraged the continuation and enhancement of this programme.  He encouraged the ITTC to continue to work to improve the quality of its activities, and also to look for more innovative and effective delivery mechanisms for TA.  Looking to the 2010-2011 biennium, he urged the ITTC to increase its engagement in the Pacific region, in specific areas that had been identified, as well in the generic activities. 
&& The Director-General said that he taken note of the comments that had been made.  He said that he wished to respond to a point made by Senegal, which concerned activities directed towards the media.  For the time being, the media was not a priority in the WTO's TA programme.  There were, however, two kinds of activities that were being implemented for the benefit of journalists from developing countries.  The first concerned regular programmes organized in Geneva by the Friedrich Ebert Foundation and by the Swiss mission.  The second concerned ad hoc activities organized at the request of particular delegations, examples of which included Sri Lanka, Namibia and Oman.  He said that more interaction with the media could be considered, if Members felt that this was a priority.  He noted, however, that more activities directed towards the media might come at the expense of other activities.  Given the resources available, this reality had to be faced.  He invited the Deputy Director‑General in charge of development issues to respond to some of the other points that had been made.
The Deputy Director-General in charge of development issues began by responding to the point made by Egypt concerning SPS-related assistance.  She said that, as she understood it, the point was related to a capacity problem faced by some countries.  The Secretariat was analyzing how cooperation with regional organizations could be strengthened, and how SPS-related activities could be held at the regional level.  She also noted that the adjustments required to hold such activities would be made in response to the needs identified by Members but, given current resources, could not be additional to the regional activities that were planned.  It was likely that specific possibilities in this regard could be conveyed to Members before the end of 2009.  On the question regarding the possibility of holding TA activities in Portuguese, she said that the Secretariat could only produce documents in the three official languages.  All efforts were, however, made to be flexible in any particular circumstance.  For example, to the extent possible, a Portuguese speaker in the Secretariat would participate in a TA activity in a Portuguese-speaking country.
She next turned to the issue of e-training. On the basis of the number of enrolments, she observed that e-training was turning into a very successful experiment.  The objective was to expand the coverage of e-training to include all areas of TA provided by the WTO.  She explained that the idea behind the e-training initiative was to bring participants to a basic level of knowledge.  She recognized that there were connectivity problems in some countries, but indicated that the Secretariat was trying to find ways around these problems by, for example, distributing CD-ROMs.  She also agreed on the need to upgrade and maintain WTO reference centres. On the issue of assistance with the needs assessments of some countries, particularly LDCs, she pointed to the EIF.  In addition to being a framework for coordination, she said that the EIF aimed to identify the needs of LDCs.  Finally, on the question of increasing the visibility of what was being done with respect to TA, she said that much progress had been made in this area recently, for example in terms of press releases and newsletters.  She added that by training journalists from developing countries, more visibility could be given to what was being done in TA and the support that was being received.  
&& The Committee took note of the reports and of all interventions.   
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
Communications on the Generalized System of Preferences scheme of Norway (WT/COMTD/65 and Add.1 to Add.3)
&& The Chairman recalled that Norway had made a notification at the 69th Session of the CTD concerning its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme.  Two sets of questions from Brazil on the scheme had been circulated in documents WT/COMTD/65 and WT/COMTD/65/Add.2.  Responses to Brazil's questions were circulated by Norway in documents WT/COMTD/65/Add.1 and Add.3.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that this item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.
&& The representative of Brazil thanked the Norwegian delegation for the responses that had been provided to Brazil's questions.  He indicated that his delegation was still evaluating these responses.
&& The Chairman inquired whether Brazil wished to maintain the item on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation had no objection to removing the item from the agenda, with the understanding that it had the right to revert to this matter if necessary.
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee take note of Brazil's interventions.  He indicated that Brazil had the right to revert to this matter in the future if necessary. 
It was so agreed. 
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union (WT/REG222/N/1 and Corr.1, WT/COMTD/N/25, WT/COMTD/66 and Add.1 to Add.3)
&& The Chairman recalled that this item had appeared on the agenda of the last CTD meeting.  It had been agreed that the item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.  He understood that, since the last CTD meeting, the concerned delegations had continued their informal consultations on the matter, and that some progress had been made. 
&& The representative of Oman, on behalf of the GCC countries, said that the GCC had had constructive and positive bilateral consultations with the US.  Good progress had been made, and it was hoped that an acceptable solution could be found soon.
&& The representative of the United States agreed that constructive bilateral consultations had been held. Her delegation hoped that the matter could be resolved soon.  
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation was looking forward to a resolution of this matter.  He recalled that his delegation had indicated at the last CTD meeting that it would be useful if the Secretariat could provide relevant information on customs unions previously notified under the Enabling Clause.  In this regard, he reiterated his delegation's view that such information would be of use to Members.  He also referred to the Legal Note on Regional Trade Arrangements under the Enabling Clause, which had been prepared by the Secretariat in 2003 and circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/114.  He suggested that the Secretariat could update this note, in particular to distinguish between the terms of reference of the CTD and the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) in light of developments since the circulation of the document.     
In response to the intervention by Egypt, the Chairman said that the Secretariat had prepared a brief compilation of customs unions notified under the Enabling Clause.  He invited interested delegations to contact the Secretariat in this regard. He also indicated that due note had been taken of Egypt's request for an update to document WT/COMTD/W/114.  On the matter concerning the GCC notification, he encouraged the concerned delegations to continue their informal consultations, and expressed his hope that a solution could be found by the next CTD meeting.  He suggested that the concerned delegations could provide a status report at the next meeting, on the basis of which the Committee could decide on the course of action to take. 
It was so agreed.
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The Council had since extended the deadline to its July 2009 meeting.
He recalled that he had informed the CTD on previous occasions of the small-group informal consultations that he had been holding to consider the draft proposal by Brazil, China, India and the US on a Transparency Mechanism (TM) for Preferential Trade Arrangements (PTAs).  At the last CTD meeting, he had mentioned that the proponents were consulting with delegations with a view to revising their draft proposal.  He said that his intention remained to call an informal, open-ended meeting to consider the revised proposal shortly after it was circulated to Members.  He also indicated that he wanted the Secretariat's "mock" Factual Presentation of a PTA, based on the US' GSP scheme, to be considered at that informal meeting.
&& The representative of the United States expressed her delegation's continued support for the establishment of a TM for PTAs.  She said that her delegation had been working with the Secretariat in the preparation of a "mock" Factual Presentation of the US' GSP scheme, which she hoped would be completed soon.  Since the "mock" was not ready yet, she suggested that it would be necessary to request the General Council for a time extension to allow the CTD to continue its work on this matter.
&& The representative of India appreciated the interest that had been demonstrated by Members in the informal consultations called by the Chairman.  His delegation believed that the TM for PTAs would contribute immensely to Members' understanding of the contents and the working of PTAs.  While substantial progress had been made on this matter, it was always the last mile that was the most demanding.  His delegation looked forward to continued constructive engagement from Members with a view to an early conclusion to the technical work.
&& The representative of Brazil supported the intervention by India.  He said that his delegation remained fully committed to completing the technical work as soon as possible.
&& The representative of China supported the call for a time extension to be granted to the CTD in its consideration of this matter.  His delegation was committed to accelerating the work with a view to reaching an agreement as soon as possible.
&& The Chairman encouraged the proponents to continue their consultations with delegations. Upon hearing back from the proponents on the status of their consultations, he would look into the feasibility of calling a small-group meeting before eventually having the revised text discussed in an open-ended setting.  He went on to say that he would need to report to the General Council at its July 2009 meeting on the status of the CTD's consideration of this matter.  He said that he would inform the Council of the progress that had been made since December 2008, and would essentially provide the Council with the same information that he had been providing to the Committee.  He proposed to also ask the Council to grant the CTD additional time – until December 2009 – to consider the matter and report back for appropriate action.  He said that he intended to continue working with Members on the issue of transparency for PTAs.  The item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.  
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  He recalled that the CTD had to date undertaken three of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision.  
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that intensive negotiations had culminated in the adoption of the Hong Kong Decision.  Developed countries had agreed to provide DFQF market access for all products from all LDCs.  For those developed countries that had difficulties in doing so, it had been agreed that they would provide DFQF market access for 97 per cent of products defined at the tariff line level, by 2008 or no later than the start of the implementation period.  So far, all developed countries except for the US had provided DFQF treatment to products of LDCs.  The LDCs did not know what difficulties the US was facing in providing 100 per cent DFQF treatment to LDCs' products.  He added that the LDCs had taken part in an impact assessment of DFQF treatment that was carried out by the US International Trade Commission.  The provision of information by the US on any progress made towards ensuring meaningfully enhanced market access to LDCs' products would be appreciated.  
While being mindful of the fact that the CTD was not a negotiating body, the LDCs had been stressing three issues.  The first was the need for information on the products that would constitute the initial 97 per cent coverage.  Second, information was sought on a time-frame or date by which developed countries would grant DFQF treatment to products for LDCs.  Finally, the LDCs wanted to know a time-frame for the phasing-in of the remaining 3 per cent of products.  He said that the LDCs were asking for this information for the sake of stability, security and predictability, as had been mentioned in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.  They were only asking for the fulfilment of a commitment that had already been made.  He concluded by thanking the developed countries that were providing DFQF market access to LDCs, thereby de-linking the provision of this market access from progress in the Doha Round.  He also thanked the developing countries that were providing DFQF market access to LDCs.
&& The representative of Lesotho expressed appreciation to the developed and developing countries that were offering DFQF market to LDCs, and invited other countries to do so as well.  He added that DFQF market access would only be beneficial to LDCs if it was accompanied by simple, transparent rules of origin.  He also pointed to the need to address non-tariff barriers which could potentially hinder the benefits of DFQF market access.  In the light of the economic crisis, he called on Members to consider providing DFQF market access to LDCs as an "early harvest" to the results of the Doha Round.
&& The representative of Guinea echoed the previous speakers in appreciating the steps that had been taken by some countries to offer DFQF market access to LDCs, and also called on others to do the same.  She noted that enhanced market access initiatives needed to be accompanied by appropriate measures to ensure that LDCs could actually benefit from the market access.
&& The representative of Angola supported the interventions made by Bangladesh, Lesotho and Guinea.
&& The representative of the United States said that the US took its Doha Round commitments very seriously.  The US continued to believe that the best outcome for development would be an ambitious package agreed to in the Round that would open new markets worldwide.  Her delegation looked forward to continued work in order to complete the Round and implement the agreed results.  She added that her delegation believed in the need for transparency in non-reciprocal preferential programmes.  The US had been transparent in its preferential programmes, including its GSP scheme.  Through its support for the establishment of a Transparency Mechanism for PTAs, the US was working to enhance transparency in the preferential programmes maintained by all Members. 
&& The representative of Haiti expressed his support for the interventions made under the present agenda item by representatives from other LDCs. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to raise a matter concerning the CTD's reporting requirements in light of the Seventh Ministerial Conference, which would be held from 30 November to 2 December 2009.  In order to allow the Ministerial Conference to fulfil its overview function, it was necessary for the CTD – as well as all Councils and Committees under the General Council – to submit to the General Council, by the end of October, a report of activities in 2009.  The General Council would consider these reports at a meeting to take place in November, and would forward them to the Ministerial Conference.  For this purpose, a draft report of the CTD would be circulated for adoption by the Committee at its next meeting, which would be held in October.  The report, once adopted, would be forwarded to the General Council for consideration at the Council's November meeting.  He added that the CTD's last meeting of 2009 would be held after the Ministerial Conference.  In order to reflect the CTD's full range of activities in 2009, an addendum to the annual report would be circulated for adoption by the CTD at its last meeting of the year.  The addendum would be forwarded to the General Council for consideration at the Council's December meeting. 
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
 In English only.

WT/COMTD/M/75 Page  PAGE 10



	WT/COMTD/M/75 	Page  PAGE 11



 

 

 

 



