WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/62
4 May 2007


(07-1857)


Committee on Trade and Development
Sixty-Second Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 6 MARCH 2007 

Chairmen:  Mr. Faizel Ismail (South Africa) for items A to K
and H.E. Mr. Shree B. C.  Servansing (Mauritius) for item L


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958010" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC165958010 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958011" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC165958011 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc165958012" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc165958012 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc165958013" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc165958013 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958014" C.	Notifications Under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC165958014 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958015" -	Communication from the European Communities on the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958015 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958016" -	Communication from the United States on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, the Protocol to Amend the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958016 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958017" -	Communication from Japan on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN And the People's Republic of China and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958017 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958018" -	Communication from Brazil on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD//57/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958018 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958019" -	Communication from China on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958019 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958020" -	Communication from India on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT//COMTD/57/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958020 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958021" -	Communication from Pakistan on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958021 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958022" -	Communication from the European Communities – Responses to Questions Submitted by Brazil, China, India and Pakistan on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958022 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958023" -	Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Customs Union (WT/COMTD/N/14/Add.1 and WT/COMTD/25/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958023 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958024" -	Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) – Biennial Report to the World Trade Organization: Information on Measures Taken by LAIA Member Countries Under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo (For the Period 1/1/2004-31/12/2005) (WT/COMTD/59)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958024 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958025" -	Notification by the United States on the Generalized System of Preferences (WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958025 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958026" D.	Decision on the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements (WT/L/671)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958026 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958027" E.	Decision on Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements (WT/L/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958027 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958028" F.	Proposal by the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements to the Council for Trade in Goods, the Council for Trade in Services and the Committee on Trade and Development on a Notification Format for Regional Trade Agreements (WT/REG/16)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958028 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958029" G.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC165958029 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958030" -	Panel Discussion:  Presentations by la Bourse du Café et du Cacao, Côte d'Ivoire;  the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC) and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958030 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958031" H.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in Order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC165958031 \H 20
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958032" I.	Review of Steps Taken to Provide Duty-Free and Quota-Free Market Access to Least-Developed Countries (WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.1 and WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958032 \H 21
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958033" J.	Draft Work Programme for 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/156)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958033 \H 22
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958034" K.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC165958034 \H 22
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958035" -	Information by the Secretariat on the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training (1 January to 31 December 2006)	 PAGEREF _TOC165958035 \H 22
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958036" L.	Election of the Chairperson of the Committee on Trade and Development	 PAGEREF _TOC165958036 \H 24
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC165958037" M.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC165958037 \H 24


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 62nd Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/2961/Rev.1 issued on 1 March 2007.  
The agenda was adopted.
&& The Chairman said that he wished to raise a point concerning the CTD's work on Aid for Trade.  He recalled that the Director-General's 14 December 2006 report to the General Council, following on the recommendations of the Aid for Trade Task Force, had called on the CTD to undertake periodic reviews of Aid for Trade, leading up to the annual Aid for Trade debate in the General Council.  For the CTD's first periodic review, he said that he had invited the OECD's Development Assistance Committee to give Members a global picture of Aid for Trade flows.  The meeting was to take place on 2 April 2007 and would include an assessment of how much Aid for Trade was spent on what programmes and in which countries.  Plans were also underway for regional Aid for Trade reviews in the CTD.  These reviews were due to be held in June, July and September, and the exact dates would be communicated soon to Members.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES ON THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.2)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE UNITED STATES ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, THE PROTOCOL TO AMEND THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.3)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM JAPAN ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman said that communications from the European Communities (EC), the United States (US) and Japan raising questions on the notifications made by ASEAN and China in 2005 had been circulated as documents WT/COMTD/51/Add.2, Add.3 and Add.4 respectively.  He recalled that he had informed the Committee at its 58th Session on 6 July 2006 that the responses from ASEAN and China had been submitted bilaterally to each of the three Members that had raised questions.  A number of delegations had then indicated that they wished to see all the responses, and were of the view that the responses should be circulated as a CTD document.  It had been agreed that he would consult with the concerned delegations, and would report back to the CTD at the present meeting.  He said, however, that his consultations had not yielded any concrete results, and suggested that his successor consult with the concerned delegations with a view to reporting to the CTD at its next meeting. 
It was so agreed. 
-	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD//57/ADD.1)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT//COMTD/57/ADD.3)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD on 11 May 2006.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4 respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  He said that it had been agreed at the last meeting of the CTD that the item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation had been requesting information from the EC on its revised GSP scheme for some time, and had received relevant information in December 2006.  However, his delegation still had concerns with regard to the degree of transparency shown by the EC in its revised GSP scheme.  In addition, he observed that the EC did not provide data to a particular GSP beneficiary country on the nature of GSP-covered imports from other beneficiary countries, which was important information to evaluate possible deviations from the Most-Favoured-Nation (MFN) clause and the EC's criteria for GSP eligibility.
&& The representative of India said that the view of his delegation was that the EC had not been fully transparent in presenting its revised GSP scheme.  He remarked that the EC's decision to not universally provide preferential import data relating to its GSP scheme set it apart from other providers of non-reciprocal preferential market access. He asked the EC to explain why it was not sharing such data more widely with Members.  His delegation had still not received satisfactory responses to the questions it had raised, and wished to know whether further clarifications from the EC could be expected.  He highlighted one question he had raised at an earlier meeting, which was whether there was a publicly available list of countries that had applied to benefit from the special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance ("GSP-plus").  He also inquired whether the EC would be providing answers to the questions that had been raised by Pakistan at the last meeting.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation associated itself with Brazil and India in requesting the EC to provide information on its revised GSP scheme in a more transparent manner in order to allow Members to better understand the operation of the scheme. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation had provided Brazil with the data that had been requested.  Informal meetings had also been held with the concerned delegations to explore some of the questions they had raised on the EC's revised GSP scheme and in particular the GSP-plus.  An explanation had also been provided to the Committee as to why the EC felt it was not appropriate to share the preferential import data for one country with other GSP beneficiary countries.  He added that the EC did not have the intention to respond in writing to the questions that had been raised by Pakistan at the last CTD meeting, since those questions touched upon issues that the EC had already responded to.  He believed that the EC had satisfied its requirements relating to transparency, and that the process in the CTD had been taken as far as it could go.  His delegation was, however, willing to continue dialogue on a bilateral basis with any Member that still sought further information on the EC's revised GSP scheme.
&& The representative of India said that he disagreed with the EC representative's assessment of the quality and nature of the responses that had been provided by the EC.  However, if the EC was not willing to provide any further information to Members on its revised GSP scheme, he noted with regret that there was little that could be achieved by continuing the discussion in the CTD.  He wished to put on record once again that his delegation remained dissatisfied with the responses from the EC.  He also emphasized that other providers of preferential market access had made preferential trade data available in the public domain, and it was therefore difficult to understand why the EC would not. 
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation supported what had been said by the representative of India.  He disagreed that the EC had satisfactorily discharged its transparency and notification duties, particularly in light of paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause.  His delegation could not understand why the EC was not willing to make preferential trade data more widely available.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation preferred to maintain this item on the CTD's agenda.  He added that his delegation would also consult with the EC and other Members to find a satisfactory outcome to the Committee's consideration of the EC's revised GSP scheme. 
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions, and that the item concerning the EC's revised GSP scheme remain on the CTD's agenda. 
It was so agreed. 
-	PROTOCOL ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN CUSTOMS UNION (WT/COMTD/N/14/ADD.1 AND WT/COMTD/25/ADD.1)
&& The Chairman said that the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Customs Union was notified to the CTD at its 61st Session on 28 November 2006 by Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda.  The notification was circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/14/Add.1, while the text of the Protocol was circulated in document WT/COMTD/25/Add.1.  He recalled that it had been agreed at the last meeting of the CTD that the item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had raised a number of issues at the last CTD meeting concerning the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Customs Union.  These were on the record, and her delegation was willing to close the matter at this point.  
&& The Committee took note of the notification.
-	LATIN AMERICAN INTEGRATION ASSOCIATION (LAIA) – BIENNIAL REPORT TO THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION: INFORMATION ON MEASURES TAKEN BY LAIA MEMBER COUNTRIES UNDER THE 1980 TREATY OF MONTEVIDEO (FOR THE PERIOD 1/1/2004-31/12/2005) (WT/COMTD/59)
&& The Chairman said that the Secretariat of the LAIA had submitted a biennial report to the WTO, circulated in document WT/COMTD/59, providing information on measures taken by LAIA member countries in the period 1 January 2004 to 31 December 2005.
&& The Committee took note of the report.
-	NOTIFICATION BY THE UNITED STATES ON THE GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES (WT/COMTD/N/1/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman said that the notification by the United States had been circulated in document WT/COMD/N/1/Add.4.  He invited the US representative to introduce the notification. 
&& The representative of the United States said that the notification by her delegation concerned the recent extension of the US GSP programme.  She said that the US' efforts to foster the further integration of developing countries into the global trading system were a vital part of US trade policy, and that the US GSP programme was a cornerstone of that policy.  The GSP programme provided preferential duty-free treatment for 3,400 products from 134 designated beneficiary developing countries and territories, while an additional 1,400 products received duty-free treatment when supplied by LDC beneficiaries.  A single transparent rules of origin regime applied for all US imports under the programme. 
She informed the Committee that the statute that extended the GSP programme – which could be found in Annex I of the notification – passed US legislation in December 2006.  A  review of waivers concerning the competitive need limitation provision was currently underway in the US, and her delegation was ready to provide more information to interested delegations on the process.  Also included in the notification – in Annex II – was a compendium of internet resources on the US GSP programme.  She explained that information on the entire US trade regime, including data relating to its preference programmes, was available in a user-friendly and freely accessible format to the public.  She added that the US GSP programme had covered over US$32 billion of imports in 2006 – an increase of 22 per cent from the previous year – and that the US was committed to continue working to improve the effectiveness of its efforts to integrate developing countries more fully into the global trading system.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation had noted with concern that the statute found in Annex I of the US submission mentioned that a communist country might not be eligible for benefits under the GSP.  His delegation believed that it was time the US dropped this type of language from its GSP statute, and that trade take place on an economic and commercial basis.     
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation welcomed the notification by the US, and in particular appreciated the guide to internet resources in Annex II.  His delegation would study the notification, and would possibly come back with comments or questions.  
&& The representative of Cuba said that she supported the intervention made by China.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation would study the US notification, and may come back with questions or comments.  He expressed appreciation for the information provided in Annex II of the notification.  He added that there was likely quite a bit of overlap between the beneficiaries of the EC's GSP scheme and those of the US GSP scheme, and therefore could not understand the explanation given earlier by the EC as to why it could not share preferential import data more widely.
&& The Chairman said he had noted that some Members had indicated that they were still studying the US notification.  At this time, however, he proposed that the Committee take note of the notification.
It was so agreed. 
DECISION ON THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS (WT/L/671)
&& The Chairman said that the General Council, on 14 December 2006, had adopted a Decision establishing, on a provisional basis, a Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs).  The Decision could be found in document WT/L/671.  He said that the CTD had been instructed to implement the Transparency Mechanism for agreements falling under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.  All RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause would, therefore, now be subject to the procedures laid out in the 14 December 2006 Decision.  For purposes of performing the functions established under the Mechanism, the CTD would convene in dedicated session.  As a rule, a single formal meeting in dedicated session would be devoted to consider each notified RTA.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation looked forward to implementing the Transparency Mechanism in the CTD in a way to ensure that the expectations of  the Negotiating Group on Rules were fully realized.  The Mechanism would contribute to improved transparency and would allow the implementation of a common vision on the process for consideration of RTAs in the CTD.  She noted that the consideration of particular RTAs would take place in dedicated sessions and, in that regard, wondered whether the Chairman could at some point provide some details concerning the implementation of the Mechanism, including in relation to any technical support that would be provided by the Secretariat to developing countries.  Her delegation hoped that the Decision would lay the groundwork for a new chapter in Members' consideration of RTAs in the CTD.
&& The representative of India welcomed the Decision.  He said that a number of developing countries had worked to ensure that the consideration of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause continue to take place in the CTD.  His delegation looked forward to the greater transparency that would arise from the implementation of the Transparency Mechanism.
&& The representative of Australia welcomed the Decision and said that her delegation looked forward to implementing the Transparency Mechanism in the CTD.
&& The representative of Canada said that the Decision was an important one.  He said that the discussion that would take place in dedicated sessions should be based on practical questions in order to allow Members to gain a full understanding of each RTA under consideration.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation was fully committed to the Decision and to implementing the Transparency Mechanism in the CTD.  He said that he would like to eventually hear more on how the Mechanism would be implemented in the CTD.
&& The Chairman said that Members were in a learning phase with regard to the Transparency Mechanism.  As the process evolved, the CTD would have to deliberate on the procedures with regard to implementation.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman said that the General Council, on 14 December 2006, took a Decision relating to "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements", contained in document WT/L/672.  In particular, the General Council, having regard to Articles IV:1, IV:2, IV:7 and IX:1 of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the WTO, pursuant to paragraph 9 of the Enabling Clause and the terms of reference of the CTD, and in light of the improvements agreed to in the provisional Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, had invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and to report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  He opened the floor to allow the CTD to begin its consideration of transparency for preferential arrangements, as per the mandate from the General Council.
&& The representative of India said that when the Negotiating Group on Rules was discussing transparency for RTAs, there was a feeling among some Members that preferential trade arrangements notified to the WTO by developed countries should also undergo a transparency process.  It was in this context that the CTD had been given the mandate to consider transparency for preferential trade arrangements notified under the Enabling Clause.  His delegation was seeking to make the information provided on preferential trade arrangements more coherent and easier to understand, and looked forward to working with Members on this issue.  He said that any input from the Secretariat would also be welcome.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation was committed to working with Members to allow the CTD to fulfil its mandate with regard to transparency for preferential trade arrangements.  He also invited the Secretariat to provide input into the process.
&& The representative of the United States welcomed the Decision.  Rather than requesting the Secretariat to provide input into the process, however, her delegation was of the view that a more useful first step would be for Members to provide input on the type of information they would like to see in notifications of preferential trade arrangements.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that preferential trade arrangements took away a lot from the effectiveness of the MFN principle.  It was hoped that the exercise that was to be undertaken by the CTD would not only enhance transparency, but would also ensure that such arrangements remained within the mandate of the Enabling Clause.
&& The Chairman said that the CTD had had a useful initial discussion on the issue of transparency for preferential trade arrangements notified under the Enabling Clause.  He suggested that the Committee take note of all interventions, and that his successor continue to work with Members and the Secretariat on this issue.  He also proposed that the item remain on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting.
It was so agreed.
&& PROPOSAL BY THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS TO THE COUNCIL FOR TRADE IN GOODS, THE COUNCIL FOR TRADE IN SERVICES AND THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT ON A NOTIFICATION FORMAT FOR REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS (WT/REG/16)
&& The Chairman recalled that at the 61st Session of the CTD on 28 November 2006, he had brought to the attention of Members a recommendation that had been made by the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) to the Council for Trade in Goods, the Council for Trade in Services and the CTD.  It had been agreed that the CRTA's recommendation would be considered by the CTD at the present meeting. 
He said that the CRTA had agreed at its 44th Session on 13 October 2006 to recommend the introduction of a common and simplified format for the notification of RTAs, including those notified under the Enabling Clause.  The recommendation could be found in the annex to document WT/REG/16.  He explained that, in forwarding its recommendation, the CRTA had indicated that the proposed format would facilitate the task of the parties to comply with the requirement to notify an RTA while making available to other WTO Members the necessary basic elements in a systematic and coherent way.  He said that it was his understanding that the proposed format for RTA notification, now under consideration by the CTD, was in line with the overall approach to RTAs that Members agreed to adopt in the 14 December 2006 Decision relating to the establishment of the provisional Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.  He inquired whether Members agreed with the format proposed by the CRTA for the notification of RTAs under the Enabling Clause.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had no difficulty in adopting the proposed format for the notification of RTAs under the Enabling Clause, in particular because of the uniformity it would provide in the notification of RTAs.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation had no problem in approving the proposed format.  He suggested that a minor modification could be made in Item 3 of the format, since in the case of the CTD it was clear that all notifications would be under the Enabling Clause.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation could approve the format, which was useful in terms of the uniformity it would provide in the notification of RTAs. 
&& The Chairman proposed that the CTD adopt the proposed notification format, noting that all notifications of RTAs to the CTD would be under the Enabling Clause, and would be reflected as such in Item 3 of the format.     
&& The Committee adopted the proposed notification format.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& 	PANEL DISCUSSION:  PRESENTATIONS BY LA BOURSE DU CAFÉ ET DU CACAO, CÔTE D'IVOIRE;  THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC) AND THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT (UNCTAD)
&& The Chairman said that, based on the discussion under this agenda item at the last CTD meeting, he had decided to hold a panel discussion at the present meeting with the participation of a limited number of panellists, in order to allow a focused discussion.  He introduced Ambassador Guy‑Alain Emmanuel Gauze of Côte d'Ivoire, Mr. Antony Sandana, Senior Commodity Officer in the Market Development Section of the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), and Mr. Olle Ostesson, the Officer-in-charge of the Commodities Branch at UNCTAD.  He explained that it had initially been expected that a representative of "La Bourse du Café et du Cacao" – a producers' organization located in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire – would participate in the panel discussion, but this had unfortunately not proven possible.  The Ambassador of Côte d'Ivoire had, however, kindly offered to participate in the discussion.  He said that each of the panellists had been asked to make a brief presentation on their experiences and the work of their organizations on the issues of fluctuating prices, adding value to products and medium- to long-term strategic planning. 
The Ambassador of Côte d'Ivoire said that it was impossible to conduct in absolute terms a critical analysis of the questions of fluctuating world commodity prices, of manufacturing value added, and of medium- to long-term strategic planning.  To be credible, such an analysis would have to be based on, or at least supported by, a few specific cases.  With that in mind, he said that he wished to highlight a number of points, including:  (i) the strategic importance of agricultural commodities and, above all, the importance of export agriculture in producer developing countries;  (ii) dependence on the international market in a regulated environment as well as in a deregulated environment;  (iii) the need to create manufacturing value added, thereby generating employment and providing an alternative mechanism for regulating supply;  and (iv) the prospects for restoring the central role of commodities in the problems surrounding the development of producer countries in the context of globalization and the new development paradigm.
He said that in Côte d'Ivoire, long considered an area of political and social stability and a focal point for economic growth, it was customary to assume that the country's success was based on a well-balanced agricultural sector, focusing both on food crops to ensure the country's food self‑sufficiency, and on export crops to earn the foreign exchange needed to finance development. Agriculture accounted for about 70 per cent of Côte d'Ivoire's gross domestic product (GDP), of which 40 per cent represented export agriculture, consisting mainly of three commodities – coffee, cocoa and wood – as well as cotton, rubber, oilseeds, jute, pineapples, and bananas.  These crops made up the essence of Côte d'Ivoire's economy.  However, owing to the importance of the commodities industry to the country's economy, and because the economy was heavily exposed to world price fluctuations and to the impact of those fluctuations on the country's macroeconomic and financial balances, these commodities were factors of both strength and weakness for Côte d'Ivoire. 
The same was true for all developing countries dependent on one or two commodities, reflecting these countries' economic fragility in a market that was becoming increasingly deregulated. With regard to certain African countries' dependence on coffee, he said that the rates were approximately 70 per cent for Burundi, 60 per cent for Ethiopia, 50 per cent for Uganda and 40 per cent for Rwanda.  In the cotton sector, the rates were about 46 per cent for Mali, 42 per cent for Chad, between 39 and 40 per cent for Burkina Faso, and 38 per cent for Benin. Côte d'Ivoire was 40 per cent dependent on cocoa for its export revenue, while Ghana was slightly more than 25 per cent dependent.  The dependence of certain African countries on agricultural commodities was, therefore, clear.  However, far from improving over the years as a result of horizontal diversification efforts, the situation was getting worse.  He said that the terms of trade provided a measure of the impact of commodity price trends in terms of their effects on a country's export revenue.  In this regard, a recent IMF study comparing average prices from 1998 to 2000 and 2002 to those of the period 1995 to 1997 revealed that, while the oil-producing and exporting African countries recorded gains, losses amounted to 34 per cent in Uganda, 33 per cent in Burundi, 32 per cent in Ethiopia, 28 per cent in Mali, Rwanda and Sao Tome and Principe, 25 per cent in Burkina Faso, Zambia, and Sudan, and 20 to 30 per cent in Chad and Côte d'Ivoire.  He said that an analysis of Côte d'Ivoire's export structure (excluding petroleum and mining products) suggested that, in spite of the significant horizontal diversification efforts undertaken over the past three decades of agricultural policy, coffee and cocoa remained the real safety valves of the country's economy.
He recalled the initiatives coordinated at the global level under the auspices of UNCTAD on the regulation of world agricultural commodity markets, coupled with the creation of national marketing mechanisms in producing countries.  These initiatives had resulted in international agreements on a number of commodities, including coffee, cocoa and rubber.  He said that in spite of  more recent criticism on the relevance and structural efficiency of these agreements, they had been useful as market regulation mechanisms, and made sense during periods of world over-supply.  The structural changes that had affected the international economic environment and the commodity markets over the past 20 years had resulted in increasingly rapid market deregulation, the questioning and ultimate scrapping of the economic clauses in international commodity agreements, and the privatization of national marketing systems, with the consequent risks posed by the withdrawal of state intervention. 
In Côte d'Ivoire, the withdrawal of state intervention from the various segments of production, management and marketing of commodities was preceded, as in all other raw material-producing African countries, by sectoral structural adjustment programmes, notably the Plan d'Ajustement Structurel Agricole (PASA) and the Crédit d'Ajustement Sectoriel Agricole (CASA).  It was under the Programme d'Ajustement Structurel Renforcé (PASR) that the coffee and cocoa sectors were fully liberalized in Côte d'Ivoire – in 1998 for coffee, and in 1999 for cocoa.  By opting for the liberalization of its agricultural sector, Côte d'Ivoire – like Cameroon, Togo, Benin, Madagascar, the Central African Republic and many other producer countries – was responding to the requirements of multilateral donors as laid down in what had come to be known as the "Washington Consensus".  This required compliance with the two main objectives of liberalization, namely economic efficiency – through growth of value added, including processing – and social efficiency and poverty reduction – through better distribution of the overall value added in favour of producers.  This reform and liberalization process had led in the producer countries to the setting up of a new parastatal or purely private institutional management mechanism.  In Côte d'Ivoire, the reform produced three bodies in charge of administrative regulations, financial regulations and trade regulations.
Empirical analysis revealed that, following the liberalization of the commodities sector in Côte d'Ivoire between 1998 and 1999, the first years were marked by a collapse in world prices of about 50 per cent.  While market analysts differed on the causes of this sharp fall in world prices and its relationship with liberalization, it was clear to some that the prospects for the market of an abundant – and hence unregulated – supply of cocoa from a major global actor such as Côte d'Ivoire (accounting for 45 per cent of world production and 55 to 60 per cent of exportable production) was seen as exerting a downward pressure on prices.  This observation was further upheld by the fact that liberalization in Côte d'Ivoire was carried out without any internal mechanism to regulate supply.  In fact, the responsibilities of the trade regulations body were confined to recording and coordinating purchases and exports of all coffee and cocoa in Côte d'Ivoire.  Spot sales were organized, but these had the effect of depressing prices.
He said that coffee and cocoa played a major role in the economy of Côte d'Ivoire.  With coffee plantations covering 1,400,000 hectares and cocoa plantations covering 1,500,000 hectares, more than 6 million growers and their families (40 per cent of the active population and more than two-thirds of the active rural population) depended directly on these crops for their subsistence.  Production areas had become genuine employment hubs.  This dimension was all the more significant when one considered the existence of, or at least the potential for the creation of, packaging and processing plants that would contribute to generating value added in the secondary sector while also contributing to physical planning, the development of regional industrial hubs, and the emergence of industrial subcontractors.  The current international environment lacked any coordinated market regulation mechanism, and prices were set by elusive and unpredictable parameters such as the dynamics of supply and demand, variations in producer and consumer stocks, the responsiveness of hedge funds and the political or social situation in the producing countries.  However, even if the concept of liberalization was not challenged any more, and even though the reactivation of the international commodity agreements on the basis of past economic models could not be expected, it was, nevertheless, important for the international community, in conjunction with the producing countries, to come up with an innovative and effective overall strategy in order to minimize market risks and the impact of price fluctuations on producers. 
He proposed that a strategy could consist firstly of the design and implementation in the producing countries of a marketing mechanism that favoured forward sales.  Second, it would be useful to introduce in commodity chains a systemic total quality approach that took into account international requirements with respect to traceability, compatibility and labelling of origin.  It was important for producing countries to bear in mind that the frequently-updated requirements of the industrialized countries in the areas of standards, human health, consumer security, environmental protection and ethical production could be factors determining competitiveness.  In this connection, the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) would have to be updated.  Third, he proposed the development of an industrial policy strategy on the basis of consultations between the producing countries, development partners and international institutions with a view to achieving a substantial increase in value added.  The massive industrial processing of certain commodities could become a powerful market regulation tool.  In conclusion, he said that the aim of liberalization was to strengthen the competitiveness of any given sector, to improve transparency in the management of the sector by separating technical, financial, trade, development and regulation operations, and to improve the incomes of farmers and their representation in the sector's management structures.  However, because there were no proper support measures in place, the results of liberalization had failed to live up to expectations.
&& The representative of the ITC said that the ITC's assistance to developing countries in the area of commodities focused on agro-based commodities.  The objective of the ITC's assistance was to improve the participation of beneficiary countries in global commodities trade.  He said that the problems that were faced by developing countries in the commodities area included shrinking demand, declining prices and increasing competition.  The ITC provided three types of assistance to commodities producers, namely sector strategy, value addition and commodity promotion.  In the area of sector strategy, the ITC had recently developed a sector strategy for the jute sector in Bangladesh and India, including a road map.  Other commodities for which the ITC was providing sector strategy assistance included coffee, cocoa leather, hides and skins, spices, cotton and various agro-based tropical products.  He noted that limited financial resources were available for this type of work, so activities were usually undertaken based on demand or the needs of countries. 
He said that the ITC also worked in the area of value addition, either through product and market development, or through product adaptation.  For example, in the area of jute the ITC had helped develop furnishing fabrics and shopping bags.  Similar work had been done with coir, where the ITC had helped develop value-added products such as geotextiles, car seats, pot liners and peat.  In the area of coffee, the ITC was working with producers in Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi to develop the market for gourmet coffee.  He also highlighted that the ITC, along with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), UNCTAD, the World Bank and the Common Fund for Commodities, was implementing an EC project to assist develop the commodities sector in African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries. In the context of this project, the ITC was working on the transfer of technology in the cotton sector from Asian countries such as China and India to African commodity producers.  This Asia-Africa partnership programme would also deal with a number of other agro‑based commodities.  
The third element in the ITC's work on commodities related to promotional activities.  He explained that, in view of the limited resources available, much of the ITC's initiatives in this area were generic, meaning that promotional activities in major markets (particularly in Europe, Japan and the US) were undertaken for several developing countries producing the same commodity.  The ITC held strategy meetings with producers and importer groups to assess the availability of resources for a particular sector, and also collaborated closely with the international commodity bodies (ICBs) in this regard.  The types of tools being used for promotional activities included market intelligence and analysis, promotional design and strategy, producer-importer joint strategy, collaboration with international commodity bodies, trade fairs, media, technical advisory visits, brochures, buyer-seller meetings, creation of logos and advertisements.  He added that the ITC had also developed product‑specific websites, where experts and consultants contributed their technical knowledge in answering questions from  producers.
He said that while the ITC continued to work on the major commodities, its work had also expanded to other commodities such as tropical fruits, nuts and vegetables, oilseeds, silk and cotton, fruit juices, spices, leather, rubber and wood.  He concluded by saying that the ITC had very close collaboration with other partners who were also actively involved in the trade of commodities.  These partners were mainly small and medium-size enterprises in developing countries and transition economies, other UN bodies and donor partners, the ICBs, national trade promotion bodies, national and international trade associations, as well as an extensive network of traders.
&& The representative of UNCTAD said that demand for several commodities had been growing positively for a number of years.  Much of this demand was coming from Asian countries, and in particular China. While it was unlikely that this boom would last forever, he believed that it nonetheless provided a great opportunity for commodity-producing developing countries to develop their commodities sectors.  He said that the main areas of UNCTAD's activities concerning commodities were:  (i) policy-oriented research and strategy formulation;  (ii) commodity information;  (iii) diversification, adding value and meeting market requirements;  (iv) commodity finance and price risk management;  and (v) energy issues and natural resources.  He would talk briefly about each of these areas.
Regarding policy-oriented research and strategy formulation, he said that UNCTAD focused on the link between commodities production and trade and poverty reduction.  The organization  aimed to develop strategies for governments, enterprises and the international community, often in the form of partnerships and multi-stakeholder initiatives.  The main mode of work was cooperative ventures with other organizations, industry and civil society.  UNCTAD produced biannual reports on commodities trade for the UN General Assembly, which had been fairly upbeat in recent times about the commodity situation. UNCTAD was also following up on a project concerning trade and the Millennium Development Goals, and was additionally engaged in the EC project to assist ACP countries that had been mentioned by the ITC representative.
He said that commodity information was a very large part of UNCTAD's work.  This included the production and dissemination of statistical data and market reviews as publications and databases, as well as a very comprehensive commodity information portal called Infocomm, which could be visited on the internet at:  www.unctad.org/infocomm.  Infocomm currently covered 23 commodities, with more expected in the future, and presented information in English, French and Spanish.  The Infocomm website received 10,000 visits per day.  UNCTAD was also trying to bridge the gap between producers that had internet access and those that did not, by disseminating price and strategic market information to small producers through a project called Infoshare.  This project had been recently selected by the UN as "one of the ten stories the world should hear more about".  The project aimed to help solve some of the infrastructure shortcomings faced by small producers in developing countries. 
Another area of UNCTAD's work concerned diversification, adding value and meeting market requirements.  This part of the organization's work focused on market entry and competitiveness issues, in particular on the issue of how developing country producers could convert the formal market access negotiated in the WTO into actual exports.  To this end, UNCTAD provided technical assistance focusing on government policies and capacity building to help improve competitiveness, meet standards, exploit niche markets and diversify away from a dependence on a small number of commodities.  
Commodity finance was another important area of UNCTAD's work.  He said that access to credit was often the single biggest obstacle to the expansion of agricultural production, to diversification and to income growth in developing countries.  UNCTAD's work in this area focused on solving the problems of high interest rates and lack of collateral.  He said that this was done in a number of ways including through the strengthening of government policies and regulations, the strengthening of banking systems to reduce the lending and borrowing spread, and the introduction of structured financing methods to allow producers to use commodities as collateral.  On the issue of price risk management, he said that price fluctuations were a major obstacle to diversification, because producers were risk averse and lacked instruments to manage price risk.  In this regard, one of the main ways by which the private sector could fulfil the role formerly played by governments was through commodity exchanges.  He explained that commodity exchanges reduced counterparty risk, which was the risk that the buyer would not pay or that the seller would not deliver.  These exchanges also improved market transparency, since prices were made public.  They could also help in the setting of quality standards, thereby creating certainty and stability in the market.  In addition, they could facilitate access to finance, and could reduce exposure to price risk through the use of forward operations.  He said that UNCTAD assisted in the development of commodity exchanges.  In cooperation with the African Union, UNCTAD had launched a pan-African commodities exchange.  The organization had also done advisory work on exchanges in India, two of which were now the world’s third and fourth-largest commodity exchanges.  Work was also ongoing in this area in Ethiopia, Iran, Kazakhstan, Nigeria and Ukraine.  
In introducing the final area of UNCTAD's work on commodities, he said that the organization was looking into the problems of trade in energy commodities for both developing country exporters and importers.  This included work on bio-fuels, which had the potential of being an enormous source of trade income for developing countries, also providing access to reasonably-priced energy for development and reducing the effects of global warming.  However, fulfilling this potential depended on the elimination of price distortions and barriers to trade in order to provide investors with the assurance of market access.  He continued by saying that UNCTAD's work in the area of natural resources focused on mining.  The organization had in particular done some work at the sub‑national level to try to ensure a well-balanced and broadly-based development and diversification in mining-dependant areas.  This was done by strengthening linkages and building capacity using partnerships, as well as by establishing networks for policy dialogue and information exchange.
He said that he wished to move on to address the question of what UNCTAD was doing to deal with fluctuating prices, adding value to products and medium- to long-term strategic planning.  He believed that traditional commodity agreements were not going to solve the problem of fluctuating prices because there was no political support for market intervention.  One alternative was for producer cooperation to be enhanced.  He said that UNCTAD did not believe such cooperation to be in contradiction with WTO rules, and that there were several examples of producer cooperation agreements currently in place.  There were, however, also some problems with these agreements.  One was the free-rider problem, since even producers that did not actually join the agreements could potentially benefit from them.  Another problem was that producer cooperation sometimes required government control of exports, and this was difficult to achieve since most governments had dismantled many of the necessary instruments for these controls. 
He said that price fluctuations had an important impact on developing economies through export revenues.  UNCTAD was looking at compensatory financing schemes aimed at smoothing out export revenue fluctuations so as to reduce strain on the balance of payments.  These types of schemes had thus far not proven very effective.  Some of the problems with these schemes included long processing times and issues relating to the burden of proof.  He believed that what was needed was a user-friendly scheme with a high degree of automaticity.  UNCTAD was exploring how these schemes could be improved based on a mandate from the UN General Assembly and under a project financed by the Government of Finland.  He said that a third way to deal with price fluctuations was by helping producers and exporters directly through price risk management.  In this context, UNCTAD carried out research, provided policy advice and training, and helped with the development and establishment of commodity exchanges.  This was also linked to UNCTAD's work on commodity finance and commodity information.  He said that this was a promising area of work where there had already been some successes, helped by the development of new technologies.  
Regarding the adding of value, he said that the way UNCTAD addressed this issue was to look at how producers could get higher prices for their commodities by finding the right markets, although increasing processing was also an option.  He explained that there had been some structural changes in the commodities market, as supply chains had become shorter, market requirements had become more stringent and there had been rapid growth in high-value market segments.  On the issue of standards, he noted that while official standards had become more demanding, there had also been a proliferation of private standards in recent times, including sustainability labels.  UNCTAD had also observed that sustainability criteria were entering "mainstream" standards, for example European standards now included many conditions that had been borrowed from the fair trade standards.  In many cases, however, there was a lack of mutual recognition between standards.  Certification costs also remained high, and there was a lack of developing country input in the setting of standards.
He said that UNCTAD had done work in estimating the costs of compliance with SPS standards in a number of countries, which had led to follow-up work financed by the Standards and Trade Development Facility (STDF).  This work involved capacity-building projects in Guinea and Mozambique on meeting SPS standards and private standards.  UNCTAD had also held discussions with standard setters, especially private ones, on how to ensure more developing country input in  the setting of standards.  The organization had additionally done some work on helping meet other market requirements, including through the preparation of a manual on assessing competitiveness, which was to be field-tested in Mali.  Cooperation was also ongoing with supermarket chains to facilitate contacts with developing country producers in order to help the latter get their products to markets.
UNCTAD was additionally looking at how to exploit niche markets through the Sustainable Commodities Initiative, which was an initiative of UNCTAD and the International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD).  Through cooperation with governments, ICBs, industry and civil society, the initiative aimed to improve developing country producers' returns from sustainability labels.  UNCTAD also worked to disseminate information about sustainability labels, and was undertaking assessments of the costs and benefits to small producers.  The work currently focused on coffee, but would soon be extended to bananas, cocoa and palm oil.
Regarding support to strategic planning, he said that UNCTAD's objective was to reduce poverty through economic diversification based on commodity production and exports.  In this context, the organization was addressing supply-side obstacles and market entry issues.  The work was carried out in the context of market-based solutions, with a focus on LDCs and on the poorest populations within countries, and with recognition of the differences between countries and the underlying reasons for poverty.  He said that work on support to strategic planning had three dimensions:  (i) generating ideas through strategically oriented research reports and coverage of commodities in general UN reports;  (ii) supporting debate though workshops, seminars for governments, industry and civil society;  and (iii) working with a regional dimension through cooperation with regional economic organizations.  He concluded by saying that as part of UNCTAD's upcoming Commission on International Trade in Goods and Services and Commodities, a meeting devoted to commodities would be held on 21 March 2007.  The three themes for that meeting were "meeting market requirements, standards and niche markets: the situation of small producers", "commodity market fluctuations: dealing with the income effects" and "energy: promoting international dialogue and achieving better energy mixes".
&& The Chairman said that a significant increase in the prices of commodities had been observed in the past few years, due particularly to growing demand from a number of developing countries, particularly in Asia.  He asked the panellists to comment on the conditions under which it might it be possible for a structural change to take place in the world economy that would provide for a sustainable rise in commodity prices.  He then opened the floor for other comments and questions.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that while the interconnection between commodity dependence and development was not a new issue, it had not been the focus of international debate for some time.  His delegation, therefore, welcomed the present discussion.  He said that market liberalization and the abandonment of international market intervention in the 1990s had left commodity producers in developing countries to struggle on their own.  The rules and institutions governing commodity trade were designed by developed country actors in accordance with their own aspirations.  Although most commodities were produced in developing countries, they were largely processed for sale to consumers by the developed countries.  He said that renewable energy offered great prospects to African countries, but expansion into this area also posed great challenges.  He believed that the establishment of commodities exchanges served useful purposes, and should be taken into consideration in terms of development objectives and aspirations.  Concerning commodity agreements, he observed that there was a lack of political support for market intervention.  However, producer cooperation was a useful area to explore.  He said that cooperation between producers and supermarket chains was useful, and should be further encouraged. 
&& The representative of Kenya said that he would like to hear more on what should be done to address the problem of the declining prices in commodities.  He gave the example of coffee as the commodity he believed most affected by price collapse following market liberalization.  He explained that the price collapse led to a situation where small-scale farmers had to produce more to maintain their income levels, thereby further depressing prices.  Furthermore, with the advice of international institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank, some countries had started producing commodities, for example coffee, where there were already several traditional suppliers occupying the market.  He commented that perhaps what was needed to alleviate the current situation regarding commodities prices were rules at both the domestic and international levels that could help stabilize prices.  While some articles in the GATT could be used for that purpose, he believed more generally that the solution to the decline in prices would not be found entirely in the WTO, but would require a joint effort with other international organizations such as the ITC and UNCTAD.    
&& The representative of Côte d'Ivoire said the present discussion showed that progress could be made in the CTD and elsewhere to find solutions to the problems of commodity-exporting countries.  He commended the work of the ITC and UNCTAD, which addressed many of the concerns that had been expressed by commodity-dependent developing countries.  He said that he would focus his comments on a number of issues that had been brought up in the presentations.  His first comment related to the problem of the increase in the supply of commodities on world markets.  He remarked that this overproduction risked causing an imbalance between supply and demand.  The second issue concerned the transfer of technology.  He said that, as noted in the ITC's presentation, transfer of technology was taking place from China and India to the African countries.  However, he believed that there was sometimes a reluctance and resistance on the part of some actors in developed countries to share appropriate technology with developing countries.  The third issue concerned the development of South-South trade.  Although he agreed that South-South trade in commodities had the potential to increase, he emphasized that the most lucrative markets at present remained those of the developed countries.  In this regard, efforts to establish links between producers and the big supermarket chains were useful.  He added that it was important to promote local consumption, and asked whether the ITC and UNCTAD were doing any work in this area.  
&& The representative of Australia said that the presentations brought out the vast amount of work that was already being done on commodities. She asked the panellists whether they could comment on the role they believed the WTO could play in finding solutions to the problems faced by commodity-dependent developing countries.  She highlighted the potential benefits that could arise from the conclusion of the Doha Round, in particular in terms of market access and reductions in domestic support in agriculture, as well as the Aid for Trade initiative.
&& The representative of Brazil inquired whether the representative of the ITC could elaborate on what work the ITC was doing in the area of cotton, and in which countries.  He also asked whether any preferential schemes notified to the WTO had been considered in the commodities-related work of the ITC and the UNCTAD.  
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the Ambassador of Côte d'Ivoire had remarked in his presentation that one of the reasons for the problems being faced by commodity-dependent developing countries was the lack of a coordinating mechanism.  She wondered whether Côte d'Ivoire was considering setting up such a mechanism.
&& The representative of Burkina Faso said that a substantial fall in commodity prices had been observed since deregulation had taken place in a number of African countries based on the recommendations of the IMF and the World Bank.  Citing cotton as an example, he outlined the difficulties faced by cotton producers in a number of African countries.  He asked what mechanism could potentially be put in place to help producers in commodity-producing countries, in particular since it appeared that developed countries often did not seem to agree with the types of solutions being proposed by the commodity-exporting countries.      
&& The representative of Nicaragua said that there were environmental aspects to the commodities problem.  Mining, for example, could be quite harmful to the environment.  She asked whether the UNCTAD representative in particular could respond to this.
&& The Chairman invited the panellists to respond to the comments and questions that had been raised.
&& The Ambassador of Côte d'Ivoire said that the phenomenon of commodity price fluctuations was not new, and a long-term sustainable solution to the problem had still not been found.  It was extremely difficult to have a development strategy in place when fluctuations in prices for some commodities, for example cocoa or coffee, contributed to such a high degree of uncertainty.  He said that deregulation and liberalization in Côte d'Ivoire and in some other African countries had not led to strengthened production capacity, and producers in these countries did not have the necessary knowledge of market conditions to gain real benefits.  Measures needed to be taken to strengthen the agricultural sectors in these countries and to ensure that the sector would not provide low-quality products in the post-liberalization period. 
He said that Côte d'Ivoire sought the assistance of a number of agencies including UNCTAD and the ITC to help in establishing proper marketing mechanisms.  He explained that producers in Côte d'Ivoire were currently supplying the spot market with large amounts of output, which was affecting prices.  If the system was better regulated, prices could be stabilized.  His Government wanted to set up a marketing mechanism through which about 80 per cent of commodities exports would be sold on the futures market and the remaining 20 per cent on the spot market.  The objective of such measures was to minimize the negative impact of liberalization by setting up an appropriate safety net.  He added that the fact that stabilization boards did not exist anymore also placed a certain element of risk on importers, given that there was no longer any guaranteed system for purchasers to receive what they had paid for.  He believed that the WTO could play an important role in finding solutions to the problems faced by commodity-exporting countries.  A number of developing countries could potentially develop the capacity to engage in the processing of primary commodities, but the SPS and TBT agreements were factors limiting their ability to gain effective market access in developed countries.
&& The representative of the ITC said that it was important to keep in mind that some producers in developing countries were not able to supply products at the appropriate level of quality to compete in international markets.  This was an area that the ITC was looking into.  On the issue of processing, he said that there had been tremendous progress made by some developing countries in certain commodities, but it was necessary for more developing countries to benefit from such progress.  He said that the consumption side was also important to consider, and that consumption should be promoted not only in developed countries, but also in developing countries.  The ITC believed there was great potential in this regard and would be willing, subject to the availability of resources, to work on promotional projects of this nature.
&& The representative of UNCTAD said that in 2005, developing countries' share of global GDP at purchasing power parities surpassed that of developed countries for the first time.  This showed the importance of developing country demand, which came out even clearer when looking at commodity markets alone.  At present, about one half of developing countries' exports of commodities went to other developing countries, up from about 40 per cent a decade ago.  More than half of developing countries' imports of commodities came from other developing countries.  Given the high economic growth rates observed in some developing countries in recent years, there was cause for optimism that developing countries could increasingly serve as major markets for commodities.  There was no indication that the commodity boom would come to an end anytime soon.  However, at some point it could be expected that supply would catch up to demand, so the boom would probably not last forever. 
He noted the comment made by the representative of Nigeria that the institutions that governed commodities trade were designed by developed countries.  In this regard, and given that an increasingly large proportion of trade was taking place between developing countries, the question arose as to whether the institutions should be modified accordingly.  He cited the example of the Global Network of Export-Import Banks and Development Finance Institutions (G-NEXID), which was an initiative taken at UNCTAD XI, and which was growing rapidly.  On the consumption potential in developing countries, he pointed to the coffee market as an example.  After the slump in the coffee market that lasted until 2002 to 2003, the market was turned around by a tremendous growth in coffee consumption in Brazil, and not by a fall in supply or a rise in demand in traditional markets.  He said that UNCTAD was not doing that much in the area of consumption promotion, though it was working with the International Cocoa Organization in promoting chocolate consumption in Russia.  On the potential contribution of the WTO to finding solutions to the commodities problem, he said that UNCTAD hoped for a successful outcome to the Doha Round, and for a substantive and ambitious Aid for Trade programme.  UNCTAD also hoped for a continuation of the STDF.
He said that one of the regrettable effects of liberalization in many countries was that many of the weaker producers were left behind.  In many countries, marketing boards and similar institutions previously had the function of enabling producers to sell their products and to receive an assured price.  These institutions were no longer there to shield the weaker producers, and the private sector had not always been able to fill that gap.  He believed that government intervention and support from donors in certain critical areas could help alleviate the situation.  One example was through the provision of affordable credit to small producers.  On the issue of sustainability in mining, he gave the example of a project UNCTAD was undertaking in Peru with a provincial government on local diversification in an area highly dependent on mining.  The environmental aspects had automatically entered into the project, since it involved working with local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and local authorities, which were highly concerned with the environment.  He emphasized the importance of working in a multi-stakeholder framework.  He said that UNCTAD was also establishing networks of various kinds, in particular over the internet.  One website, a joint undertaking with the International Council on Mining and Metals (ICMM), the UK Department for International Development (DfID) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), was concerned with good practices in mining (www.goodpracticemining.org).   
&& The Chairman said that he sensed the interest of several Members in the commodities discussion in the CTD.  He suggested that another panel discussion be held at the next CTD meeting, to which could be invited the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Bank.
&& The representative of Kenya said that he supported the Chairman's proposal.  In addition, he proposed that UNCTAD be invited back to brief the CTD on the outcome of the meeting on commodities which would be held on 21 March 2007.
&& The representative of Côte d'Ivoire said that he supported the Chairman's proposal as well as the proposal by Kenya.  He said that he was particularly interested to hear what the World Bank had to say on its work and on the impact of liberalization.
&& The Chairman said that a panel discussion would be organized at the next CTD meeting, to which would be invited the World Bank and the FAO.  UNCTAD would also be invited to report on its 21 March 2007 meeting on commodities.     
It was so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& The Chairman said that under this agenda item, the Committee had since its 54th Session on 5 October 2005 been undertaking a review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations based on a periodically updated background paper prepared by the Secretariat.  Members had, however, agreed at the 59th Session on 4 October 2006 to temporarily suspend their discussion under this agenda item, in view of the fact that the negotiations were suspended at the time.  The matter was discussed once again at the 61st Session, and it was decided that the Committee would revert back to this item at the present meeting to consider how to proceed. 
He said that the Director-General had informed the General Council at its meeting of 7 February 2007 that negotiations had resumed across the board, and that political conditions were now more favourable for the conclusion of the Doha Round than they had been for a long time.  In light of these developments, he asked whether the CTD could agree to revert to its discussion under this agenda item at the next meeting.  If so, he further suggested that the Secretariat's background paper be revised for that purpose. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation wondered if discussion under this agenda item would be more productive if it resumed after there had been more substantive progress in the negotiations.
&& The representative of Côte d'Ivoire said that there had been times during the Doha Round when the negotiations had been taken away from Geneva, and African countries had been requesting that the negotiations be brought back to Geneva.  In that context, he said that it would be useful if the CTD resumed its discussion under this agenda item.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that his delegation wanted the CTD to resume its discussion under this agenda item.
&& The representative of Mali emphasized that development was at the heart of the Doha Round and it was, therefore, important for the CTD to resume its discussion of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.
&& The representative of Cuba said that her delegation supported the idea of the CTD resuming its discussion under this agenda item, and of the Secretariat revising its background paper for that purpose.
&& The representative of Kenya said that the Secretariat should revise its background paper in order to allow the CTD to resume its discussion under this agenda item at the next meeting.  He added that the resumption of the discussion would allow Members to identify what gaps still remained in order to make the Doha Round a development round.
&& The representative of the United States said she had noted that other Members wished to resume discussion under this agenda item, and indicated that her delegation was willing to proceed along these lines.   
&& The Chairman said that the CTD would resume its discussion on the developmental aspects of the negotiations at the next meeting, and that the Secretariat would revise its background paper for that purpose.    
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES (WT/COMTD/W/149/ADD.1 AND WT/COMTD/W/149/ADD.2)
&& The Chairman said that two communications had been received from the United States under this agenda item.  The communications had been circulated in documents WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.1 and Add.2.  He invited the US representative to introduce the submissions.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation wished to bring to the attention of Members two important steps in the US' domestic consultative process related to the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs.  Document WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.1 informed Members of a Federal Register notice requesting public comments on issues relating to DFQF market access to LDCs.  Document WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.2 announced the transmittal of a request by the Office of the US Trade Representative (USTR) to the US International Trade Commission (USITC) to initiate a study on the probable economic effects on US producers and consumers on a tariff-line basis of providing DFQF market access to LDCs.  These steps would allow policymakers to make informed evaluations and move towards taking decisions on critical variables in the design and implementation of a commercially meaningful programme for the LDCs.  Her delegation welcomed questions from other Members on these submissions, both in the formal CTD meetings as well as informally.  
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, thanked the US for its report on the process recently initiated to provide DFQF market access to the LDCs. The LDC Group understood that the mandate of the CTD was to review the steps taken by the developed country Members, and the developing country Members declaring themselves in a position to do so, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  The LDCs would continue to negotiate on this issue in the relevant negotiating bodies, including the CTD in Special Session, the Committee on Agriculture in Special Session and the Negotiating Group on Market Access.
He said that document WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.1 outlined the procedure of submission of comments on the issue of DFQF market access, and also set a deadline of 15 March 2007 for the receipt of comments.  It was understood from document WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.2 that a study would be conducted by the USITC to evaluate the impact of DFQF market access on different stakeholders.  The LDCs understood the necessity of the study, but wanted to know the date by which the US authorities planned to complete it.  The LDCs were also interested to know what steps the US authorities were envisaging after the study had been completed, and what deadlines were being set for different stages of the process before the LDCs would receive DFQF market access.  He said that the LDCs encouraged other developed country Members, and also the developing country partners, to come forward with the offer of DFQF market access for LDCs.  The LDCs asked them to execute and operationalize the instructions given by Ministers in Hong Kong, China in December 2005.
&& The representative of the United States said that the US was working to put in place the necessary legislation to implement the Hong Kong Decision, and that the content of documents WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.1 and Add.2 was part of this process.  There were no explicit deadlines for completion of the process, but the objective was to have legislation in place to implement the Decision alongside the results of the Doha Round.  With regard to the study to be undertaken by the USITC, she said that internal discussions would take place over the next six months.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
DRAFT WORK PROGRAMME FOR 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/156)
&& The Chairman said that a draft 2007 work programme for the CTD had been issued as document WT/COMTD/W/156.  He invited the Committee to consider the draft work programme with a view to adopting it.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that he wished to make a number of comments on the draft work programme.  With regard to the agenda item concerning commodities, his delegation believed that the discussion in the CTD lacked focus, and it was not clear where it was leading.  He proposed that either the item be dropped from the CTD's agenda, or that Members establish a work programme on commodities with specific objectives to meet.  He also inquired what specifically was meant by the item concerning the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system.  Finally, he asked for some clarification as to why there was no mention of Aid for Trade on the draft work programme.
&& The Chairman, in response to the questions raised by Switzerland, said that the item concerning the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system referred to a regular statistical update prepared by the Secretariat.  He said that the CTD's scheduled discussions on Aid for Trade would be held in dedicated sessions, whereas the draft work programme only referred to the regular sessions of the CTD.  As for the matter raised by Switzerland on the agenda item concerning commodities, he said that he would leave it to Members to discuss.
&& The representative of Côte D'Ivoire said he did not agree that the item concerning commodities should be taken off the CTD's agenda.  He believed that the discussions in the CTD under this agenda item were useful, and should continue.
&& The representative of Kenya said that he supported  the intervention by Côte d'Ivoire.  He believed that Members needed more discussion in the CTD in order to understand the problems faced by producers of commodities, and what could be done to help them.  Among the issues that could be discussed in more detail was the processing of primary commodities.  He emphasized that the commodities discussion in the CTD had been introduced with certain objectives in mind, and it was important not to water down these objectives.      
&& The representative of Nigeria said he did not believe that the CTD was yet in a position to remove the item concerning commodities from its agenda, since there were still many issues that Members could discuss.
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee adopt the draft work programme found in document WT/COMTD/W/156.  
&& The Committee adopted its work programme for 2007.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
&& -	INFORMATION BY THE SECRETARIAT ON THE ANNUAL REPORT ON TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING (1 JANUARY TO 31 DECEMBER 2006)
&& The Chairman said that the Secretariat wished to provide some information on the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training for the period 1 January to 31 December 2006.  The document in question would be issued for consideration by the CTD at its next meeting.
The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) said that 486 activities had been carried out in 2006, of which 44 took place in Geneva.  The activities ranged in duration from one day to three months.  Participant days continued to be used as a measure of implementation.  In 2006, 29,752 participant days had been counted out of the 35,430 foreseen in the Technical Assistance and Training Plan.  Of the planned activities for 2006, 93 per cent were carried out.  There were almost 4,500 days of staff travel involving 229 staff members and consultants, and 882 separate trips to venues outside Geneva.  He said that 37 per cent of the activities took place in Africa, 20 per cent in Asia and the Pacific, 11 per cent in Latin America, 8 per cent in Central and Eastern Europe, and 7 per cent in the Caribbean and in the Arab and Middle Eastern regions.  The remainder of the activities had taken place in Geneva. LDCs had participated in 44 per cent of the activities, either exclusively in the case of national activities, or in the context of regional or Geneva‑based activities.  He added that LDCs were entitled to three national activities as opposed to two for other beneficiaries, and a number of TA products were particularly relevant to LDCs.   
There had been a total of 246 national activities and 163 regional activities.  There had also been a number of activities organized by other institutions, in which the Secretariat had been asked to participate.  The number of regional activities had remained relatively stable, while the number of national activities had increased.  He said that 2006 had also been the year in which preparations had been made for the closure of phase II of the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme (JITAP).  Consideration had begun on what might follow, and this was work in progress.  He added that the Secretariat would continue to dialogue regularly with Members so as to be able to respond in the most appropriate ways to their needs and expectations.
He said that out of the foreseen 2006 technical assistance budget of CHF 24 million, an amount of CHF 20.2 million had been spent.  This was equivalent to 84 per cent of the foreseen budget, which was higher than the corresponding figure for 2005.  However, the present financial situation was alarming, as there was only CHF 300,000 left for technical assistance activities.  Once these funds were committed, and if no new funds became available, the Secretariat would be obliged to halt the planning of further technical assistance activities.  The active support of Members was required in order to rectify the situation.
&& The representative of Nigeria urged donor countries to provide the necessary funding to allow the WTO's technical assistance activities to continue.
&& The representative of Côte d'Ivoire said that his country had benefited from technical assistance activities, but was in need of more.  His delegation wished to see JITAP extended and expanded.  He urged donors to make the necessary contributions.
&& The representative of Australia said that she would transmit to her capital the message concerning the critical financial situation.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that he would transmit to the EC and its member States the message concerning the critical financial situation.  In terms of the process to adopt and implement the TA Plan, he said that there needed to be a closer link between the process in the CTD and the process in the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration.  He also inquired whether the LDCs had availed of their entitlement to have three national activities.
&& The representative of the United States said that the US contribution to the WTO technical assistance budget would be provided soon, though an exact date could not be given at this time.
&& The representative of Mali said that his country had greatly benefited from technical assistance, and particularly from JITAP.  He urged donor countries to continue to provide funding to the WTO's technical assistance budget.
&& The representative of Brazil expressed his appreciation for the technical assistance activities of the WTO.  His delegation looked forward to reading the 2006 Annual Report.
&& The representative of Cambodia thanked the donor countries for the technical assistance that had been provided to his country.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
&& The Committee expressed its appreciation for the work and contributions of the Director of the ITTC, who would be retiring at the end of March 2007.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
&& The Chairman said that the General Council at its meeting on 7 February had announced the new Chairpersons for 2007.  He was pleased to inform the Committee that H.E. Mr. Shree Baboo Chekitan Servansing, Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the Republic of Mauritius to the United Nations Office at Geneva, had been chosen as the new Chairman of the CTD.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Servansing as Chairman of the CTD.
The outgoing Chairman said that Ambassador Servansing had been with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Mauritius for several years.  From 2002 to 2004, Ambassador Servansing was the personal representative of the Prime Minister to the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) and the national focal point of NEPAD in Mauritius.  Ambassador Servansing had also served as the Chairman of the WTO's Committee on Trade and Environment, and had been the Coordinator of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group in Geneva.
The incoming Chairman thanked Members for having placed their trust in him to chair the CTD.  He also thanked the outgoing Chairman for the work that had been put in over the course of the previous year.  He emphasized the importance of the CTD, and remarked that the Aid for Trade discussion would lead to increased responsibilities for the Committee.  He said that, whenever necessary, he would consult informally with Members on the various issues under consideration in the CTD.
&& The Committee expressed its appreciation to the outgoing Chairman.   
OTHER BUSINESS 
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
&& The Committee expressed its appreciation for the work and contributions of the Director of the Development Division, who would be retiring at the end of March 2007.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________


 The work programme was circulated as document WT/COMTD/61.

WT/COMTD/M/62 Page  PAGE 4



	WT/COMTD/M/62 	Page  PAGE 3



 

 

 

 



