WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/55
23 January 2006


(06-0285)


Committee on Trade and Development
Fifty-Fifth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 28 NOVEMBER 2005

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Gomi Tharaka Senadhira (Sri Lanka)



 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC125345601" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC125345601 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC125345602" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC125345602 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc125345603" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc125345603 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc125345604" (ii)	Request for observer status by the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC)	 PAGEREF _Toc125345604 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc125345605" (iii)	Request for observer status by the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc125345605 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc125345606" (iv)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc125345606 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC125345607" C.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in Order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected (WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC125345607 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC125345608" D.	Notifications under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC125345608 \H 20
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC125345609" -	Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/N/20/Add.1 – WT/COMTD/51/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC125345609 \H 20
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC125345610" E.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC125345610 \H 21
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC125345611" F.	Export Helpdesk for Developing Countries:  Presentation by the European Communities	 PAGEREF _TOC125345611 \H 22
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC125345612" G.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC125345612 \H 22
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc125345613" -	STRATEGIC REVIEW OF WTO-PROVIDED TRADE-RELATED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE:  REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN	 PAGEREF _Toc125345613 \h 22
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC125345614" H.	Draft Annual Report 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/144)	 PAGEREF _TOC125345614 \H 23
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC125345615" I.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC125345615 \H 23



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman welcomed the Director-General to the meeting.  He said the Director-General had indicated at the last meeting of the Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) that he wished to be present for the Committee's discussion on the developmental aspects of the negotiations relating to paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration.  In view of the schedule of the Director-General, the Chairman requested that agenda item "C" be discussed immediately after the adoption of the agenda.  The Committee would revert to the other items on the agenda after discussion on agenda item "C" was completed.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman recalled that the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in document WTO/AIR/2712 circulated on 1 November 2005 and two revisions issued on 22 November and on 25 November 2005.  The late circulation of a second revision to the agenda was due to the insertion of a recent request received for observer status in the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD).  
&& The Committee adopted the agenda.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman  recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, those organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that those organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Request for observer status by the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC)
Request for observer status by the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said he wished to address the two requests together.  The request from OAPEC came from the Secretary General of OAPEC and was addressed to the Director-General of the WTO.  The request from the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement was sent by the President of the Bank to the Chairperson of the General Council. 
&& The Chairman said he had originally wished the CTD to consider these two requests for observer status at the present meeting.  However, he had been informed by a group of Members that they were not in a position to support the requests.  He, therefore, proposed that the two requests be examined in future along with other pending requests.   
It was so agreed.
&& The representative of Antigua and Barbuda said the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) had been trying for over a year to obtain observer status in the CTD.  The OECS used combined resources to offer representation in the WTO for six Members from the Caribbean region.  The OECS' request for observer status in the CTD had been blocked because of systemic issues in the WTO.  The OECS' request was currently not on the CTD's agenda, but would be brought back on a future occasion.  He urged Members to resolve the issue of observer status so that organizations that were legitimate and played a role in providing representation for small countries could become observers of WTO bodies.  He explained that the issue needed to be resolved for very practical reasons.
&& The Chairman said he understood the concerns of the representative of Antigua and Barbuda.  He said he had held consultations with the concerned parties, but the problems relating to observer status were not limited to the CTD.  He hoped the situation could be resolved soon.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note, and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED (WT/COMTD/W/143/REV.1)
&& The Chairman recalled that at the last meeting of the CTD on 5 October 2005, the Committee had undertaken a review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations based on a background paper prepared by the Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/143).  The Committee had felt it was timely to undertake such a review before the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference took place.  Members had had a very interesting and constructive discussion on the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  The Secretariat had been commended at the previous meeting on the paper it had prepared, but at the same time Members had made several suggestions on how the interests and concerns of developing countries in the Doha Round could be more fully reflected.  It was agreed that the Committee would continue its review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations at the present meeting, and that the Secretariat would revise its paper for that purpose.
&& The Chairman said the revised Secretariat paper on the developmental aspects of the negotiations had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1.  What had been made clear in the paper was the extent to which the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) was indeed a development round.  Development was at the heart of the Doha Round.  However, it was for the Members to realize the potential of the Round.  The presence of the Director-General showed his personal commitment to realizing the potential development gains that the Round had to offer.  As the paper indicated, there were also important institutional aspects to the gains from the Round.  With these introductory comments, the Chairman gave the floor to the Director-General. 
&& The Director-General said it was not often that a Director-General took part in the meetings of the various WTO Committees.  Since he took office he had only been present at two such meetings.  The first was a meeting of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration.  The present meeting of the CTD was the second.  There were two reasons for his participation at the present meeting.  The development dimension of the negotiations was firstly a priority of the Organization.  Second, the Secretariat had worked hard to revise its paper on the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  While the original version of the paper had, on the whole, been well received at the previous CTD meeting, there were a number of ways in which it could be improved.  He wished to thank the Deputy Director-General who had been in charge of revising the paper, as well as the Secretariat, for the efforts that had been expended in revising the paper.  A number of delegations were currently in Brussels for meetings relating to the ACP and G90 groups of countries.  He had decided, however, not to defer the discussion on the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  This was because he wished to emphasize the importance of the development dimension in the run-up to the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  Ministers at Doha had recognized the crucial link that existed between trade liberalization and development.  The interests and concerns of developing countries were at the heart of the Doha Work Programme.  The goal in the present Round was to guarantee that the development dimension remained at the centre of the negotiations in every subject under negotiation, and that developmental gains could be obtained in all areas. Development was the raison d’être of the Round. 
&& The Director-General said agriculture was obviously of critical importance to all developing countries and LDCs, and was also in many ways the key to the negotiations.  Developing countries stood to gain from increased market access in developed markets and expanded opportunities in other developing country markets.  They would also gain from substantial reductions in trade-distorting domestic support in developed countries and from the elimination of all forms of export subsidies.  The Uruguay Round had made contributions in this direction.  He did not believe that the Uruguay Round had been a bad deal for developing countries.  Developing country agricultural exports increased by 24 per cent between 1995 and 2003, and developing countries had increased their share of world exports from 40 to 42 per cent at a time when agriculture exports increased from US$299 billion to US$352 billion.  Trade growth had been particularly strong between developing countries, increasing by 32 per cent between 1995 and 2003.  It was necessary to ensure that the Doha Round took developing countries well beyond that.  It was also important to not forget such issues of importance to developing countries as cotton, commodities, tropical products and preference erosion.  On all these issues there were proposals on the table addressing, if not responding to, the concerns of developing countries.  Also to keep in mind in the agriculture negotiations, as in all areas of the negotiations, was the issue of special and differential treatment (S&D), including the flexibility to designate a number of products as special products based on criteria of food security, livelihood security and rural development needs. 
In the non-agricultural market access (NAMA) negotiations, the Director-General said that market access was a key issue for developing countries.  Market access interests lay not only in developed country markets, but also in other developing country markets and improved opportunities in South-South trade.  In addition to addressing high tariffs, tariff peaks and tariff escalation, it was important that non-tariff barriers that hinder and distort trade be addressed.  Members were aware of certain specific concerns of developing countries including the preservation of policy space, the need to provide adequate protection to infant industries, the maintenance of unbound duties in sensitive sectors and preventing the loss of tariff revenue.  LDCs considered duty-free and quota-free market access as key to their development goals and hoped to secure more of this type of access to other developed markets as well as to more advanced developing country markets.  The Uruguay Round made contributions to market access.  Developing country industrial exports had increased quickly in the last ten years.  For example, African merchandise exports increased by 6 per cent between 1995 and 2000, and by 12 per cent from 2000 to 2004.  LDCs' merchandise exports increased by 14 per cent from 2000 to 2004.  It was necessary to ensure that developing countries benefited further from the Doha Round. 
As for the development dimension in the services negotiations, the Director-General said developing countries stood to gain considerably from the further opening of trade in services, both on the part of their trading partners and in terms of their own policy regimes.  The sectors addressed so far by individual developing countries extended across all major services and all modes with a focus on movement of natural people – mode 4 – as well as cross‑border supply of services under modes 1 and 2.  While trade facilitation was a more recent area of the negotiations, the gains to be enjoyed from lowering trade-related transaction costs were well recognized.  This was an issue of particular importance to landlocked developing countries and LDCs, for which steps to facilitate transit traffic along with facilitating their own cross border trade could produce marked reductions in their import costs and an improvement in their export competitiveness in world markets.  In the area of S&D, it was necessary to ensure that the S&D provisions were made more precise, effective and binding. S&D provisions should respond to, and be reflective of, the concerns of developing countries, particularly LDCs. 
&& The Director-General said the points he had raised were only some of the developmental elements of the negotiations in the various areas.  All subjects of importance to developing countries would be taken into account in the preparation of the draft Ministerial Declaration for the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  They would also constitute the main part of the discussion during and after the Conference and until the end of the Round.  He believed there were already a number of submissions and positions on the table that had an important development potential, for example with regard to agricultural subsidies relating to domestic support and export competition.  Developing countries stood to gain substantially from the Round, and a failure to move forward in the negotiations would be a serious opportunity cost.  To once more take the example of agriculture, a failure to reach agreement would mean the loss of an opportunity to reduce protection in the sector.  Without a Doha Round agreement, current levels of support to the agricultural sector would remain unchanged, or could even increase.  He was aware that the opening of trade did not translate into trade flows, job creation and poverty reduction at the same pace and in the same way for developing countries as it did for developed countries.  There was a need to focus on the need for improved technical and financial assistance to allow developing countries to build the supply-side capacity to benefit fully from the opportunities the Doha Round would provide.  "Aid for Trade" would, therefore, need to accompany the results of the Round to assist developing countries increase their capacity to participate in the multilateral trading system. 
&& The Director-General said the revised Secretariat paper provided an overview of the potential development gains that could be realized.  What was already on the table could be translated into a good result for development from the Doha Round.  It would certainly be disastrous if what had been already achieved disappeared because the negotiations failed to move forward.  The overall goal was to ensure that the package stayed on the table and translated into real benefits for developing countries.
&& The representative of South Africa welcomed the Director-General to the meeting.  He commended the Chairman and the Secretariat for the preparation of document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1.  The document would prove useful in securing the development content of the Doha Round.  Development was a complex and contested concept, and had become highly political in the current Round.  To advance towards convergence, there was a need for greater engagement on the concept.  It was for this reason that a number of developing countries (Argentina, Brazil, India, Indonesia, Namibia, Pakistan, the Philippines, South Africa and Venezuela) had submitted a paper which had been circulated at the present meeting.  It was his privilege to introduce the paper, titled "Reclaiming Development in the WTO Doha Development Round".
&& The representative of South Africa made the following statement:
"Recent proposals by some industrial countries in the WTO threaten the developmental content of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).  It is thus timely to reclaim the developmental content of the round.
The Ministerial Declaration that launched the DDA proclaimed that the interests of developing countries would be placed at the centre of the negotiations.  This was not an act of charity but based on the recognition that promoting development in developing countries is an essential impetus to sustained global economic growth from which all can benefit.  A key to global growth lies in unlocking the potential of developing countries, and to achieve this, developing countries must pursue development and industrialization in sectors where they possess comparative advantage.  The strategic objective for the negotiations is for industrial countries to reduce the protection they grant to inefficient sectors that frustrate the growth potential of developing countries.  An early conclusion of the current round of negotiations, consistent with the mandate agreed to in Doha in 2001 would deliver the best overall context for such an outcome.
In reclaiming the developmental content of the negotiations, the principles of proportionality, less than full reciprocity and special and differential treatment in favour of developing countries should be considered along three dimensions.
First, the removal of anti-development distortions in international agricultural trade is central to the DDA.  Through a combination of high tariffs, massive domestic support and export subsidies, industrial countries retain inefficient agricultural production in their economies at the cost of agricultural development in developing countries.  However, developing countries cannot be expected to pay for this needed reform in agriculture by acceding to overly ambitious demands in industrial tariffs and services that do not take into account the realities of their levels of economic development.  
Second, the DDA must provide enhanced access to industrial country markets for the exports of goods and services of developing countries.  On industrial tariffs, development requires that tariff peaks and escalation on products of export interest to developing countries are eliminated.  Developing countries would reduce their tariffs proportionately on the basis of less than full reciprocity so that their concessions are commensurate with their level of industrial development.  
Third, not all developing countries stand to gain from the DDA in the short-term.  Least-developed countries (LDCs) and other weak and vulnerable economies often do not have the supply capacity to compete for the new export opportunities that will arise.  Others will face significant adjustment costs including from the erosion of preferences.  To address these particular concerns of developing countries, we call for the following actions to be taken:
Developed countries should make a firm commitment to work for the provision of duty free and quota free market access for all LDCs, and developing countries in a position to do so are also encouraged to make such commitments.
The launch of an ambitious "Aid for Trade" package in Hong Kong to address the trade-related capacity building needs of developing countries.  WTO Members should also agree to create a grant aid fund to assist developing countries to manage the impact of preference erosion that would arise from the Doha Round.
Developed countries should seize the opportunity to increase the gains from the Doha Round for all Members by making serious efforts to liberalize the temporary movement of natural persons (mode 4), from developing to developed Member countries.
WTO Members in Hong Kong should agree to review a number of WTO rules which are now imbalanced in favour of developed countries, for example, the TRIPS agreement, which has only strengthened the rights of private ownership and should provide equivalent protection for the intellectual property rights of communities.
Developed countries have made demands on developing countries in their recent proposals to make commitments in the NAMA negotiations that are totally disproportionate.  The enormous burdens of adjustment that developing countries would have to bear in their industrial sectors bear no resemblance to the relatively insignificant adjustments that developed countries will need to make in this sector.  Developing countries are being called upon to reduce their tariffs from their applied rates with limited space to manage the adjustments in their sensitive labour intensive sectors.  In addition, developed countries are not offering to make any significant cuts in their industrial sectors with their offer to reduce their tariffs by a coefficient of 10, using the Swiss formula.
In sharp contrast the European Communities (EC) has made insignificant offers to open its markets in the agriculture negotiations, with its call for additional flexibility for the bulk of its sensitive products, allowing it to close off the possibility of any significant new market opening for agricultural products from developing countries.  The EC and other developed countries are thus seeking a round for free.  Developing countries are being called upon to bear the burden of any new market opening in this round.  This threatens to create an imbalanced and anti-developmental outcome in the Doha Round.
We for our part are committed to work for a genuine development outcome of the round that is fair and balanced and that will create new opportunities for all Members, developed and developing, to grow their economies and foster their development.
Chairman, I wish to thank you for your efforts in the CTD to advance the development interests of developing countries."
&& The representative of Argentina said his delegation was a co-sponsor of the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa and fully supported the latter's statement.  It would be important to consolidate results at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  However, any package agreed to in Hong Kong should not be to the detriment of S&D provisions or to a wider result in favour of developing countries which would be finalized at the end of the Round.  While agriculture was a key area of the negotiations, it was not the only area with developmental implications.  The paper introduced by the representative of South Africa had a vision of development permeating through all the areas of the negotiations.  Furthermore, the Doha Round should not only have the goal of improving the position of developing countries in international trade, but more generally to improve their growth potential and their ability to combat social inequality.  The objectives of the Doha Round should, therefore, not be framed only in terms of trade outcomes.
&& The representative of Argentina said that one of the results of the Uruguay Round had been to limit the national policy space of developing countries.  Tariffs were one of the few elements remaining for developing countries to carry out industrial policies.  Tariff reduction implemented through a formula would erode regional preferences.  From the point of view of Argentina this meant an erosion of intra-regional trade by 40 to 60 per cent.  In view of the inevitable reduction in tariffs that would take place in the Doha Round, there was need for more space to implement policies.  It was satisfactory that there were discussions under way on how to deal with the situation with regard to LDCs.  The subject of TRIMs had been included in the discussions, and there was a possibility to come to an agreement on this in the context of the preparatory work leading up to the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  Once a decision had been taken with regard to LDCs, the TRIMs issue could be discussed in the context of developing countries more generally, as this was one important area where developing countries could benefit from greater policy space.   
&& The representative of India made the following statement:
"India has long sought a development audit of the Doha Round.  I see this morning's discussion in the CTD as kicking off a process which will guide us in the remainder of the negotiation.  Although belatedly, we are embarking on an extremely important exercise.
I see that several of our colleagues from the ACP are not able to be present today because of their meeting in Brussels.  I would, however, have expected more colleague Ambassadors from developed country Members to be here for this very important discussion.
I welcome the Secretariat paper, and acknowledge the quality of the professional effort in many areas.  This is, however, not uniformly the case.  For example, there are factual inaccuracies in paragraphs 68, 70, 74 and 90-91.  India is also disappointed at the complete omission of the CBD-TRIPS issue in the section on the TRIPS Agreement.  The various caveats and disclaimers are thus in order.
Mr. Chairman, India is a co-sponsor of the paper on 'Reclaiming Development', just introduced by my distinguished friend.  My remarks will briefly supplement this joint presentation.
India was sceptical when the Doha negotiations were packaged as a development round.  The negotiations over the past four years have done little to reassure us.  There is a serious and growing development deficit in the round.  This will have to be corrected.  Not only to meet a demand of developing countries, but to ensure timely completion of the negotiations.
It is true that the greatest benefits for developing countries are to flow from the market access negotiations in agriculture, NAMA and services.  But equally, it is in these negotiations that the greatest development hazards lie.  On their present trajectory, a pro-development outcome is not only not inevitable, its achievement will be a surprise.  Let me elaborate.
In agriculture, early agreement with sufficient specificity on the issues of special products and special safeguard mechanism for developing countries is an urgent necessity.  Unless developing countries are able to effectively secure the food and livelihood security of hundreds of millions of their subsistence and marginal farmers, the development benefit of the negotiations in agriculture will elude us.  Any slippage on this issue will largely nullify the development gains of a less distorted structure of international trade in agriculture, which we hope to achieve in this round.  This calls for a recalibration of the pace in this multi-tiered negotiation.
Another issue calling for urgent progress is the subsidies on cotton, which have had devastating consequences for millions of poor farmers in Africa. 
In the NAMA negotiations, there is an even more determined assault on the S&D elements in the mandate.  The paragraph 8 flexibilities are being eroded.  We need a greater sensitivity to the mandate among our developed partners.  In their totality, the S&D and flexibility elements in NAMA fall well short of the protection that underpinned early industrialization in the developed countries.  If they are undermined any further, we will be scripting an anti-development outcome with potentially devastating consequences for developing countries.  On the other hand, efforts are afoot to protect tariff peaks and tariff escalation in developed country markets.  Preference erosion calls for direct resource transfers to facilitate adjustment, not for further cosseting protectionist interests in developed markets.
The prospects for meaningful development gains from the services negotiations have also receded.  Liberalization of temporary mobility of natural persons is a crying need of the global economy.  Yet, the most competitive services economy in the world has offered no improvement in mode 4 from its Uruguay Round commitments.  As a result, the overall development promise of the services negotiations has been compromised.  India will continue to work for significant improvements in the quality of offers in mode 4.
There is no progress in the Doha mandate on S&D, calling for provisions to be made more effective, precise and operational.  There is virtually no S&D proposal, including the five proposals tabled by the weakest among our membership, the LDCs, on which we agree.  There could not be a greater indictment of the Doha Development Agenda.
There is a growing concern across the developing world over piracy of bio resources, and the misappropriation of their traditional knowledge.  Developing countries sense an imbalance in the protection of private IPRs, and those belonging to communities, in the TRIPs Agreement.  Despite the Doha mandate, and years of technical work, we are yet to launch negotiations on clarifying the CBD-TRIPs relationship.  A key development objective has been frustrated by questions over the mandate and a variety of procedural manoeuvres.  India hopes that the handful of countries resisting the launch of negotiations will see the damage they do to the development promise of Doha.
A word about South-South trade, which is a favourite theme of our developed country partners.  South-South trade is growing faster than world trade, and will perhaps continue to do so.  India is alive to the imperative of co-prosperity of the South and is actively engaged in expanding opportunities in its market for other developing countries, including LDCs.  We are pursuing such initiatives in different formats, including the GSTP.
Mr. Chairman, I have spoken with candour.  We need to recognize the urgent need for correcting the growing development deficit in this negotiation.  I have little doubt that the growing anxieties and apprehensions of developing countries account for much of our present difficulties.  The round cannot regain momentum, until key players revisit their negotiating positions from a development perspective.  This morning's discussion will, I hope, contribute to this objective.
Lastly, Mr. Chairman, I would request you to ensure that the status of the development dimension of the negotiations remains under constant review in the CTD.  The Secretariat should be requested to bring out a further update, say at the end of February.  India shall also pursue a horizontal discussion on development in the TNC, or the General Council, after the Hong Kong Ministerial."
&& The representative of the European Communities said like others he regretted that most of the ACP delegations could not attend the present meeting.  Their input in the debate would have been most valuable.  He thanked the Director-General for his introductory remarks and the Secretariat – in particular the Deputy Director-General who had been responsible for revising the Secretariat paper – for having provided an important compendium.  He also thanked the representative of South Africa for introducing the paper submitted by a group of developing country Members.  Though he had had little time to study the latter paper, he thought the substantive issues could be better dealt with within the core negotiations.  He wished to say that many of the proposals contained in the paper had the full support of his delegation.  These included matters relating to duty-free and quota-free access, preference erosion, Aid for Trade and cotton, to mention a few.  He understood the emphasis given in the paper to the European Communities (EC), both directly and indirectly.  The EC was, after all, the most important market for developing countries in general and LDCs in particular.  The EC was also the single biggest provider of trade-related technical assistance (TRTA) and Aid for Trade. 
Turning to the Secretariat paper, the representative of the European Communities said that in its revised version it remained a valuable tool for all Members as they sought to live up to the mandate.  Members would no doubt have their own areas of emphasis or may interpret situations in a different way as compared to the Secretariat's presentation.  If the Secretariat were to give full justice to all the issues contributing to the development dimension, the paper would have been significantly longer.  This was not the time or the place to get into that level of detail.
&& The representative of the European Communities said the paper illustrated the great diversity of developing country interests in the areas under negotiation.  This was a salutary reminder to those who presented the development dimension of the Round as simply the sum of all the requests and negotiating positions presented by developing countries.  It was also a message to those outside the house who tended to see and present the negotiations in rather simplistic, North-South terms.  In many cases, interests of developing countries did not coincide, and their requests were, accordingly, at odds with one another.  This should be no surprise to any delegation.  The challenge that negotiators had to face was to reconcile these competing interests in a way that supported a pro-development emphasis and preserved the essential substantive interests of all.  In the main negotiating areas where the bulk of the development dimension was to be found, much of this work still lay ahead.  It was unfortunate that not as much progress as had been hoped would be made by the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said the negotiations should intensify in the weeks after the Ministerial Conference.  A successful outcome to the negotiations was a prize worth fighting for.  The prize was a combination of judicious and well-designed liberalization and modernization of the WTO rule book.  The market access negotiations in agriculture, NAMA and services should lead to additional opportunities to trade – including for developing countries and LDCs in South-South trade – that would deliver a large part of the contribution that the DDA could make to development.  However, market access was not the whole story.  The results of negotiations on WTO rules – including anti-dumping, trade facilitation and geographical indications (GIs) – would play a vital role in underpinning the market access negotiations and in the overall balance of the Round, including from a development perspective.  This was because well-functioning and well‑designed rules helped ensure that developing countries and LDCs were better able to take advantage of reductions in tariffs and other forms of border protection in both existing and potential new export markets.  
He said he wished to provide some examples of tensions and differences of interest among developing countries, as they were presented in the Secretariat paper.  In the area of market access, there was the issue of preference erosion versus tropical products.  There was also the question of the high level of duties collected on South-South trade.  In the area of services, there was the issue of the value to developing countries of liberalization of services, including infrastructure services, impacting on the competitiveness of productive sectors.  Developing countries were active users of anti-dumping, including on imports from other developing countries.  Major tensions had also arisen on a South-South basis on the S&D Work Programme.  
&& The representative of the European Communities said there was evidently a pressing need for developing countries and LDCs to have sufficient and effective TRTA and support for capacity building.  The development community had responded significantly since Doha, and continued to do so.  The EC was leading the way.  Effectiveness of support depended also very largely on individual developing countries working out their real needs and priorities.
He added that the principal developmental benefits of the DDA would come from the main negotiating areas, though it was too soon to predict the eventual results.  The EC was, however, determined that the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference deliver a substantial development package, even while failing to achieve the initial objective of "full modalities".  Unlike some others, the EC did not believe that Members should keep all the "development deliverables" until the end of the Round.  Rather, agreement should be reached on whatever was possible.  Where it was not possible to reach agreement because of intimate connections with the negotiations, it was, nonetheless, necessary to give a clear direction on the desired outcomes.  The main components of the development package should include duty- and quota-free market access for LDCs, with a clear commitment from developed countries to deliver on the objective subscribed to in Doha.  Other Members in a position to grant similar treatment to imports from LDCs should do so over a longer period of time and with some flexibility with regard to product coverage.  There should also be agreement on the set of LDC Agreement-specific S&D proposals, which included giving LDCs new flexibility for measures that would otherwise be incompatible with their WTO obligations under TRIMs.  Other components of the package would include decisions to endorse and push forward with work on an enhanced Integrated Framework and on Aid for Trade more generally;  positive resolution of the LDCs' request for an extension of the transition period for implementation of TRIPs obligations and settlement of outstanding issues on TRIPS and health;  and a clear direction for the future course of the DDA negotiations with regard to the issue of cotton, the interests of small economies, and ways to resolve the different concerns of developing countries on preference erosion.
&& The representative of Djibouti, speaking as the representative of the LDCs and the African countries, said the presence of the Director-General was a comfort to developing countries.  If there was to be a favourable developmental outcome to the negotiations, it was necessary for developing countries to participate actively in international trade so as to reduce poverty.  At the same time, these countries faced several challenges in attempting to do so.  He agreed with the representative of South Africa in highlighting that development permeated all areas of the negotiations.  He said that Ministers at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference did not have the time to consider in depth all the WTO negotiating issues.  It was, therefore, up to the negotiators to put appropriate proposals to the Ministers.  Ministers would take into account the advice given to them by the negotiators.  Negotiators were, therefore, responsible for coming up with solutions in the various negotiating areas.  
&& The representative of Paraguay said he wished to underline the importance of the presence of the Director-General at the meeting.  One of the primary responsibilities of the Secretariat was to provide support to those delegations that most needed support, namely those from developing countries.  He thanked the Secretariat for the preparation of document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1, which allowed Members to consider the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  In the Uruguay Round, a similar exercise was only carried out at the end of the negotiations.  It was, therefore, encouraging that in the Doha Round the exercise was being undertaken at the present time.  The Uruguay Round provided benefits to those developing countries that were prepared for integration into the global economy.  However, the experience had been negative on balance for the majority of developing countries, and in particular those with vulnerable economies, that had faced huge difficulties in introducing economic reforms.  The production of a number of developing countries was essentially focused on raw materials, which faced tariff peaks and tariff escalation in partner country markets.  It was on these types of issues that discussion should take place and on which agreement should be reached.  It was also important to keep in mind that the monitoring of the developmental dimension of trade was a complex exercise.  It went beyond the WTO negotiations and also included support from other international organizations such as the IMF, the World Bank, the regional development banks and the ITC.  The WTO should, however, take the lead as it was the only organization among these that was Member-driven and worked on the basis of consensus. 
&& The representative of Paraguay said the Informal Group of Developing Countries (IGDC) was discussing an initiative for Ministers to decide upon in Hong Kong, China. As the Chairman of the IGDC, he had held consultations with various delegations.  He believed the IGDC at Ministerial level could prove to be a useful forum in which ideas and initiatives might emerge.  He congratulated the delegations that had submitted the paper introduced at the present meeting by the representative of South Africa.  The paper had the support of Paraguay.  His delegation hoped the paper would prove to be useful in the search for concrete solutions to concrete problems.
&& The representative of Egypt said his delegation strongly supported the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa.  He thanked and commended the delegations that had submitted the paper, which his delegation believed reflected several crucial concerns of developing countries.  The submission came at a timely juncture, thus further adding to its importance.  
&& The representative of Brazil said his delegation was a co-sponsor of the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa.  He supported the statements of Argentina and India, two other co‑sponsors of the paper.  He wished to make five brief points on the paper.  First, the paper reflected a commitment to the Doha mandate by placing development at the centre of the negotiations and calling for the negotiations to be concluded in this manner.  Second, the developmental aspects of the Round comprised both the offensive and the defensive interests of developing countries.  While offensive interests in agriculture were important, they were not the only area where the offensive interests of developing countries should be reflected.  The defensive interests of developing countries, including the need for policy space and flexibilities, needed to also be taken into account in the various areas under negotiation.  A third point related to paragraph 44 of the Doha Declaration. In his view, developmental considerations had been present in multilateral trade negotiations since 1964, when Part IV of the GATT was established.  However, in the past the results of the negotiations had resulted in general developmental provisions with no great precision.  The challenge in the Doha Round was to make such provisions precise and effective.  Fourth, the topic of development was not only related to the special situations of developing countries.  Development was a far wider subject, and was not limited to flexibilities within the WTO talks.  Cooperation between developing countries was important in boosting South-South trade.  The regional aspect was of particular importance in promoting trade between developing countries.  Finally, the challenge of development was closely related to the issue of coherence.  A coherent vision of development should be built up within the WTO.  Trade liberalization should not be implemented in contradiction to developmental objectives.  A coherent vision would permit the results of the negotiations to better reflect developmental considerations.
&& The representative of Brazil congratulated the Secretariat and the Chairman for the preparation of document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1.  There were certainly imperfections in the document, but it would no doubt be improved as the discussion and debate moved forward.  It was an important contribution to the process of evaluating the developmental aspects of the Doha Round.
&& The representative of China thanked the Director-General for his introductory remarks.  He also thanked the representative of South Africa for having introduced the paper submitted by a group of developing countries.  His delegation shared most of the concerns expressed in the paper introduced by South Africa.  His delegation was very concerned with the slow progress in the negotiations.  There was particular concern with regard to those areas of the negotiations where the legitimate rights of all developing country and LDC Members were at stake.  There were also serious concerns at attempts to undermine the unity of developing countries by re-categorizing them beyond the Doha mandate.  The Doha Declaration contained several references to development issues.  In the last few years, Members had on various occasions emphasized the importance of the developmental aspects of the negotiations in their statements.  However, translating the statements into specific commitments and actions remained a serious problem.
&& The representative of China said he wished to make a number of comments on the paper introduced by South Africa.  Agriculture was at the centre of the negotiations.  His delegation shared the view expressed in the paper that distortions in the agricultural sector that prevented the export growth of developing countries needed to be removed.  Commitment to the level of ambition envisaged in the Doha mandate needed to be demonstrated by the cutting of domestic support and the elimination of export subsidies by developed country Members.  For products of export interest to developing country Members, the issue of high tariffs, tariff peaks and tariff escalation in developed country markets needed to be fully addressed.  S&D for developing countries needed to be offered through different rates of tariff-cutting and different thresholds, as well as through the treatment of special products and the use of a special safeguard mechanism.  On the subject of NAMA, his delegation shared the view expressed in the paper that the Doha Round should increase liberalization and foster positive adjustment in all Member countries.  Genuine market access opportunities needed to be provided for all, and particularly for developing country Members.  His delegation was deeply concerned by the high tariffs, tariff peaks, tariff escalation and non-tariff barriers (NTBs) to be found in developed country markets, in particular on products of export interest to developing countries.  It was also necessary to provide sufficient flexibilities to developing country Members to allow them to make commitments commensurate with their development levels and needs.  His delegation fully supported the position that paragraph 8 of the NAMA framework in the 1 August 2004 Decision was a stand-alone provision. 
In the services negotiations, the representative of China said his delegation believed there were two major developmental aspects.  The first concerned the flexibilities accorded to developing country Members in scheduling their commitments.  Some Members were insisting on numerical market access targets for all Members.  Such targets appeared to be incompatible with the WTO provisions.  Most developing country Members were recipients of services, and their services sectors were still at an early stage of development.  Permitting developing country Members to open their services sectors in line with their development levels and needs was of utmost importance.  Second, special consideration should be given to the sectors and modes of export interest to developing countries.  Both developed and developing country Members would benefit from serious efforts to liberalize mode 4.  Regrettably, very few offers to date had taken this into account to an appropriate extent.  With the regard to the S&D Work Programme, his delegation strongly urged developed country Members to be more forthright in meeting the requests of the LDCs and to make further efforts to allow the LDC Agreement-specific proposals to be more commercially meaningful.  This would allow LDCs to advance their development process, both in trade and in industrial capacity building.  He underlined the particular importance of providing duty-free and quota-free market access for LDCs.  His delegation expressed its support on the issue of the relationship between TRIPs and CBD, and underlined the necessity of striking a balance between the protection of the interests of the developed and the developing country Members.  China would work closely with all Members to achieve a solid development package in the Round. 
&& The Chairman said discussion of paragraph 51 would remain a standing item on the CTD's agenda.  He said the Director-General would now be leaving the meeting room.  He wished to give the floor to the Director-General for his closing remarks.
&& The Director-General said he would limit himself to remarks on three points.  First, he said the Secretariat would take into account India's comments on the revised paper.  More generally, he said the paper would be regularly updated.  Second, he wished to highlight one area in which agreement had already been reached.  In particular, it was agreed in the 1 August 2004 Decision of the General Council that industrial tariffs would be reduced through a formula that compressed tariff peaks and hence addressed tariff escalation.  This was of great importance to developing countries, and should be built on.  Third, he observed that several delegations wished to have a regular horizontal review of the development dimension of the Round.  He agreed with the usefulness of the exercise.  It was in the hands of the Chairman of the CTD to organize the work in this respect.  As mentioned by the representative of Paraguay, it was important that the exercise was being undertaken while the negotiations were still ongoing.  Members could rely on the Director-General and the Deputy Director-General responsible for development issues to remain personally involved in a regular horizontal review.    
&& The representative of Namibia said the presence of the Director-General at the meeting was an indication of the importance attached to development issues in the Round.  He thanked the representative of South Africa for having introduced the paper co-sponsored by a number of countries including Namibia.  The Doha Declaration was about development, and development should therefore take its place at the heart of the Doha Work Programme.  This was an objective of the multilateral trading system, reflected in the preambles of both the GATT and the Marrakesh Agreement.  The Doha Declaration made mention of specific elements to achieve the developmental objectives in favour of developing countries.  These included, among others, the need for balanced rules and policy space, enhanced market access in areas of export interest to developing countries, and capacity‑building programmes.  Development was defined by the needs and interests of developing countries.  That was why a number of developing countries had submitted a paper at the present meeting.  The development needs of developing countries could not be outsourced or defined elsewhere.  On the issue of policy space, history showed that many developed countries had benefited from policy space in enhancing their development and industrial capacity.  Policy space was critical to developing countries today, and should be recognized in the negotiations.  On the subject of market access, Ministers at Doha had called for enhanced market access for developing country exports.  The enhanced market access referred to should be in addition to the current market access offered to developing countries.  On the subject of Aid for Trade, his delegation believed that any capacity‑building programme must be demand-driven and needs-based.  It must be predictable and sustainable, and must have no conditionalities.  Capacity building should be independent of market access and flexibilities.  Aid for Trade could not be a substitute for market opening. 
&& The representative of Hong Kong, China said it was vitally important for development to be appropriately reflected in the Doha Round.  He welcomed document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1 and the introductory remarks of the Director-General.  He also welcomed the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa.  He said that Hong Kong, China's Secretary for Commerce, Industry and Technology had repeatedly called for an early harvest on development at the Sixth Ministerial Conference.  The Secretary had spoken on the subject at various international meetings of LDCs and developing countries at Mombasa (Kenya), Livingstone (Zambia) and Arusha (Tanzania), and would be repeating the message in Brussels in the course of the present week.  The Secretary believed that a development package to be agreed upon in Hong Kong, China should not be seen as a substitute for the substantive gains to be achieved from subsidy elimination and market opening in agriculture and NAMA, and should not be a hostage to either.  The Secretary also believed the development package should comprise a number of elements.  First, there must be an unambiguous commitment to duty-free and quota-free market access for products from LDCs.  While some Members had technical problems in implementing such a commitment, he called for imaginative solutions to be found.  Second, the package should allow for the harvesting of as many of the Agreement-specific S&D proposals as possible.  Third, there was a need for longer transition periods for LDCs under the TRIPs and TRIMs Agreements.  Fourth, it was necessary to commit to an Aid for Trade programme which, among other things, would be sufficient to enable early implementation of the trade facilitation measures on which a broad measure of agreement had already been reached.  Finally, there was a need for securing a permanent solution to the TRIPs and public health issue.  There were certainly a host of other candidates for inclusion in the early harvest, some riper than others.  Members may not be able to harvest them all in Hong Kong, China, but efforts would certainly be made.  His delegation looked forward to working with other Members on them.   
&& The representative of Colombia said that when she entered the meeting room she was struck by the level of attendance, including the Director-General and several Ambassadors.  She assumed that document WT/COMTD/W/143, which had been the subject of such passionate debate at the Committee's last meeting, had inspired the presence of such leading figures.  The document was at the heart of the negotiations.  She congratulated the Chairman and the Secretariat for the preparation of the document.  She was proud to have taken part in previous discussions and to have contributed to the revision of the document.  She also welcomed the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa.  Her delegation considered it to be a contribution which reflected some positions contained in the Secretariat document.
&& The representative of Colombia said that from her country's perspective, development was at the heart of the negotiations.  Colombia was a developing country committed to a multilateralism with trade liberalization and poverty reduction as its goals.  Colombia had, therefore, tried to give development a specific dimension in the Doha Round.  The greatest development dividend to be gained from participation in the Round would be an outcome to the agriculture negotiations which would enable trade liberalization to go hand-in-hand with poverty reduction.  Such an outcome would be achieved when support for the agricultural sector was reduced and the elements of the agriculture negotiations were appropriately addressed.  She understood that there were both offensive and defensive interests at play in the negotiations.  What she found hard to understand, however, was that there were countries which had offensive interests in gaining market access, and at the same time had defensive interests in keeping their own markets closed.  These interests were very difficult to reconcile.  They were extreme offensive and defensive positions and were of great concern to her delegation and other delegations.
Her delegation wished to continue working on the basis of the Secretariat document.  While she had no specific comments on the document at this time, she remarked that it reached quite timid conclusions, presumably out of caution and deference.  The document ended with two small paragraphs of concluding remarks.  She understood it was very difficult for the Secretariat to engage in conjecture.  She had no wish to exaggerate or play down problems, or to be associated with any particular problem or issue.  However, she felt the time had come to make specific proposals.  Special situations formed part of the discussion, but the development dimension of the negotiations did not end with special situations.  She said some issues, such as that of ensuring market access for tropical products and for products which diversify production away from the growing of illicit crops, did not seem compatible with the issue of preference erosion.  This was why her delegation wished to suggest that a product-specific approach be adopted.  Studies by other organizations such as the World Bank and the IMF had found that some problems were amenable to non-trade solutions.  It was, however, first necessary to establish the  trade dimension of the problem.  She hoped to see a revised version of the Secretariat document incorporating the issues that had been mentioned by other delegations at the beginning of 2006.  Her delegation also wished to submit a number of comments that it had not yet been able to make.  Her delegation remained committed to the issue and was convinced that the Secretariat document would become a roadmap for concluding the Doha Round.
&& The representative of Pakistan thanked the Secretariat for the revised paper.  The paper in its revised form, along with some further editing, made it a valuable living document that captured the areas of concern to developing countries.  Her delegation supported the proposal to review the document periodically until the end of the Round.  Now that a single document was available to reflect the concerns of developing countries, her delegation hoped to see tangible progress in addressing these concerns.  Her delegation was a co-sponsor of the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa, and invited Members' attention to the concerns and interests raised in that paper.      
&& The representative of Australia made the following statement:
"Thank you Chair and thank you to the Secretariat for putting out a revised version of this paper which provides a good overview of the various development aspects of the negotiations.  We have two comments on the paper which go to the accuracy of the document.  These centre on paragraphs 69 and 86.
Paragraph 69 discusses the consultations on GI-extension and then provides, 'It was felt that progress on this issue would have spill over effects and allow progress to be made on the other issues.'  We are unclear how this found its way into the paper.  From memory, this issue wasn’t raised at the last meeting of the CTD when we discussed the paper and no opportunity was given to provide alternative views.  Singling out GI-extension and providing that progress on this issue would allow progress to be made on other issues – other implementation issues or other development issues more broadly – is a profoundly inaccurate characterization of current negotiating realities.
We have never seen GI-extension as a development issue.  The main demandeurs on this issue are not developing countries and this can be contrasted with the TRIPs‑CBD issue.  If there is one issue that could help unblock progress in the negotiations over all, in support of the development dimension, it is improvements in agricultural market access, not GI-extension.  We are firmly of the view that including the line in question in the paper is misleading.  If there is one Member who has this view then the paper should make this clear.
Our second comment relates to paragraph 86 on the wines and spirits GIs register which we were not aware was a development issue.  This paragraph provides that 'some developing country Members have lent broad support to the approach proposed by the European Communities…'
Now Mr. Chair, I have been at these negotiations in the TRIPs Special Session and during my time here in Geneva not one developing country has spoken in favour of the EC register proposal.  By contrast, numerous developing countries have spoken with concern about the EC proposal, and not just those developing countries which have co-sponsored the Joint Proposal.  So we are not sure what the factual basis of the comment in paragraph 86 of the Paper is.
We would be happy to put these concerns in writing and convey them to the Secretariat."
&& The representative of the United States thanked the Secretariat for its revised document.  She also thanked those delegations that had submitted the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa.  Her delegation strongly supported the idea of a horizontal assessment of the developmental aspects across all areas of the negotiations.  With regard to the revised Secretariat paper, her delegation had found many places where the revision was an improvement over the original.  However, there were also a number of places where the revision masked the complex nature of the negotiations and the varied interests of Members.  The original version described more fairly the diversity of views among developing countries in each area of the negotiations in a succinct and balanced way.  In the revised paper, the differences in positions between developing countries were sometimes not reflected or were muted.  For example, while the NAMA section mentioned increased market access in developed countries as a key goal of developing countries, it did not explicitly mention that in the context of the negotiations developing countries should also be seeking to reduce trade barriers among themselves.  Reducing barriers between developing countries would result in significant gains to these countries.  Her delegation saw the Secretariat document as a work in progress which would be improved through the negotiations.  Her delegation strongly believed that the main benefits to developing countries from the negotiations would come from their participation in the greater global economic activities generated from a successful outcome to the Round.  Active contributions to liberalization were, therefore, of key importance.  Little benefits would accrue to those countries that remained in economic isolation behind high tariffs and other barriers.
On the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa, the representative of the United States remarked that several developing countries seemed to believe the interests of developed countries in the negotiations were self-serving, and that the latter were attempting to sow divisions among the former.  In fact, developing countries were themselves recognizing that there was not necessarily a common developing country position on all issues.  The paper was highly defensive on this point.  With regard to the question of how to address the question of tariff peaks and tariff escalation, she said Members were endeavouring to do so through the use of some type of Swiss formula.  It was inaccurate to state that developed countries were not willing to liberalize.  Developed country Members were participating actively in the negotiations and had submitted several proposals to reduce their own tariffs and those of developing countries.  In addition, the mandate was not limited to addressing tariff peaks and tariff escalation in developed countries.  On the question of whether paragraph 8 of the NAMA mandate was a stand-alone provision, her delegation was of the view that all the elements of the mandate were inter-related.  It was not possible to come to an agreement on one element until all other elements were also in place.  The paper stated that developed countries were proposing to start tariff reductions from applied rates, which was inaccurate.  Rather, the United States was among those developed country Members that had proposed that bound rates be cut below applied rates to achieve real new market access.  Her delegation preferred to continue the discussion on the developmental aspects of the negotiations based on the Secretariat paper rather than on the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa.   
&& The representative of Chinese Taipei thanked those delegations that had submitted the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa.  The paper was very valuable.  His delegation agreed that development should be placed at the centre of the negotiations and supported the proposition that developing countries should pursue their economic development and their industrialization in sectors in which they possessed competitive advantage.  His delegation hoped that all Members, developing and developed alike, could benefit from the results of the Round.  While recognizing that developing countries needed flexibilities in certain sectors, flexibilities provided should be limited in scope.  More importantly, new market access opportunities in both developed and developing country markets should be created.  Chinese Taipei was a beneficiary of liberalization.  Efforts to liberalize markets had not only provided market access opportunities to its trading partners, but had also enhanced the competitiveness of industries in Chinese Taipei and allowed the creation of new industries.  For Chinese Taipei, the main objective of the negotiations was to achieve a more liberalized trading environment in both developed and developing countries.   
&& The representative of New Zealand made the following statement:
"Let me begin by thanking the Secretariat for the considerable amount of work that has clearly gone into producing document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1.  This is a useful document which shows the degree to which development considerations permeate all aspects of our work.  Our limited comments reflect the fact that overall we see this as a useful exercise.  We realize the Secretariat document has been produced under its own responsibility and is heavily caveated.  Therefore, we hesitate to bring up specific issues.  Nevertheless, we do wish to place on record our position on a couple of points and to echo the previous statement made by Australia.
First, in relation to Part F, Implementation Related Issues (para. 69), we too question the way the paper attempts to prioritize the issue of GI extension and the way in which GI extension has been characterized as the single issue blocking progress on other outstanding implementation issues.  Chair, if only the answer to this set of issues was quite so simple.
Second, we turn to part H of the paper: TRIPs (para. 86).  Again we have some questions about the way in which the Secretariat has characterized aspects of the negotiation in the TRIPs Special Session.  This is a negotiation of particular interest to us. Therefore, we are concerned to see the way in which the Secretariat has portrayed the positions of developing country Members.  This characterization does not reflect our understanding of developing country interests as expressed in the Special Session. 
Like Australia, we'd be happy to provide further feedback direct to the Secretariat on this matter and perhaps also other elements of the paper such as those comments raised by the United States in relation to NAMA.  We hope our comments will be taken into account in the next version of the document for distribution early next year.
Finally, we can't help but make a more general comment in relation to the GI aspects of the Secretariat paper and note that we have on a number of occasions questioned the development credentials of these GI issues.  We stand to be corrected but we note that the co-sponsors of the new paper, 'Reclaiming Development in the WTO Doha Development Round', have not mentioned GIs at all in their paper."
&& The representative of Jamaica thanked the Secretariat for its revised document.  Her delegation believed the WTO had a development mandate.  It shared the disappointment of other developing country delegations that not much progress had been made in carrying out the mandate.  The development outcome of the Round would be met through a number of reinforcing elements.  These included the meaningful implementation of paragraph 44 of the Doha Declaration and the treatment of development as a cross-cutting issue in the various sectors of the negotiations.  The treatment of the small economies was also important.  Her delegation looked forward to working constructively with Members towards such a desired outcome.  She thanked the co-sponsors of the paper submitted by South Africa.  Her delegation looked forward to commenting on that paper on a future occasion. 
&& The representative of Argentina thanked the Secretariat for document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1.  He noted that a revised version of the paper would be prepared early next year.  He drew the attention of the Committee to paragraph 19 of the paper. Reference was made in that paragraph to "advanced developing country markets".  However, the category of "advanced developing countries" did not exist in the Marrakesh Agreement and it was not appropriate to use it in the context in which it was mentioned in the Secretariat paper.  The reference should be deleted in the revised version of the paper.  On behalf of Argentina and Chile, he said he supported the statements made by Australia and New Zealand with regard to paragraph 69 of document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1.  
&& The representative of Djibouti said he wished to draw attention to an important issue which was mentioned in paragraph 63 of the revised Secretariat paper.  This was the issue of technical assistance (TA).  Most developing countries, and in particular LDCs, were in need of TA.  However, in order to benefit from TA from the WTO it was necessary to know which Division of the Secretariat to contact.  Small and newly-arrived delegations were not always aware of the procedure to follow in that regard.  He, therefore, sought clarification from the Secretariat.
&& The Director of the Development Division said the problem raised by the representative of Djibouti was one that he was aware of.  The focal point for LDCs was the LDC Unit, which also covered TA issues relating to the Integrated Framework.  The Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) was, however, the main focal point for TA in the WTO.  In addition, TA on a technical issue might be provided by the relevant substantive Division.  He said the Secretariat would try to find a way to make it clearer for delegations to know where to address queries relating to TA. 
&& The representative of Mexico said her delegation considered the present discussion very opportune.  She thanked the Secretariat for its revised document and the numerous delegations that had submitted the paper presented by the representative of South Africa.  She said the development agenda would not be finalized by only dealing with special situations.  The development agenda was much wider.  The Doha mandate specified that S&D be made more precise, effective and operational. It was not a matter of dividing developing countries.  Her delegation supported Argentina in requesting that the reference in paragraph 19 to "advanced developing country markets" be deleted from the revised Secretariat paper.  The present discussion should serve to advance the development agenda and not to multiply regional problems. 
&& The representative of Malaysia welcomed document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1.  Her delegation supported the request made by others that the reference in paragraph 19 to "advanced developing country markets" be deleted from the revised Secretariat paper.  Her delegation agreed with the general thrust of the paper presented by the representative of South Africa.  Support could also be given to the proposal for a development audit of the Round.    
&& The representative of Costa Rica thanked the Secretariat for document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1.  His delegation had made substantial comments at the previous CTD meeting, and many of these had been reflected in the revised Secretariat document.  However, the structure of the document had also changed in the revision.  His delegation reserved the right to transmit comments in areas where it believed more work was necessary.  The Secretariat document was a living document which could be modified as negotiations advanced.  He supported Brazil and Colombia in emphasizing the offensive interests of developing countries.  It was through enhanced market access that the best development results would be achieved from the Round.  Market access was fundamental for Costa Rica.  South-South trade would form part of the developmental benefits from the Round, and should be highlighted to a greater extent in the Secretariat paper.  He thanked those delegations that had submitted the paper introduced by the representative of South Africa.  Costa Rica would provide comments on that paper at a later date.     
&& The representative of Canada said his delegation appreciated the present discussion.  The presence of several Ambassadors was indicative of its importance.  He welcomed the revised Secretariat document, which provided a useful overview of the state of play across the various areas of the negotiations.  His delegation, however, had some concerns with the document.  For example, it shared the concerns of others with regard to paragraph 69.  He looked forward to continuing the present discussion after the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  The paper introduced by the representative of South Africa was interesting and stimulating, and would help delegations in addressing the development dimension in the lead-up to the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  
&& The representative of Kenya welcomed the revised Secretariat document.  Her delegation saw the document as work in progress and supported the idea of regularly reviewing the document until the end of the Round.  She believed the proponents of the commodities issue had made more submissions than had been reflected in paragraph 19 of the document.  Her delegation would revert with more detail on the omissions in that paragraph.  Her delegation believed that trade liberalization should not be to the detriment of any developing country.  Solutions should be found within the WTO for any negative effects arising from trade liberalization.    
&& The Chairman said discussion of paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration was a standing item on the CTD's agenda.  In the last two meetings of the CTD, the paragraph had been given its due importance.  The presence of the Director-General and several Ambassadors at the present meeting demonstrated this importance.  The Secretariat paper would be revised before the next CTD meeting.  The discussion would remain on the agenda of the CTD until the end of the Round.  Discussion at a high-level of representation was appropriate for at least every other meeting of the CTD.  The CTD would remain the focal point for discussion on the developmental aspects of the negotiations. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/N/20/ADD.1 – WT/COMTD/51/ADD.1)
&& The Chairman recalled that at the previous meeting of the CTD, the Committee had considered a notification concerning the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People's Republic of China.  The notification was circulated as document WT/COMTD/N/20/Add.1.  The text of the Agreement was circulated as WT/COMTD/51/Add.1.  It had been agreed at the last meeting of the CTD that the Committee would once again consider the notification at the present meeting.  This was in view of questions that Members wished to raise on the notification.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor. 
&& The representative of China said he wished to provide answers to questions raised by some Members at the previous meeting of the CTD.  He said there was no stand-alone agreement on non‑tariff barriers (NTBs) between ASEAN and China, even though there were some provisions relating to quantitative restrictions and safeguards in the Agreement on Trade in Goods.  According to the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China, the parties would prepare lists of their NTBs after the Agreement on Trade in Goods came into force, with a view to phasing them out.  The timeframe to eliminate NTBs was subject to negotiation.  ASEAN and China would notify any agreement on NTBs to the CTD. ASEAN and China did not believe the Agreement on Trade in Services between the parties was relevant to their notification obligations under the Enabling Clause.  The parties, therefore, had nothing to add beyond the content already notified.   
&& The representative of the United States thanked China for the responses provided.  She wished to emphasize that the Enabling Clause had no provisions for NTBs.  If ASEAN and China did enter into an agreement on NTBs, they would have to notify the agreement in a forum other than the CTD.
&& The representative of the European Communities said his delegation was continuing to examine the notification, and would wish to come back to it at a future meeting of the CTD.
&& The representative of China said that according to his delegation's understanding of the relevant provisions of the Enabling Clause, developing country Members could notify an NTB agreement between them to the CTD.
&& The representative of the United States said there was longstanding legal interpretation on this issue.
&& The representative of Malaysia said her delegation supported the statement of China.  By way of clarification, she drew the attention of the Committee to Article 8 of the Agreement on Trade in Goods which dealt with quantitative restrictions and NTBs.  Work on these issues was ongoing.  With regard to the Agreement on Trade in Services, a decision to notify the Agreement in the appropriate forum would be made once the negotiations had been concluded.     
&& The Committee took note of the notification and all interventions.   
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said this item had been on the agenda of the CTD for some time.  He recalled that at the last meeting of the CTD he had proposed to the Committee to postpone a detailed discussion on commodities until the first meeting of the CTD in 2006.  He had also mentioned that Kenya would be willing to make a presentation at that meeting on its experiences with commodities.  The item was, however, also on the agenda for the present meeting.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation had a specific proposal for future work on the commodities issue which could add depth and balance to the discussion in the CTD.  In particular, her delegation proposed building on earlier presentations by UNCTAD and the Common Fund for Commodities by inviting relevant institutions to make presentations on specific commodities.  Such presentations could identify appropriate roles for international organizations and also focus attention on the critical role of the private sector in trade and development outcomes.  Her delegation suggested the International Tropical Timber Organization and the International Coffee Organization could be invited to make presentations in the CTD.  This would provide an opportunity to examine the experiences these institutions had had in dealing with specific commodities.  It would also draw on the perspectives of the private sector, which had played an active role in both the institutions and their work.    
&& The representative of Kenya confirmed her delegation would be making a presentation at the next CTD meeting.  She also drew the attention of the Committee to an African Union Declaration on commodities that had been passed by African Union Ministers the previous week in Arusha, Tanzania.  The Declaration would be shared with Members. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
EXPORT HELPDESK FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:  PRESENTATION BY THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
&& The Chairman said a representative of the European Communities was to have made a presentation at the present meeting on the European Communities' Export Helpdesk for Developing Countries.  However, he had been informed that the representative was unable to attend the meeting.  He, therefore, proposed that the presentation be postponed until the next meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed. 
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	STRATEGIC REVIEW OF WTO-PROVIDED TRADE-RELATED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE:  REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN 
&& The Chairman made the following statement: 
"At the adoption of the Terms-of-Reference (TOR) of the Strategic Review of WTO Trade-Related Technical Assistance (TRTA) activities by the Committee on 11 May of this year, the CTD entrusted me to organize the Steering Committee of the Strategic Review as stipulated in the TOR and carry out due consultations with the Members. 
The consultations resulted in a six-member Steering Committee that is composed of three representatives of the recipient Members of WTO TRTA and three representatives of donor Members:  Sri Lanka, Rwanda, Argentina, Belgium, Japan and Sweden.  The Steering Committee held its first meeting in July, which resulted in an invitation for a tender to conduct the Strategic Review.  To make it as open as possible, the tender was announced on WTO's public Web-site.  Delegations were also kept informed.
By the end of September, we received a total of 40 bids, which were examined along agreed-upon selection criteria in three subsequent meetings of the Steering Committee in October.  Finally, on the basis of a unanimous decision of the members of the Steering Committee, an Indian/Argentinean/Canadian consortium composed of the Consumer Unity & Trust Society (CUTS), the Latin American School of Social Sciences (FLACSO) and the North-South Institute (NSI) was chosen and contracted to carry out the Strategic Review.  
On 23 November the inception workshop aimed at officially launching the Strategic Review of WTO TRTA activities was held.  The consortium presented the methodology of the Strategic Review and a tentative schedule of its implementation. The presentation was followed by a discussion and dialogue between members of the Steering Committee, the Review Team and the Secretariat.  The list of countries for inclusion in the field visits of the Review Team will be agreed in consultation with the countries concerned.  It was agreed that a Review Matrix would be prepared by the first week of January 2006, that field visits would be carried out in January and February, and that a draft report should be made available by May 2006." 
&& The representative of Switzerland said his delegation was satisfied that a group of institutions had been selected to carry out the Strategic Review.  His delegation wished to have further details on the criteria applied by the Steering Committee in choosing the institutions.  A report detailing the manner in which the selection process had taken place would be useful.
&& The Chairman said the selection process was based on the criteria given in the TOR.  The Steering Committee additionally sought to have representation from both donor and recipient Members.  Consideration was also given to maintaining a gender balance.  Out of 40 candidates, a shortlist was first made on the basis of qualifications.  The 13 short-listed candidates were evaluated on the basis of their qualifications and experience, as well as on the basis of their bids.  The final four candidates were interviewed via conference call.  He did not believe a written report on the selection process could be provided.  Records of the discussions had not been kept, as all decisions by the Steering Committee had been taken by consensus. 
&& The representative of Switzerland said it would be useful to have some information in written form on how the final four candidates were evaluated.  This would enhance the transparency of the procedure. It was a matter of importance to his delegation.
&& The Chairman said he would not be in a position to respond to the request of the representative of Switzerland without first consulting with the members of the Steering Committee.  He said it may, however, be possible to provide a written document on the selection process with regard to the last four candidates.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's statement and the interventions.
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/144)
&& The Chairman said the CTD's draft annual report for 2005 contained the annual reports of the CTD in Regular Session, the CTD in Dedicated Session and the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  He said square brackets had been placed in the draft report on text relating to subjects that were scheduled for discussion, but on which discussion had not yet taken place, at the time the report was circulated.  As part of the process of adopting the report, the square brackets would be removed and the discussion that took place at the present meeting would be appropriately reflected in the report.  
&& The Chairman invited the Committee to consider the report with a view to adopting it.  The report, when adopted, would be forwarded to the General Council for its meeting on 1 and 2 December 2005.
&& The Committee adopted its annual report for 2005. 
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman said there was no item proposed under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
 After adopting the agenda, the Committee moved directly to agenda item "C", as had been agreed.  The Committee reverted to the other items on the agenda after completing its discussion of agenda item "C".   
 The paper was later issued as document WT/COMTD/W/145.
 The report was circulated as document WT/COMTD/55.

WT/COMTD/M/55 Page  PAGE 22



	WT/COMTD/M/55 	Page  PAGE 23













