WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/52
18 May 2005


(05-2017)


Committee on Trade and Development
Fifty-Second Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 22 FEBRUARY 2005

Chairperson:  H. E. Mr. C. Trevor Clarke (Barbados)


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399665" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC103399665 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399666" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC103399666 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc103399667" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc103399667 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc103399668" (ii)	Request for observer status by the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)	 PAGEREF _Toc103399668 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc103399669" (iii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc103399669 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399670" C.	Notification Under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC103399670 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399671" -	framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between the association of south east asian nations and the people's republic of china (WT/COMTD/N/20 – WT/COMTD/51)	 PAGEREF _TOC103399671 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399672" D.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC103399672 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399673" E.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in Order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC103399673 \H 21
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399674" F.	Electronic Commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC103399674 \H 25
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399675" G.	Graduation of the Maldives from LDC Status (WT/COMTD/W/128)	 PAGEREF _TOC103399675 \H 25
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399676" H.	Participation of the Developing Economies in the Global Trading System (WT/COMTD/W/136)	 PAGEREF _TOC103399676 \H 26
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399677" I.	Election of the Chairperson of the Sub‑Committee on Least-Developed Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC103399677 \H 26
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399678" J.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC103399678 \H 26
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC103399679" K.	Election of the Chairperson of the CTD	 PAGEREF _TOC103399679 \H 27


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman recalled that the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in document WTO/AIR/2490/Rev.1 circulated on 17 February 2005. 
&& The Chairman proposed to add an item under "Other Business" concerning a presentation to the CTD from the NEPAD Secretariat.  He also proposed to change the order of items so as to place the election of Chairperson at the end of the meeting.
The Committee adopted the agenda as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
Request for observer status by the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The representative of Egypt noted that under agenda item B, Egypt had always spoken on behalf of eleven countries, these being Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Jordan, Kuwait, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Tunis and the United Arab Emirates.  He said that the view of the group was that this agenda item should be dealt with in a holistic manner, so that requests for attendance of observers should be considered as one item. 
&& The representative of Antigua and Barbuda sought some clarification on the intervention of the representative of Egypt.  His understanding from the last session of the CTD had been that the OECS' request would be dealt with separately.  It was not quite clear to him why there was a need to combine issues.
&& The Chairman replied that the CTD at its last session had agreed to consider the request of the OECS at the present meeting.  The request from the League of Arab States (LAS), on the other hand, had been communicated on 10 February 2005 and was, therefore, being considered for the first time.  The Chairman welcomed views on how the two requests should be treated.
&& The representative of Egypt once again presented the view that all requests should be treated on the same footing, in a holistic manner. 
&& The representative of the United States indicated that for procedural purposes the two requests could be treated as one item.  However, the view of her delegation was that "holistic" was not the right term, as each request would need to be evaluated separately.
&& The representative of China recalled that his delegation had earlier expressed its support for the request of the OECS.  He also expressed the view that the position taken by Egypt on behalf of a group of developing countries was understandable, as this was really a horizontal issue.  This issue had been debated many times in many WTO subsidiary bodies, as well as at the General Council level.  He proposed that the Chairman consult with the Chair of the General Council so as to resolve the issue of observer status in a general fashion.  The OECS' request could then be dealt with easily.
&& The Chairman then summarized the state of the discussion under this agenda item.  He said that at the last session of the CTD it was agreed to consider the OECS' request for ad hoc observer status at the current meeting.  He explained that the LAS had subsequently submitted a letter requesting similar status and that Egypt had suggested that both the applications by the OECS and the LAS be deferred until the next session of the CTD.  He noted that some Members had suggested that he consult with the Chair of the General Council and that Members consult with each other and then revisit the applications at the next session of the CTD.
&& The representative of Canada suggested that given the period of time that Members had had to consider the request of the OECS, this request could be considered at the present session of the CTD.  The request from the LAS could then be considered at the next meeting.
&& The representative of Egypt said that the group of Members that he represented would have difficulty in agreeing to the suggestion put forward by the representative of Canada, as the group's  position was to allow flexibility in approving observer status on an ad hoc basis, and therefore not to shun any organization from participating in the work of the CTD. 
&& The Chairman clarified that in his view even if the two requests were treated at the same time, each would necessarily be considered separately and on their own individual merit.  He proposed to defer any further consideration of agenda items B(ii) and B(iii) until the next meeting.
It was so agreed. 
&& The Chairman, in relation to agenda Item B(i) - requests for attendance of ad hoc observers -  recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the African Union;  the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the Pacific Islands Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, those organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He then proposed that those organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
&& The representative of China requested clarification as to why the OECS was not included in the list of intergovernmental organizations that would be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
&& The Chairman clarified that the OECS had not yet been granted ad hoc observer status.  No decision had been made at the last meeting of the CTD, and the Committee had agreed to consider the request of the OECS at the present meeting.
&& The representative of the United States admitted to some confusion, and said that she did not believe that the position of her delegation had changed with regard to the request of the LAS for ad hoc observer status.  In particular, her delegation did not support the request, as in its view the LAS was a political and not an economic group and, therefore, did not meet the appropriate criteria.  She indicated, however, that the OECS did have a case to make in its request for observer status.  More generally, her delegation was prepared to consider each request on its own merit. 
&& The Chairman clarified that in his earlier intervention he had simply provided an answer to the question raised by China as to why the OECS was not included in the list of intergovernmental organizations that would be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD. 
&& The representative of Antigua and Barbuda admitted to some confusion in the consideration of the request of the OECS for observer status.  He said that the OECS was an organization which tried to merge the resources of six small WTO Members of the Caribbean.  He pointed out that his delegation was the only representative of that body at the present meeting, and that the members of the OECS were non-resident Members of WTO.  As the OECS was not a legal entity in the WTO, it was not possible for the group to utilize funding provided by the European Communities.  The request of the OECS for observer status was then made as a compromise, so as to allow the members of the OECS to be included and to participate in the WTO process.  He thanked those Members that had supported the request of the OECS and accepted the approach that each application should be considered on its own merit.  He expressed hope that the issue of observer status for the OECS could soon be resolved.
&& The representative of Egypt suggested that the matter could be resolved through informal consultations.  He said that this was the first time that he had heard the position of the United States regarding the request for ad hoc observer status of the LAS.  He did not agree that the LAS was a political organization.  He said it was an organization with an economic role.
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the last meeting, there had been overwhelming support for the request of the OECS.  However, his sense was that the proponents of the request of the LAS would not be willing to have the two requests treated separately.
&& The representative of China expressed respect for the position of each and every Member on this matter.
&& The representative of Barbados expressed disappointment that the request of the OECS seemed to be falling victim to a situation which was not of its own making.  Her delegation was of the view that the request of the OECS was fully deserving, as the members of the body were non-resident Members of WTO, and were suffering from the constraints arising from this situation.  Observer status, even at an ad hoc level, could help to alleviate some of these constraints.
&& The representative of Canada said that from her understanding of the last meeting, the agenda of the present meeting should have read "Request for ad hoc observer status by the OECS" under item B(ii).  This would then be a different issue from item B(iii), which relates to observer status.  Her understanding was that what was to be considered at the present meeting was the request for ad hoc observer status by the OECS.  She gathered that there was some confusion regarding the agenda, and requested that the agenda for the next meeting be made clearer.
&& The Chairman clarified that applications to the CTD were always for observer status, and this was reflected in item B(ii).  However, if observer status were not approved, the Committee could consider offering ad hoc observer status in lieu of observer status, with the agreement of the applicant.
&& The representative of Switzerland felt that the Committee should now be in a position to approve the request for ad hoc observer status of the OECS.  With regard to the request of the LAS, he suggested that at the next meeting the issue of permanent observer status could be considered, and if not approved, the Committee could then consider whether the LAS could be granted ad hoc observer status.  He assumed that in the interim Egypt and the United States would confer and ascertain whether the United States would be opposed to ad hoc observer status. 
&& The representative of the European Communities reiterated the support of his delegation for the request of the OECS, which would also apply if the Committee decided to grant observer status on an ad hoc basis.  He also sounded a word of caution as to whether the issue could be resolved by the Chair of the General Council, and if that was not the case, it would mean that this Committee would have to deal with the request of the OECS and other requests on a pragmatic and short-term basis.  He suggested that if agreement could not be reached during the present meeting then consultations could take place so that the matter could be resolved at the next meeting.  The OECS could then join the Committee as an observer, and if need be, on an ad hoc basis.
&& The representative of the United States suggested that in the future there could be more annotation in the agenda so that it would be clear what precisely was being discussed under each agenda item.  She felt that some of the confusion at the present meeting had come about because of this.
&& The representative of Egypt said that consultations would be needed on the matters discussed. He noted that ad hoc observer status had been created to allow flexibility, and hoped that flexibility would be shown during the consultations.  The group of Members that he represented supported the granting of observer status of other organizations, and was of the view that the issue should be addressed in a fair and balanced way, as well as in a pragmatic and consistent way.  The group supported the OECS' request to be an observer, and not just an ad hoc observer, but the approach taken should be fair and balanced so as to accommodate other similar requests.
&& The representative of the United States said that the view of her delegation was that not all applicants for observer status in the WTO should necessarily be granted this status.  Some organizations had something to contribute to the work of the WTO and could significantly add value.  In that regard, her delegation had supported the Arab Authority for Agricultural Investment and Development, the Arab Monetary Fund and others, organizations that her delegation felt had a direct economic role and bearing on the work being undertaken in the WTO.  She reiterated that it was important to think seriously about requests for observer status.
&& The representative of Canada supported the proposal that had been made by the representative of Switzerland to grant ad hoc observer status to the OECS, and suggested that the Committee could agree to this at the present meeting.
&& The representative of Zambia was of the view that a decision had been made that consultations would be held after the present meeting.  He also stressed the importance of informal consultations.  The impression he got from the present meeting was that little discussion had been held before the meeting;  if the proponents and others had held discussions before the meeting, then perhaps much less time would have been spent on this agenda item.
&& The representative of Antigua and Barbuda said that he felt there was a general consensus of the merits of the application of the OECS.  He took the point of Zambia of the need for talks in an informal setting.  He believed that the issue could be resolved in this body, and that it was just a matter of making a decision as a Committee.
&& The Chairman said that he could not as yet feel consensus, and that the best course of action at this time would be to close the agenda item.  Consultations could then be held before the next meeting.
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATION UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/N/20 – WT/COMTD/51)
&& The Chairman recalled that the notification of the Agreement was circulated on 21 December 2004 in document WT/COMTD/N/20, and that the copy of the actual Agreement was circulated on the same day as document WT/COMTD/51.  He also said that he was informed of a small error in the preamble of document WT/COMTD/51:  in the first page, second paragraph, "Bandar Sen Begawan" should be replaced with "Bandar Seri Begawan".
&& The representative of Malaysia, speaking on behalf of the ASEAN members of WTO (Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand), made the following statement: 
"Malaysia speaking on behalf of the ASEAN members of the WTO (Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand) wish to notify the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China.
We hereby notify the Framework Agreement to the WTO pursuant to the Decision of 28 November 1979 under the GATT on Differential and More Favourable Treatment, Reciprocity and Fuller Participation of Developing Countries, known as the 'Enabling Clause'.
The objectives of this Framework Agreement are to:
strengthen and enhance economic, trade and investment cooperation between ASEAN and China;
progressively liberalise and promote trade in goods and services as well as create a transparent, liberal and facilitative investment regime;
explore new areas and develop appropriate measures for closer economic cooperation between ASEAN and China;  and
facilitate the more effective economic integration of the newer ASEAN member States and bridge the development gap among the parties to the Framework Agreement.
A copy of the Framework Agreement has been circulated as WT/COMTD/51 dated 21 December 2004.  The related Protocols together with the Annexes have also been submitted to the WTO and can be made available to interested Members.  The documents are also available on the ASEAN Secretariat website."
&& The representative of China said that the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China was notified to the CTD on 24 November 2004, pursuant to the Enabling Clause.  The Framework Agreement had set up the legal framework for the ASEAN-China Free-Trade Area (FTA), to be established by 2010.  According to the Framework Agreement, the ASEAN-China FTA would cover trade in goods, services, investment and economic cooperation.  With regard to trade in goods, ASEAN members and China would begin to reduce tariffs from 2005.  By 2010, China and six ASEAN countries – Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand – would establish a free-trade area with zero tariffs for the majority of imported products;  the newer ASEAN members – Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Vietnam – would enjoy a transition period of five years.  An Early Harvest Programme was set up to enable China and the ASEAN countries (except the Philippines) to benefit from the prospective FTA.  As from 1 January 2004, tariffs on more than 500 products (including many agricultural products in chapter 1 to 8 of the tariff schedules) had been reduced, and would be reduced to zero by 2006;  the newer ASEAN members would enjoy a transition period of two to four years.  The ASEAN and China decided to establish through negotiations rules of origin requirements and provisions on anti‑dumping, countervailing and safeguard measures, and a dispute settlement mechanism, so as to ensure the smooth functioning of the ASEAN-China FTA.  After concluding the Framework Agreement, ASEAN and China signed in November 2004 the Agreement on Trade in Goods and the Agreement on Dispute Settlement Mechanism, which provide for specific arrangements for tariff reduction, rules of origin, and trade remedy measures like safeguards.  From 1 July 2005, ASEAN and China would embark on a process of tariff reduction on products covered by the Agreement.  With regard to trade in services and investment, these were still in the process of negotiation.
&& The representative of the European Communities thanked China and the ASEAN member countries for their notification.  His delegation welcomed the transparency that had been shown, and recognized that the Agreement was potentially a very important development in terms of regional integration in East and Southeast Asia.  He further said he was pleased to see the commitment of the countries concerned to comply with high standards for regional trade agreements.  He had certain questions for the countries party to the Agreement.  First, he noted that the documents circulated stated that the Early Harvest Programme was an integral part of the Framework Agreement and the FTA.  He wanted to get a clearer sense of how that worked in practice.  He also said that his delegation would be grateful if the parties concerned could share additional information concerning the timetable for entry into force of tariff reductions, and on the phasing and coverage of products.  His delegation encouraged the parties concerned to notify the FTA itself in due course under the relevant WTO provisions.
&& The representative of the United States thanked China and the ASEAN member countries for the information provided.  Her delegation believed that the Agreement was an important development, and one that supported the overall trend towards global liberalization.  She said that it would be helpful if more information could be provided on the various timetables for liberalization and the scope of liberalization in each phase.  She was interested in the annexes alluded to in the text, and was also interested to know how the Agreement had accommodated the challenges of the new ASEAN members.  In general, her delegation welcomed the notification and ongoing transparency on this matter.
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation was pleasantly surprised by the breadth and extent of the Agreement and the elements included.  He noted that the Agreement not only had an interesting emphasis on the goods side, but also an extensive section on trade in services.  He also noted the interest of the parties in expanding investment liberalization, and in strengthening cooperation and protection of investments.  He commended China and ASEAN for the far-reaching agreement.  Regarding the goods side, he said his delegation would be interested in obtaining more detail on the implementation periods.  He also noted from the intervention of the representative of China that the majority of tariff items would be covered by the FTA, and he sought more detail on this, in particular in the context of WTO rules requiring substantially all trade to be covered.  He further noted that the applied MFN rate was taken as the starting point for tariff reduction in the Agreement, thereby contributing to further liberalization than might have been possible if the bound rate had been used.  He also expressed interest in the Early Harvest Programme and the revisions that had been made to it.  He encouraged the parties to formally proceed with notification and to allow for further discussion along that route. 
The Committee took note of the notification and all statements made.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman recalled that at the previous meeting the Committee had a discussion of the work being done in this area by UNCTAD.  A representative from the UNCTAD Secretariat was present again at the meeting as some Members felt that they did not have enough time for discussion at the previous meeting.  He also recalled that the Committee had agreed at the last meeting that Malaysia would make a presentation on its national experiences with commodities.  He then invited Mr. Loke Fong Han, who was the Principal Assistant Secretary of the Ministry of Plantation Industries and Commodities of Malaysia, to make his presentation.
&& The representative of Malaysia made the following presentation:
I.	INTRODUCTION
For more than two decades after Malaysia's Independence, the commodity sector, namely tin and rubber, continue to be the twin pillars of the economy.  This situation remained until early 1980s when the country began to embark on its industrialization programmes.  It is important to note that while the commodity sector has developed substantially, its share in terms of contribution to the country's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has steadily declined from a hefty 40 per cent in the 1970s to about 15 per cent in 2003.  This reflects the characteristic of a growing and evolving economy from predominantly agriculture to include other more important sectors such as manufacturing and services.
During the colonial days, Malaysia had gone through structural shifts in expanding its economic growth.  In the early twentieth century it was the agriculture sector which came to the forefront.  The crops boomed briefly but were hard pressed to survive severe price swings, pests and diseases that were endemic in tropical agriculture.  The colonial government attempted to counteract this vulnerability to economic swings by instituting schemes to restore commodity prices to profitable levels.  For the rubber industry, this involved two periods of mandatory restriction of exports to reduce world stocks and exert upward pressure on market prices.  Tin exports were similarly restricted from 1931-1941.
Post-independence saw the state playing a leading role in the transformation.  The transition form British rule was smooth.  Apart from the disturbances in 1969, the Government maintained a firm control over the administrative machinery.  This was also facilitated by the development of infrastructure namely roads, railways, ports and telecommunications.  The Government continued to draw national plans, programmes and schemes to develop the country and improve the living conditions of the rural populace.  The Government's Five Year Development Plans were a model for the developing world.  Foreign capital was accorded a central role, though subject to the requirements of the National Economic Policy (NEP).
One of the legacies left by the colonial government was the distribution of wealth and division of labour in which economic power and function were directly related to race.  This had caused the racial segregation which lay the seeds of growing discontent among Bumiputra that they were losing their ancestral inheritance especially land and becoming economically marginalized.  The Government implemented the NEP to restructure the Malaysian economy over two decades, 1970 till 1990 with the following aims:
To redistribute corporate equity so that the Bumiputra share would rise from around 2 per cent to 30 per cent.  The share of other Malaysians would increase marginally from 35 to 40 per cent, while that of foreigners would fall from 63 per cent to 30 per cent;
To eliminate the close link between race and economic function and restructure employment so that the Bumiputra share in each sector would reflect more accurately their proportion of the total population;  and
To eradicate poverty irrespective of race.  In 1970 just under half of all households in Peninsular Malaysia had incomes below the official poverty line.  Malays accounted for about 75 per cent of these.
The principle underlying these aims was that the redistribution would not result in any one group losing in absolute terms, rather it would be achieved through the process of economic growth, that is the economy would get bigger, more investment, more job opportunities.  The NEP has helped Malaysia to restructure its commodity sectors, disintegrate economic powers from race and the injection of new concept in technology and R&D in expanding its commodity sector.  For the economy as a whole, these efforts managed to broaden the economic base.
Malaysia continues to expand its commodity sector by getting the development allocation under the successive Five Year Plans.  The Government introduces schemes, research institutions, national boards and unions to improve its commodity sector, to monitor and manage the commodity prices and at the same time improve the living and working standards of the rural populace.  Institutions such as RISDA, FELDA and FELCRA were created.
While the primary commodity sector would continue to receive developmental aid under the Five Year Plans, the main emphasis was a switch to export-oriented industrialisation with Malaysia seeking a share in global markets for manufactured goods.  Free-Trade Zones were set up where production was encouraged with the undertaking that the output would be exported.  Firms locating there received concessions such as duty-free imports of raw materials and capitals goods, as well as tax concessions aimed primarily at foreign investors who were also attracted by Malaysia's good facilities, relatively low wages and docile trade unions.  A range of industries grew up;  textiles, rubber and food products, chemicals, telecommunications equipment, electrical and electronic machinery/appliances, car assembly and some heavy industries, iron and steel.
An important point to note was that while the country pursued these industrialization programmes, the resource-based industries i.e. the primary commodity sector was not neglected.  The importance was highlighted in both the Industrial Master Plans.  The sector continues to feature prominently in the country's economic growth, in terms of its contribution to the GDP, employment, export earnings as well as higher living standards for the rural populace.  In fact, it has played a significant role in helping to cushion the economy from the impact of the previous economic downturn and the present global economic slowdown.
The primary commodity sector has evolved from merely producing and exporting primary raw materials to producing semi-processed, processed and finished products, thus generating more value-added products to meet the growing world demand.  Based on the firm belief that the primary commodity sector should remain vibrant in order to complement the growth in the manufacturing and services sectors, the Government will continue to give due prominence and importance to the development of this sector.
In 2000, the sector's performance was effected by the decline in the prices of major commodities.  This was due to the weakening of market fundamentals, particularly those related to the oversupply in the world market of some major commodities.  It's contribution dropped by RM2.84 billion or 5.9 per cent compared to RM47.55 billion earned in the previous year, primarily due to lower export earnings from palm oil and its related products, rubber, cocoa and minerals.
On the other hand, earnings from forestry and timber products registered increases, contributing RM17.70 billion.  Palm oil and palm oil products recorded earnings of RM14.94 billion, rubber and rubber products RM8.27 billion, minerals and mineral products RM2.12 billion, tobacco RM771.19 million, cocoa and cocoa products RM595.10 million and pepper and pepper products RM362.20 million.  The performance of the commodity sector from the period 1990 to 2003 could be illustrated below:
II.	ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
Like any other primary commodities sector elsewhere, the primary commodity sector in Malaysia also faced various issues and challenges.  However, due to proper planning and policy implementation, those issues and challenges had helped to transform and further enhanced the resilience of the Malaysian commodity sector.
Price Fluctuation and Adequate Remuneration
The primary commodities such as raw materials are often plagued by low and unremunerative prices that fluctuate form time to time.  Palm oil prices, for example, fluctuate according to the competition and the supply and demand balance situation in the world oilseed, oils and fats market.  This is the main set-back of palm oil trading since the price is difficult to forecast.  Bumper crop will result in price decline.  Crop failure on the other hand will push prices higher.  Palm oil will suffer most from  fluctuating prices since it is a perennial crop compared to other oilseeds that are annuals.  A key factor in determining price is the global supply and demand situation as well as changing global weather patterns that may affect palm oil production.  In addition, the increased production of oils and fats by major producing countries has led to a surplus supply of vegetable oils in the world markets.
In the case of rubber, its price has also been subjected to the vagaries of excess supply in the world markets, which has depressed rubber for an extended period of time.  The unremunerative prices had adversely affected returns to investment in the estate sector and had forced smallholders to find alternative sources of income.  Similarly in the case of cocoa, the international market prices have been very volatile and depressed in the last decade.  These depressed prices were largely attributed to the structural imbalance of the world cocoa market.
In order to address the fluctuating low prices of natural rubber, a tripartite cooperation between the three major rubber producers, namely Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia was established in 2001.  The purpose of such cooperation is to ensure a fair, remunerative and sustainable price level so as to keep the smallholders in the business;  and not too high a price that would lead consumers to shift to synthetic rubber.  In the future, similar cooperation has been planned for timber and palm oil sectors.
Market Access
Primary commodity exports continue to face barriers in the form of tariff peaks, discriminatory-tariffs, tariff-escalation and non-tariff barriers such as Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) imposed by importing countries.  Although the World Trade Organization had addressed some of these issues, there still remain obstacles to the entry of Malaysian products in some overseas markets.  For instance, importing countries impose discriminatory tariffs on Malaysian palm oil vis-à-vis other competing oils, thereby impeding its accessibility to some markets.  Likewise, Malaysian cocoa beans and products are also subjected to non-tariff barriers in the form of health and SPS requirements, which have led to exporters incurring additional costs and created unnecessary delays in shipment.  In the case of timber, boycotts and restrictions on the use of tropical timber and labelling requirements have also obstructed market access in several major markets.  In general, non-tariff barriers incur additional cost to exporters and cause unnecessary delay in shipments.  These trade barriers should be reduced accordingly to simplify and facilitate export of commodity products to the importing countries.  The establishment of Free-Trade Agreements between Malaysia and ASEAN Dialogue Partners such as China, Japan and India would facilitate and accelerate the liberalization process.
Labour Shortages
The primary commodity sector, which is still labour-intensive, has been facing a problem of labour shortage.  This has been partly due to the migration of labour from the agriculture to the manufacturing, construction, services and other economic sectors.  In addition, the aging population of those involved in the smallholdings plantation sector makes this problem more serious.  As such, the labour shortage in the plantation sector has affected the output from the various estates and related holdings.  Consequently, the upstream sector of the Malaysian commodity sector is dependent on unskilled foreign labour.  The ratio of foreign worker is about two times that of the local worker.  In 2003, there were 195,990 foreign workers in the plantation sector, namely palm oil (189,281 workers), rubber (1,640 workers), cocoa (4,400 workers) and tobacco (669 workers).
Pest and diseases
Pest and disease problems exist in all of the commodities.  In cocoa, cocoa pod borer can result in considerable crop and income loss to the growers if left uncontrolled.  Judicious insecticide application, planting of tolerant materials, good cultural practices and management can control it effectively.  However, such an effective control incurs costs of  about 10 to 20 per cent of the total cost of production.
Uneconomic Holding Size
Another constraint is uneconomic holding size, where in the case of rubber, census data showed that smallholder holdings average at only about 2.3 hectares.  Uneconomic holding size compounded by a farm labour shortage amidst an aging population, still characterize the upstream sector of the Malaysian sector.
Competing Land-Use
New land for the expansion of oil palm cultivation in Peninsular Malaysia is limited due to restricted land availability, higher land prices and competition from other industrial activities and urbanization.  Marginal lands are now being utilized as the new development areas with high risk of lower yield and higher cost.  In Sarawak, the main problems are the land tenure system under the Native Customary Rights, as well as peat soils.  The future growth development is therefore focused on Sabah, Malaysia and on investments in palm oil plantation in Indonesia and the Philippines.
Price Taker
Raw commodity producers are generally price takers as in the case of palm oil.  Although palm oil is the largest vegetable oil traded in the word market, it is still a price taker to soybean oil which is the world's largest vegetable oil produced and consumed.  The world vegetable oil market still refers to the Chicago Board of Trade for soybean oil prices since the US oil producers sell at a discount to maintain their competitiveness and to enable the world population to be fed with cheaper palm oil.  China, India and Pakistan are expected to have difficulties improving the per capita fat intake if they cannot have access to cheaper imports of palm oil.
Most major agricultural commodity producers in this region are located in the tropical belt.  They also produced similar and/or competing products.  Malaysia and Indonesia are the major world producers of palm oil, while the major producers for natural rubber are Thailand and Indonesia.  The Philippines, on the other hand, is a major producer of copra and coconut oil, a competing product for palm kernel oil.  As palm oil production in Indonesia will continue to increase, Malaysia will face competition on the export market in the future.  Malaysia exports palm oil to more than 120 countries in the world.  However, in recent years, Malaysia has lost market share in many of the vegetable oil markets.  The Malaysian industry could not match the aggressive marketing efforts of the soybean growers from South America and palm oil producers from Indonesia.  Indonesia had increased its export volume considerably in the last couple of years.
III.	STRUCTURAL TRANSFORMATION
In view of the above issues and constraints, and with the current global developments of open markets and liberalized trading being the order of the day, competition in the commodity sector has reached new heights.  In order to remain competitive, the Malaysian commodity sector has undergone some structural changes both in the upstream as well as the downstream aspects of the industry.  While economic considerations must take precedence in the formulation of the policies and strategies, political and other socio-economic considerations cannot be overlooked.
With the implementation of some structural and organizational changes, the small land holders, who had formed the backbone of the country's commodity sector, will continue to contribute to the sector.  Production policies and strategies geared to meet national goals of ensuring sufficient supply of raw materials for the downstream sector must take cognizance of the needs of the small producers.  Small land holders will be encouraged to consolidate their holdings.  Land and management consolidation by both the private and public sectors will continue to be given greater emphasis in the coming years.  The key to the success of such schemes will be to formulate modes for a win-win situation to both the owners of the land and the party that undertakes to invest in resources to consolidate and manage the land.  Public sector estate is yet another alternative to consider.  This could run parallel with that of land and management consolidation.
Upstream
Increase in yield/productivity
With reduced planted areas and the need to maintain competitiveness, yields must increase by various means such as breeding, improved exploitation of technologies and agronomic practices.  Productivity improvements can be achieved through utilizing newer and higher yielding planting materials, increased mechanization, optimization of fertilizer inputs and establishing best plantation management practices.  With better planting materials, bigger and more efficient production units and improved delivery system, the average yield should increase from the current level.
Planting materials
Apart from improvements in productivity, tolerant planting materials can be used to manage pests and diseases.  Planting materials that possess desired traits can be developed through conventional breeding and genetic engineering.  Besides breeding of better clones, the adoption of technologies to boost yields also warrants further attention.  The ultimate objective is not only to improve income but also to be labour and cost saving.  Present technologies must be further improved so they can be more commercially attractive.  Biotechnology as the frontier of research and as a new source of growth will be further focused to produce genetically improved planting materials and commercially high value-added products.
Cost-effective pest and disease management
With health and environmental hazards becoming important issues in pest and disease control, biological control will be the thrust for research in the management of pests and diseases in the commodity sector.
Efficient production systems
Increasing cost and labour scarcity affects all economic sectors in Malaysia including the commodity sector.  As such, suitable planting patterns and planting materials would allow greater uses of farm machinery.  However, the use of farm equipment is largely dependent on the topography.  Good agronomic practices also contribute to higher efficiency in the production system.  Mechanization will enhance workers' productivity and efficiency thus reducing labour dependence and overcoming labour shortages as well as lowering the cost of production.
Maximizing land use and income per unit area
One of the alternatives to expanding planted areas is to go for marginal areas, such as hilly land and peat land, which can be cultivated cost effectively through extensive research and development (R&D).  Furthermore, the adoption of integrated farming approaches such as intercropping and mixed farming with livestock would also maximize land use to generate additional income to growers.  Mixed farming with other crops or activities is an alternative to supplement income.  The hedge-planting concept for on-farm integration can continue to be a planting strategy to maximize income per unit area of land.
Downstream
Increased Processing
To lessen the impacts of fluctuating commodity prices, Malaysia through its industrialization programmes, has embarked on a policy to encourage more downstream processing and adding value to primary commodities.  Such a policy has resulted in a significant and major increase in product transformation and market diversification, especially in the palm oil sector.  Up until 1974, the exports of palm oil were all in crude form.  Today, 92 per cent of exports are in form of various processed oils.  Before 1974, Malaysian crude palm oil markets were mainly in the industrially developed countries such as the EU, the US and Japan which are equipped with refining facilities.  With the advent of palm oil refining facilities in Malaysia in 1975, Malaysia has successfully diversified its palm oil market to include developing countries in Middle East, Africa, West Asia and East Asia.  Currently there are 48 refineries and 17 oleochemical manufacturers in operation.  At the end of 2004, annual operating capacity was 16.67 million tonnes and 1.82 million tonnes respectively.
Similarly in the rubber sector, encouraging foreign demand backed by strong government support through various development strategies spurred the development of the rubber product-manufacturing sector.  Since 1985, domestic rubber uptake increased more than six-fold to about 488,233 tonnes in tandem with the increase in domestic consumption as local manufacturers grew in number from 135 to 344 in 2003.  The policy of diversifying the rubber product base will further broaden the applications into high value-added and high technology areas such as engineering and the marine, automotive, aeronautical and military sectors.  The strategy is to manufacture high-end specialized products where Malaysia has the comparative advantage in areas like R&D support, intelligent materials and expertise.
Product Quality Research
The commercialization of R&D findings is one area that has yet to be fully exploited.  R&D undertakings are currently concentrated in the public sector, namely, research institutions and institutions of higher learning.  In order to remain competitive, there is also a need for developing a knowledge-based industry through inputs from R&D.  The success of this transformation will depend largely on the identification and development of the right products and processes which can be produced efficiently with optimum k-inputs and which are then successfully marketed.
In the cocoa sector, cocoa powder has a wide range of uses in the food industries sector.  Research undertaken on food-based products includes the development of various compounds and sugarless products.  Chocolate products such as power bar and omega chocolates are being developed.  The cocoa-based beverages such as three in one beverages and cocoa pulp juice have been developed and are ready for commercialization.  While in the non-food products, among the products developed are cocoa gum as a binding agent in foods and pharmaceutical products and cosmetics products such as creams and lotions and lip care products.
In regard to rubber, the rubber products industry has entered into a mature phase.  With increased competition coming from other countries such as Thailand and China, issues such as creativity, innovativeness, increasing efficiency, reducing costs and designing products using special materials will be priorities.  With greater competition exacerbated by globalization, market widening and penetration will depend on the ability to design customized products that are not only price competitive but are also of high and improved quality.  Market diversification is critical so as not to be held ransom by a few major markets and to cushion the industry from external shocks.  The financial crisis of 1997 should be a lesson to be remembered.
Product Diversification
Palm oil, with its inherent techno-economic advantages and proven nutritional values, will be able to expand and sustain its market share in both the edible and non-edible sectors.  Increasing consumer preferences world-wide for healthy, biodegradable and environment-friendly products provides bright prospects for the palm oil and its downstream industries including the oleochemical industry.  This augurs well for the production of intermediate consumer products such as beta-carotene, vitamin E and oleochemical products such as in pharmaceuticals, soap, detergent and cosmetics.  In addition, there are also good prospects for the utilisation of palm oil biomass to complement the wood-based industry in the manufacture of particleboards, medium density fibreboards as well as pulp and paper.  In this respect, palm oil will continue to support the development of the food and non-food oleochemical industries as well as the future development of the wood-based industry.
Cocoa beans are generally processed and transformed into semi-finished products such as cocoa liquor, cocoa butter and cocoa powder.  In addition, cocoa liquor, cocoa butter and cocoa powder are formulated with other ingredients to produce food products such as pralines and cocoa beverages.  Cocoa butter is used as one of the main ingredients of non-food product such as cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and other toiletries.  A wide range of cocoa-based products and packaging are currently available locally.  Because of increasing demand by the manufacturers and consumers, a wider range of products will enable the product to be more competitive and accepted.
The combined use of enriched ingredients and new concepts in technology and packaging will continue to produce high-value premium products.  The demand for premium products is steadily increasing, even at a national level.  Health issues also play a significant role in product development.  Products, such as sugar-free chocolate with high level of anti-oxidant, which can deliver some health benefits are increasingly demanded by consumers.
IV.	CONCLUSION
Based on the above discussion, Malaysia has been successful in transforming its primary commodities sector from merely producing and exporting primary raw materials to producing semi-processed, processed and finished products.  Such a transformation was necessary to ensure that our products remain competitive in the global market.  The long-term viability of the primary commodities sector will depend on making significant leaps in local processing and taking advantage of downstream value-added activities to produce high quality goods.
Research has shown that there are vast opportunities for developing many more downstream value-added products in the commodity sector.  Malaysia can be proud of the fact that it is a leader in know-how and technology for a number of agricultural commodities such as palm oil, rubber, cocoa and pepper, as well as wood-based and tin-based products.  This know-how and technology have been obtained through years of collaborative involvement in the industry by both the private sector and Government agencies.
It is expected that any future expansion of the plantation sector would have to compete for land where other economic activities such as housing, industrial and infrastructure development would also take place.  In view of this, serious consideration will have to be given to invest in countries where climatic conditions are favourable for the cultivation of primary commodity crops.  In fact, some Malaysian companies have already gone into joint-venture projects with their counterparts in neighbouring countries like Indonesia, Vietnam, the Philippines and Cambodia to develop palm oil and timber-related industries.
As the country moves along into the 21st century, it is envisaged that new and more challenging issues will emerge.  Even though Malaysia may currently have the technological edge in respect of some commodities, appropriate measures will have to be taken in order to keep pace with global developments.  This will have to be done while facing emerging structural constraints and other related problems.  Approaches to addressing some of these problems would include improving production capacities, both in terms of quality and quantity through innovative technological advancements and strengthening the market position with continuous proactive strategies and programmes that will be responsive to market demands and preferences.
As the country moves towards achieving developed country status, the Government gives greater emphasis on promoting downstream processing of primary commodities into semi-processed and finished products for exports.  This will enable the primary commodities sector to grow and contribute to the development of the resource-based industry in the country, while at the same time increasing the income of those involved in all the related and spin-off industries.  In this context, the private sector will also be encouraged to play a greater role in the development of the various resource-based industries.
In terms of development philosophy, the Malaysian economy is based on the system of free enterprise, with the public sector playing an active role.  The Government provides the broad thrusts and sets the direction for the whole economy to ensure the achievement of the socio-economic goals.  It focuses on institutional and infrastructure developments, maintains a stable economic and political environment and carries out the traditional role of government.  The private sector, local and foreign, is given the freedom to operate and participate in the economy and is provided with the appropriate policy environment and institutional and infrastructural support.
In essence, Malaysia owes it successful economic record to a number of factors:
geographically it lies close to major world trade routes bringing early exposure to the international economy;
the economy has always been exceptionally open to external influences such as globalization.  Foreign capital has played a major role throughout;
political stability – the Government has always aimed at managing the structure of the economy and simultaneously maintaining inter‑ethnic stability;
since the 1960s the economy has benefited from extensive restructuring with sustained growth of exports from both the primary and secondary sectors, thus gaining a double impetus;
the historic economic factor was also due to a small indigenous population and a labour force supplemented by immigrants, mainly from neighbouring Asian countries;  and
the quality of national leadership was a crucial factor.  This was particularly so during the NEP.  (The leading figure was Dr. Mahathir Mohamed, Malaysian Prime Minister from 1981 to 2003).
To further maintain the competitiveness of Malaysia's primary commodities sector and to benefit from the knowledge-based economy, all efforts will also be undertaken to upgrade the use of technology, strengthen public-private sector cooperation, improve the organizational and institutional infrastructure and focus on the development of a more dynamic and productive human resources sector.
&& The representative of UNCTAD noted that the presentation showed that being a commodities exporter was not a curse.  He also said that palm oil was a product which originated in Africa and had successfully been adapted to Asia, just like rubber production which originated in South America and then moved to Asia.  He highlighted certain points in the presentation such as the cooperation between the private and the public sector and the successful promotion mechanism for palm oil in India.  He also informed Members about the successful defence before Indian courts against a case brought by the Indian soy crushers on seeking restrictions on palm oil for health reasons.  He concluded by saying that a successful trade diversification programme such as the one presented by Malaysia required conscious effort and planning by the Government.
&& The representative of Switzerland asked what was the average holding size for oil palm plantations.  He also asked whether there had been any foreign investment in the sector by multinational companies and what had been the role of the public sector in research and development.
&& The representative of China said that this was a good example of how to deal with an over‑dependency on commodities exports.  He said that China had become a major importer of Malaysian palm oil and that although at the beginning the Government had had some concerns on the health effects of the use of palm oil, these were effectively dispelled by research on the matter presented by the Malaysian exporters.  He asked how Malaysia was tackling the problem of land scarcity or use for palm oil production versus use for industrial development. 
&& The representative of Australia highlighted the significance of improved market access for the success of these type of diversification efforts.  He also commended Malaysia for the successful marketing of their products undertaken by both the private and the public sectors.
&& The representative of India remarked that India was the largest importer of Malaysian palm oil.  He asked about the environmental implications of palm oil plantations.  He also asked what efforts were being made with other regional partners such as Indonesia to reproduce the Malaysian experience.
&& The representative of the United States noted that Malaysia had presented a very useful layout for structural transformation to address the problems on commodities and move up the value chain.  She asked whether there were certain steps that had been more effective than others or what were the most fundamental actions.  She also found it useful to have the chart with the commodities that showed that there was still solid economic activity in the sector although the economy's dependency on it had declined.  She thought it was important to underline the efforts made by Malaysia to achieve this transformation in an outward looking way while working with its regional trade partners and hopefully ultimately in the multilateral trading system.  She also complemented Malaysia on the creative use of R&D in the processing of by-products and its move into new industries.  This presentation helped the Committee to talk more concretely on ways to address problems that some Members had encountered in commodities trade. 
&& The representative of Egypt asked about the relationship between transformation in the commodities sector and RTAs.  He also asked which criteria were useful when deciding which commodities to process and which to export with little or no processing, especially in light of practices like tariff peaks and tariff escalation.
&& The representative of Kenya said Malaysia's presentation provided direction on how to deal with some of the commodities' issues being faced by certain countries.  She noted that Malaysia's  presentation focused on a positive experience with palm oil.  However, she said that she would also like to hear about the problems faced with other commodities.  She also noted that diversification was dependant on the level of development of the country and the technology available to it.  Malaysia's was a positive experience and she said that Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya were trying to follow the same direction on this issue.  She asked the representative of UNCTAD how he believed that the issue of price fluctuations would be alleviated with the successful conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda.
&& The representative of Canada found it very interesting to see the structural transformation and increase on downstream activities that Malaysia had pursued in striving for diversification.  He also noted UNCTAD's continued interest in the commodities sector and its work in coming up with ways to increase the value-added component for commodities producers.  He said Malaysia was a good example of how to pursue this from a very wide aspect by looking at different ways to broaden the market appeal of its product. 
&& The representative of the European Communities was impressed by the breadth of the potential tool box that Malaysia had recourse to in terms of developing its commodities sector, improving its competitiveness and with diversification.  This tool box was both government led and private sector led.  He said that it seemed like a large component of these different policies were essentially driven at a national level, in terms of policy strategy and choice, although the importance of external factors were important.  He was also interested in hearing the answers to questions relating to regional integration and how this played out in terms of other countries which were operating in similar geographic conditions and which would have a comparable comparative advantage, generating the need for specialization by the different regional partners.  He also asked what experience there was in Malaysia on exporting investment and know-how in terms of commodities production and development in other countries.
&& The representative of the FAO noted that Malaysia's success was the result of a structural transformation begun 20 years ago.  He asked Malaysia what research and development activities were being undertaken to maintain competitiveness in the palm oil sector and also in other products like rubber and other commodities.
&& The Chairman asked the representative of Malaysia how they acquired expertise in the field of commodities trade and what was being done to enhance it for future development.  He asked the representative of UNCTAD if he could highlight examples of other developing countries which had achieved a similar level of success.
&& The representative of Malaysia in response to the question by Switzerland said that they had learnt, through their experience with rubber plantations that were introduced by the British, that a large size was needed to obtain economies of scale and more competitiveness.  Through research and development, it had been determined that for palm oil the minimum plantation size was around 100 acres.  Smaller holdings of ten acres had been granted to individual farmers through the Federal Land Development Authority, created with World Bank assistance, which provided the necessary planting materials and the economic and technological support for the small farmers to be able to manage their operations.  This was a fruitful collaboration between the private and public sector that had proved successful not only in diversifying to palm oil from rubber production but also from cocoa where the international market was very depressed.  Therefore, the structural transformation was also driven by the international market and foreign trade, since the Malaysian market was small.  In its transformation, Malaysia had focused on exports, producing at competitive prices and producing what the market wanted to buy.  Also, in answer to Egypt on downstream production, he noted that achieving competitiveness in the production of raw materials made it a natural progression for Malaysia to move to manufacturing the downstream products as well as cheap raw materials which could be sourced domestically.  
Regarding foreign investment, Malaysia was quite open to it.  However, according to the Malaysian Constitution for land ownership by foreign nationals, land ownership requires authorization from the State.  Currently most of the plantations owned by the British companies prior to independence had been taken over by the National Investment Arm of Malaysia.  Among the other lessons learned from private-public sector cooperation was what was called the ABC institutions.  The "A" stood for the associations, which are private sector organizations like the Malaysian Palm Oil Association and similar associations for other commodities which organized the private producers.  The "B" institutions were the government boards, like the Malaysian Palm Oil Board and similar boards for other commodities.  These boards included representatives and experts from the industry across all sectors, be it at the processing or production level, private sector, government sector and supporting institutions.  He explained that all the inputs were synergized to plan for the future of commodity production, including what R&D to conduct, what downstream products to produce and how to satisfy the international market requirements.  The "C" stood for the councils which are the corporations that do the marketing and promotion of each of the commodities, for example the Malaysian Palm Oil Promotion Council, the Malaysian Timber Council and the Rubber Exports Council.
The issue of land shortage was a problem because Malaysia was a small country.  There was land usage competition in the production of the different commodities, as well as urbanization and industrialization pressures.  There was actually very little land left for plantation expansion.  This issue was mostly regulated by the market forces, thus, a lot of the expansion on the palm oil plantations had come as a substitution of rubber and cocoa plantations where the prices had declined.
&& The representative of Malaysia went on to say that in terms of increasing productivity, the Government of Malaysia was trying to achieve this by increasing yield through R&D programmes, new technologies and diversifying the products.  There was also a zero waste policy where all by-products were to be utilized. 
Regarding India's interest in palm oil production, the representative of Malaysia noted that the tariffs for palm oil had increased in India's most recent budget and, therefore, palm oil exports to India from Malaysia had decreased.  China and the European Communities were now the biggest importers of Malaysian palm oil.
On the environment dimension, a great importance was placed on environment and Malaysia had integrated environmental measures in every step of the production, like for example using biological pest controls to eliminate the use of pesticides.  Additionally, Malaysia had participated in a round table of palm oil producers that had set out the criteria for sustainable palm oil production.  This had been organized by the Malaysian Palm Oil Producers Association in collaboration with the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
Regarding investment by Malaysian companies in other companies in the region, he said that about 30 per cent of palm oil production investment in Indonesia came from Malaysia, and that investments had also been made in Cambodia, Vietnam and Myanmar.
He continued by saying that on lessons learned in managing commodities, what had been learned from managing rubber had also been applied to other commodities.  The learning curve had, therefore, been shortened.  Institutional support was required, as was a focus on research and development.  Other important factors included the reliability of supply, the need for quality products, and after-sales service and support to consumers.  He said that it was necessary to keep in constant touch with the markets and also to try to secure new markets.
Finally, on the future direction of research and development, the challenge was to produce what the markets wanted.  Future research and development would, therefore, be focused on this, and would require close monitoring of developments that took place in the markets.  He also said that there would be a focus on identifying new products in biotechnology in collaboration with well-regarded institutions in the field.
&& The representative of UNCTAD, in response to the request of the Chairman for other examples of countries that had had success in managing their commodities trade, said that experiences between countries were varied.  He went on to briefly describe some examples of success stories and the factors that had contributed to these successes.  Firms in Kenya, having efficiently produced and marketed their products, had contributed to a large extent to that country's success, while the government had also played a role through implementation of a strict and reliable quality control system for exports.  In Zimbabwe, a code of good practice had been put in place by the exporters themselves.  In the case of Colombia, the coffee industry was largely responsible for the successful marketing of Colombian coffee.  Brazil had successfully expanded soya production through government policy, while Thailand's success in poultry and shrimp was largely due to the actions of a single large company.  The key to Botswana's success was in using the rents generated from the mineral sector for the long-term development of the country.  He said that more examples of success stories could certainly be provided, and stressed once again that the reasons for success differed from country to country.
In response to the representative of Kenya's request for clarification about what would happen to prices of commodities after a successful conclusion of the Doha Round, the representative of UNCTAD said that prices were expected to rise.  The rise in prices would occur via two channels.  The reduction in subsidies would be the first channel.  Second, the general liberalization of trade was expected to lead to increases in income, which would in turn lead to an increase in demand.  He said that the rise in prices would be beneficial to producers.  With regard to fluctuations in prices, he said he believed that fluctuations would be lessened after completion of the Round.  This was because a large part of the markets for commodities was currently not subject to free market forces, and that that part of the market which did operate under free market conditions bore a high burden of adjustment.  As the extent of the market operating under free market conditions expanded, the expectation was that price fluctuations would be reduced.
&& The Chairman requested the views of Members on how to continue the discussions on this item at the next meeting.
&& The representative of Kenya proposed to have another presentation from the Common Fund for Commodities that would focus on the problems faced by commodities producing countries and not just on the work of the Common Fund for Commodities.  He also proposed to have a presentation from a Member which had faced problems in diversifying its production.
&& The representative of the United States noted there had been a very useful exchange between the representatives of Malaysia and UNCTAD.  Therefore, she proposed to have two presentations at the same time on  a success story like Malaysia's or on the problems faced by other countries as suggested by Kenya.  She suggested inviting representatives from the World Bank, ITC and also some private institutions.  Ultimately, the Committee had to look at where the WTO could add value to the work done on commodities by other agencies.
&& The representative of the FAO noted that his organization was open to contribute to discussions by making a presentation on the matter.
&& The Chairman concluded that for the next meeting, the Committee should try to find an organization that could provide assistance in identifying where the WTO could add value to the work being done in commodities and also to hear from a Member that has experienced difficulties as a commodities exporter. 
The Committee so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& The Chairman recalled that at the last regular meeting, the CTD heard a presentation on the developmental aspects of Negotiating Group on Rules on the issues of anti-dumping, subsidies and fisheries subsidies.  The Committee would continue to hear from the rules negotiations but this time in regard to Regional Trade Agreements.  He then offered the floor to the Secretariat for its presentation on the developmental aspects of the Negotiating Group on Rules, Regional Trade Agreements.
&& The Secretariat made the following presentation:
Under paragraph 29 of the Doha Declaration, Members are mandated to negotiations on RTA rules and procedures, taking into account developmental aspects of RTAs.  These negotiations concern the provisions contained in Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and the 1994 Understanding on its Interpretation, in the relevant paragraphs of the Enabling Clause, and in Article V of the GATS, as well as the corresponding procedures.
In the negotiations, the issue-identification phase proceeded quickly, because controversial issues related to RTAs had already been extensively debated in the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA).  Participants distinguished, at a very early stage, those issues that were more "procedural" in nature from those that had a higher "systemic" or "legal" content.  Procedural issues, in particular "RTAs transparency", were identified as priorities for the negotiations. 
The developmental aspects of RTAs have been important to the Group's work, mainly in two areas:  the place of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause vis-à-vis any improved RTA transparency and review process resulting from current negotiations;  and the inclusion of special and differential treatment (S&D) for developing countries in some WTO provisions relating to RTAs.
RTAs transparency
In the last two years, the Group has considerably progressed in its consideration of various elements aimed at improving "RTA transparency", in particular:  the early announcement of RTAs, the timing of formal notification, and a revived, more transparent and efficient RTA review process based on a factual presentation made by the Secretariat, instead of by the parties to the RTAs as is currently the case.  
A number of relatively more technical issues still need in-depth consideration, in particular regarding subsequent notifications and reporting, and data needs.
Another issue still pending concerns the scope of any new transparency process:  firstly, how to deal with those RTAs on which the CRTA has not been able to report;  and, secondly, the extent to which such a process would also apply to RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  This latter question embodies a number of other issues, concerning, for example, the role of WTO bodies in a revised transparency process, a possible adaptation of the procedures for Enabling Clause agreements, and technical assistance. 
These issues regarding the scope of a new RTA transparency process will be discussed at a later stage, once other elements are clarified.
RTAs systemic issues
Negotiations on systemic issues have not reached the same level of progress as those on RTA transparency, though from mid-2004 the Group has embarked in a more focused discussion of systemic issues on the basis of a Chairman's Roadmap.  The issues more referred to during these discussions have been RTAs and development; RTAs' coverage (in particular the definition of "substantially all trade");  other (restrictive) regulations of commerce (in particular matters related to preferential rules of origin and safeguards);  the primacy of the multilateral trading system;  and possible negative effects of RTAs on third parties.  The Group has also considered the question of "grandfathering" existing RTAs and retroactive application of any new rules, but it has been generally held that no useful outcome could be achieved on that issue until the negotiations had progressed  significantly.
Up to know, however, these discussions have not allowed the Group to identify issues to be pursued further, and the Chairman has called upon interested Participants to put forward specific proposals that would allow the Group to engage in detailed discussions.
As to S&D-related issues, three RTA-related proposals were referred to the Negotiating Group on Rules by the Chairman of the General Council in May 2003.  They had been submitted by the African Group and by the LDCs and all referred to the Understanding on the Interpretation of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994.  Since referral to the Group, these proposals have been considered at two formal meetings in 2003 (June and July).  The specifics of these discussions are reflected in the summary records of the Group found in TN/RL/M/9 and TN/RL/M/11.
Although the Group's discussion was very preliminary, as for various reasons it proved difficult to ensure active engagement of the sponsors, the proposals are squarely before the Group and are an integral part of its negotiating agenda.
Several submissions by Participants have dealt, inter alia, on possible development-related flexibilities.  However, in discussions held in the context of the Chairman's Roadmap, participants considered that, though this matter was of major importance, the consideration of S&D elements should take place at a later stage, once progress had been achieved on other systemic issues. 
Finally, there has been one submission to the Group fully devoted to S&D.  It was circulated by the ACP Group of States (TN/RL/W/155).  That submission, which contained a number of proposed additions/changes in GATT Article XXIV to incorporate S&D treatment for developing countries, was discussed in two formal meetings (TN/RL/M/15 and TN/RL/M/15/Corr.1 and TN/RL/M/16), and a formal submission was received commenting on it (TN/RL/W/165).  The ACP Group of States have indicated that they are working on a new proposal that would be more precise and would take into account many of the comments made by Participants.
&& The representative of the United States noted that the CRTA had intensified the review process lately.  She asked what was meant by unadopted reports. 
&& The Secretariat clarified that all agreements notified under Article XXIV had been factually reviewed by the CRTA but none of them had been approved and some had not even had a report drafted.  The issue then arose on what to do with those previously reviewed agreements once new rules were in place.
&& The representative of Zambia asked what was the time‑frame for dealing with developmental aspects of RTAs such as those noted in the ACP proposal.
&& The Secretariat clarified that priority had been placed on the transparency aspect but other systemic issues had not been put aside.  Some new precise proposals were expected on these other aspects as well as a revised proposal from the ACP countries.  
&& The representative of Egypt asked for more information on the development dimension of RTAs, on what was the expected outcome of the negotiations and how could this help development.
&& The Secretariat said that these questions should be answered by Members and that the development aspects of RTAs had not yet been tackled.  
&& The representative of Zambia said that although the Secretariat's report should be factual, he wanted to have a more comprehensive report on how the different proposals, such as the ACP proposal, and the negotiations as a whole would impact development.
&& The representative of the United States noted that the RTAs Group was moving slowly towards addressing the substantive questions where the developmental aspects of RTAs would be discussed, like the ACP proposal.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that in the Negotiating Group on RTAs, things were not clear at all.  Therefore, it was difficult to talk about developmental aspects of the RTA negotiations.  However, it was possible to talk about the economic development function of RTAs in general for developing countries.  There were some questions that would be interesting to discuss, for instance, how much trade diversion and trade creation took place with RTAs.  Or, whether RTAs between unequal partners were more beneficial for development.  Also, whether in RTAs there were internal preferences or special and differential treatment.  This would be the best way to proceed since to talk about the developmental issues in RTA negotiations at this stage was hopeless. 
&& The representative of Egypt supported the comments made by Switzerland.  He noted that the Committee could have a factual presentation on the state of the negotiations but what would be better would be to discuss the more substantive aspects of how these issues impacted on development.  These could even be presented by the Secretariat as that would not mean that it was taking a position.  A discussion on the issues that were noted by Switzerland was exactly what he was hoping to hear, and what he thought would lead to a fruitful contribution by the Committee under the paragraph 51 mandate. 
&& The representative of Zambia said that the CTD could discuss what were the expectations of developing countries for the outcome of the RTA negotiations.  He also offered to make a presentation on the developmental aspects that were contained in the ACP proposal. 
&& The Chairman said that the Secretariat could only be factual in its presentations but that more was expected from the work of the CTD.  He, therefore, suggested inviting speakers from other organizations or from the Members to try to help the discussions in the Committee.  He asked && The representative of Zambia to clarify his proposal.
&& The representative of Zambia said that he would like to make a presentation on the developmental aspects that were contained in the ACP proposal.
&& The representative of Egypt suggested inviting a speaker from the World Bank to talk on the studies that had been done on the impact of RTAs on development.  He also said that the Committee could meet informally to discuss how to continue the work under the paragraph 51 mandate.
&& The representative of the United States cautioned against what she saw as transferring the RTA negotiations to the Committee.
&& The representative of Kenya expressed support for the proposal by the representative of Zambia.  He also said that the Committee could revisit some of the issues that had been discussed some time ago, like agriculture, NAMA and services to look at the most recent developments in those negotiations.  He also agreed with the proposal of having an informal meeting to discuss how to continue the work under the paragraph 51 mandate
&& The representative of Canada also warned against discussing in the Committee issues that were at a further stage in other negotiating groups.  He said he saw the work of the Committee as one where issues would be discussed at a high intellectual level where there would be a balance of views presented on various aspects affecting the negotiations broadly.  He said he agreed with the Chairman's idea to invite speakers from other organizations to talk on some development issues.  He also agreed that the discussion on how to advance the work of the Committee on paragraph 51 could take place at an informal meeting to be held in the future.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that Members should allow the negotiating groups to do their work.  He also agreed with && The representative of Switzerland that the Committee could discuss the developmental aspects of RTAs in general.  He noted that RTAs was an area where the work in the Negotiating Group on Rules needed to catch up to the progress made in other negotiations and that maybe it was better to let the Rules Group do its work.
&& The representative of Zambia noted that the negotiations on RTAs were far from having been concluded and that his intention was not to transfer those negotiations to the Committee but to discuss the proposal at an intellectual level.
&& The representative of Australia suggested including the issue of TRIPs in the discussions under paragraph 51 as this topic had not yet been discussed in the Committee.
&& The representative of Cuba said that it was not helpful to continue to evade getting to the substance of the mandate under paragraph 51 by continuing to discuss issues of process.  She suggested listening to what the representative of Zambia wanted to say on the ACP proposal on RTAs. 
&& The Chairman concluded by proposing to hold an informal meeting to discuss how to proceed with the mandate given to the Committee in paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.
It was so decided. 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman recalled that at the Committee's meeting in September, it was decided to invite a representative of the International Telecommunications Union to speak on the latest developments in the preparation of the second phase of the World Summit of the Information Society that would take place in Tunisia in 2005.  Since the expert was unavailable, the Chairman proposed to revert to this item at the next regular meeting of the Committee.
It was so decided.
GRADUATION OF THE MALDIVES FROM LDC STATUS (WT/COMTD/W/128)
&& The Chairman recalled that this item had been on the agenda of the previous meeting of the Committee.  Unfortunately, the delegation of the Maldives had not been able to travel to Geneva to be present at that meeting and it had been decided that this issue would be taken up at this meeting.  However, the delegation of Maldives had sent a submission to the Committee on the effects of the Indian Ocean tsunami on the Maldivian economy.  The Chairman noted that he had been in contact with the Maldives' delegation and they had said that their work on a plan for a smooth transition to developing country status was continuing.  He expressed his sympathy on behalf of the Committee with the Government of the Maldives on the unfortunate loss inflicted by the December tsunami and hoped that all of the affected countries would recover as quickly as possible.  He suggested reverting to this item at the next meeting of the Committee.  
It was so decided. 
PARTICIPATION OF THE DEVELOPING ECONOMIES IN THE GLOBAL TRADING SYSTEM (WT/COMTD/W/136)
&& The Chairman reminded Members that under this agenda item, the Secretariat had prepared a note circulated to Members as document WT/COMTD/W/136 and Corrigendum 1.  This note had been prepared to assist the Committee with its requirement to keep under continuous review the participation of developing economies in the multilateral trading system.  The note highlighted salient features of developing economies' trade, focusing mainly on the period 2000-2003.  It also touched upon various issues including the participation in merchandise trade by each of the developing country regions, participation in world trade in services, as well as a specific section on LDCs.  He recalled that at the previous meeting of the Committee, it was decided to continue discussions on this paper at a future meeting to allow more time for Members to study the content of the paper.
&& The representative of the United States noted that the paper by the Secretariat was interesting and presented a lot of information that would be very useful in assisting the work of the Committee.  She, therefore, suggested to allow for more time to study the paper and defer its discussion to the next meetings of the Committee.
&& The Chairman proposed to revert to this item at the next meeting for further discussions.
It was so decided.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB‑COMMITTEE ON LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
In regard to the election of the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries (LDCs), the Chairman said he had been informed that consultations by the LDC Group had led to a proposal for H.E. Mr. Ian de Jong, Ambassador of the Netherlands, to serve a second year as the Chairman of the Sub‑Committee.  He asked whether this would be agreeable to the Committee.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman recalled that Ambassador de Jong had vast diplomatic experience.  Before taking up his post as Ambassador in Geneva, he served as Deputy Permanent Representative of the Netherlands to the European Union in Brussels and as Minister Plenipotentiary at the Netherlands' Embassy in Bonn.  He had served in several other capitals including the Hague, Washington, Khartoum, and Beirut.  He had also served as an Executive Director of the Inter-American Investment Corporation in Washington.  Ambassador de Jong's vast experience had been a valuable asset to the work of the Sub-Committee. 
&& The Chairman reminded Members that the next meeting of the Sub-Committee was scheduled for 10 March 2005.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman recalled that he had requested the inclusion of an item under other business concerning a presentation by NEPAD at the Committee's next meeting in May.  He noted that the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) was a development policy framework adopted by African Heads of State and Governments in July 2001.  It was a commitment by African leaders to eradicate poverty and to place Africa on a path of sustainable growth and development. 
&& The Chairman recalled that the Head of the NEPAD Secretariat was invited to make a presentation to Members at the 41st Session of the CTD in July 2002.  At that time, this was considered to be very useful.  In recent contacts that had taken place between the WTO Secretariat and the NEPAD Secretariat, it was considered that it could again be useful to have such a presentation given to the CTD by the Head of the NEPAD Secretariat.  The main purpose would be to brief Members on their development work as well as the challenges they are encountering.  He, therefore, proposed that the CTD invite the NEPAD Secretariat to the next session of the Committee in May for a follow-up presentation.  
It was so agreed. 
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE CTD
&& The Chairman noted that the outgoing Chairman of the General Council, Ambassador Oshima had announced the previous week at the General Council meeting that his consultations had led to the choice of H.E. Mr. Gomi Senadhira of Sri Lanka to be elected as Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development.
The Committee elected H.E. Mr. Gomi Senadhira of Sri Lanka as Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development.  
&& The Chairman recalled that Ambassador Senadhira had wide diplomatic as well as technical experience.  Prior to his arrival in Geneva in January 2004, he had served as his country's Minister (Commercial and Economic Affairs) at the Mission of Sri Lanka to the European Communities in Brussels where he worked for three years.  Before serving in Brussels, he held from 1998 to 2001 the post of Minister at the Sri Lankan Embassy in Washington D.C..  In addition to his wide diplomatic experience, Ambassador Senadhira also had a sound technical knowledge of trade issues which he gained between 1995 and 1997 when he served as Deputy Director and Head of the Research and Development Division of the Department of Commerce in Sri Lanka.
&& The Chairman reminded Members that the next meeting of the CTD was scheduled for 11 May 2005.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________


 This document was later circulated as WT/COMTD/52.

WT/COMTD/M/52 Page  PAGE 26



	WT/COMTD/M/52 	Page  PAGE 27













