WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/68
11 April 2008


(08-1707)


Committee on Trade and Development
Sixty-Eighth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 4 MARCH 2008

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)


 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517164" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC195517164 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517165" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC195517165 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc195517166" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc195517166 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc195517167" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc195517167 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517168" C.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC195517168 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517169" -	communication from brazil on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC195517169 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517170" -	communication from china on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC195517170 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517171" -	communication from india on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC195517171 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517172" -	communication from pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC195517172 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517173" -	communication from the european communities – responses to questions submitted by brazil, china, india and pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC195517173 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517174" -	communication from the united states on the notification by china of the amendment to the first agreement on trade negotiations among developing member countries of the economic and social commission for asia and the pacific (bangkok agreement) (wt/comtd/62/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC195517174 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517175" D.	declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries	 PAGEREF _TOC195517175 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517176" E.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (wt/l/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC195517176 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517177" F.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC195517177 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517178" G.	latest developments of measures within the framework of the forum on china-africa cooperation (focac) (wt/comtd/w/164)	 PAGEREF _TOC195517178 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517179" H.	election of the chairperson of the sub-committee on least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC195517179 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517180" I.	election of the chairperson of the ctd	 PAGEREF _TOC195517180 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC195517181" J.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC195517181 \H 10



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 68th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3151/Rev.1 issued on 27 February 2008. 
The agenda was adopted.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to inform the Committee of a communication received by the Secretariat on 19 November 2007 from Saudi Arabia concerning the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union and the Pan-Arab Free Trade Area (FTA) Agreement, both of which had in 2006 been notified under GATT Article XXIV.  The communication from Saudi Arabia requested that the legal provision under which these agreements were to be notified be changed to the Enabling Clause.  He recalled that notifications under the Enabling Clause were required to be circulated using the common format that the CTD adopted in 2007.  However, in view of some missing information, the notifications concerning the GCC Customs Union and the Pan‑Arab FTA Agreement had not yet been circulated.  He said that he had been in touch with the Saudi Arabian Ambassador on this matter.  The notifications would be circulated as soon as possible.
-	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.3)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the European Communities had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4, respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would continue with his informal consultations on this matter and would report back to the Committee.  In this regard, he said that his consultations indicated that more time would be required before this item could be taken off the CTD's agenda. He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor. 
&& The representative of Brazil indicated that the information that had been received by his delegation on the EC's GSP scheme was insufficient in a number of respects, and had not been provided in a timely manner.  For example, trade data for 2006 had not been provided by the EC.  He informed the Committee that his delegation had recently raised the data issue with the EC, and had been informed that changes were being introduced to Eurostat data.  He believed that it would be useful if the EC could provide some detail to Members on the types of changes that were being introduced, and when the changes would be implemented.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation was still in the process of reviewing the responses provided by the EC.  However, a preliminary consideration of the information indicated that the responses did not fully address India's queries.  His delegation would be shortly conveying to the EC some requests for clarification.  He requested that this item remain on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting. 
&& The representative of Pakistan said that a bilateral meeting between her delegation and the EC had been held in November 2006.  At that meeting, six follow-up questions were given to the EC and then shared with the CTD.  Written responses were received from the EC on 28 February 2008.  Unfortunately, a preliminary consideration of the responses – which had been sent to her capital – indicated that they failed to address the precise issues raised in the relevant context in the follow-up questions, and had not allayed the concerns that had necessitated the questions in the first place.  The evasive answers had, in fact, heightened her delegation's apprehension that the Enabling Clause, which was a tool to facilitate and promote the trade of developing countries as an exceptional departure from the most-favoured-nation (MFN) principle, was being distorted.  Many of her delegation's concerns – for example, that the EC's special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance was a tailor-made scheme using non-objective criteria for selecting beneficiaries, that the arrangement sought reciprocity, and that it did not allow others to enjoy the same facility by imposing a deadline to meet the requirements – remained unanswered.  She requested that this item remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the present item had been on the CTD's agenda for a substantial period of time, and related to a GSP scheme which was being applied for the years 2006 to 2008.  He believed that the discussion was becoming outdated, in particular because the EC was in the process of elaborating its GSP scheme for the years 2009 to 2011.  On the point raised by Brazil concerning the provision of trade data by the EC, he said that the EC had, in fact, submitted data to Brazil for the year 2006.  He added that the EC was always willing to meet bilaterally with delegations to provide information on its GSP scheme, but had not recently received any requests for information.  He recalled that the last formal request for information from India dated back to 2006. With regard to the responses to Pakistan's questions, he recognized that there had been a delay in their submission.  This was, however, due to a misunderstanding, as the EC had been expecting to receive an official request for information.  He said that the EC believed that its GSP scheme fully complied with the Enabling Clause.
&& The representative of Brazil clarified that his delegation was seeking data from the EC for the year 2007, and not 2006 as he had earlier mistakenly indicated.  He believed that the EC should be in a position to provide this data.  In response to the comment from the EC representative on the length of time that the present item had remained on the CTD's agenda, he observed that an item necessarily became old if it was kept on the agenda for a lengthy period.  This did not, however, in any way dilute the significance of the present item on the CTD's agenda.  He added that his delegation still had issues with the procedure the EC had put in place to share trade data, namely for delegations to request data bilaterally.  Furthermore, for each individual request for trade data, the EC only provided data relating to the trade of the country requesting the data.  He emphasized the importance to developing countries of having information concerning the trade of other developing countries benefiting from GSP schemes.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that more time was required to process and prepare data in the case of the EC – a customs union of 27 member States – than might be the case for individual countries.  He explained that the EC's provision of data on a bilateral basis allowed more detail to be provided on aspects of the data.  He added that with Eurostat's COMEXT database, which was available online, it was possible for users to formulate queries concerning the EC's imports from any given beneficiary country under all preferential schemes combined.  For countries benefiting from only one of the EC's preferential schemes, however, the data would relate to preferential imports under that scheme.  
&& The representative of Pakistan said that part of the reason why this item remained on the CTD's agenda was because her delegation had been waiting for written responses from the EC.  The responses had now been received, but they did not appear to be satisfactory.  Her delegation was open to further engagement on this matter, and would shortly be sending to the EC its considered reaction to the EC's responses. 
&& The Chairman said that he would continue with his informal consultations, and would report back to the CTD at the next meeting.  The item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.  
It was so agreed.
&& 	COMMUNICATION FROM THE UNITED STATES ON THE NOTIFICATION BY CHINA OF THE AMENDMENT TO THE FIRST AGREEMENT ON TRADE NEGOTIATIONS AMONG DEVELOPING MEMBER COUNTRIES OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMISSION FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC (BANGKOK AGREEMENT) (WT/COMTD/62/ADD.1)
&& The Chairman recalled that China, on behalf of the Participating States of the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), had introduced a notification at the 65th Session of the CTD concerning the Amendment to the First Agreement on Trade Negotiations Among Developing Member Countries of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (Bangkok Agreement).  A communication from the United States raising questions on the notification had subsequently been circulated in document WT/COMTD/62/Add.1.  He recalled that oral responses to the questions were provided by China and Korea at the last CTD meeting.  Written responses to the questions had now been received from China.  The responses were submitted to the Secretariat on 29 February 2008, and had been placed at the back of the room.  He invited China to introduce the responses.
&& The representative of the China, on behalf of the Participating States of APTA, thanked the United States for the questions and for the interest shown in the agreement.  He also thanked the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP) – the Secretariat of the agreement – for its assistance in preparing the responses.  He explained that the delay in providing the responses was due to the detailed and technical nature of the questions and the need to coordinate the responses between the APTA member countries.  He said that he wished to emphasize that APTA was not a new agreement, but was an amendment to the existing Bangkok Agreement.  He expressed the hope that the responses appropriately addressed the concerns of the US with regard to the agreement.   
&& The representative of the United States thanked China and the APTA Participating States for the responses.  Her delegation appreciated the time it took to coordinate the responses among the member countries.  She noted that the responses had just been provided and that her delegation had, therefore, not had the opportunity to review them.  She requested that this item remain on the CTD's agenda.  
&& The Chairman said that this item would remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  
It was so agreed.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would consult with Members to get a better idea as to how the Committee could continue to add value in its discussion on commodities.  In this regard, he informed the Committee that he had consulted with a number of Members on the matter.  He was aware that some Members were working to explore ways in which the CTD could continue to add value under this agenda item.  He said that he generally encouraged proposals from Members in this regard, either at the present meeting or after the meeting.
He also drew Members' attention to the upcoming UNCTAD XII conference, which would be held in Accra, Ghana.  He believed that the conference was an important event in the context of the present agenda item, since commodities would be a topic of discussion.  He recalled that UNCTAD had contributed on several occasions to the CTD's work on commodities, and trusted that delegations would be following the deliberations at UNCTAD XII.  He invited the representative of UNCTAD to say a few words on the context of the commodities discussion at the upcoming conference.  
&& The representative of UNCTAD said that she wished to brief the Committee on the  commodities interactive roundtable that would take place at UNCTAD XII.  The theme of the roundtable was "The changing face of commodities in the 21st century".  The focus would be on recent developments in commodity markets – in particular the recent boom in commodity prices – and the long-term prospects for commodities as an engine of growth in commodity-dependent countries.  In this context, the conference was expected to agree on actions to address long-standing commodity‑related trade and development problems, as well as challenges in harnessing development gains from the current boom.  The focus would be on key aspects of the international policy environment which could facilitate the integration of commodity-dependent countries into the global economy.  This would include trade policies and rules with regard to market access, tariff escalation, subsidies and competition issues, as well as issues relating to commodity supply chains and processing.  The roundtable would also address the matter of financial policies affecting the availability of resources to finance commodity-dependent countries.
&& The Chairman said that he was always open to hear suggestions from Members as to how the CTD could continue to add value under this agenda item.  He proposed that he continue his informal consultations with a view to concretizing a way forward for the CTD on the commodities issue.
It was so agreed.  
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The General Council had extended the deadline to its July 2008 meeting.  He recalled that in his report to the General Council in December 2007, he had informed the Council of the progress that had been made on the matter.  He had in particular reported on the "non-paper" that the proponents – Brazil and India – had circulated as document JOB(07)/142 in October 2007, and on the discussion that had taken place on the non-paper in the formal CTD that same month.  He had also informed the Council that he had subsequently held an informal consultation with some Members in November 2007 to consider a more complete draft text prepared by Brazil and India.   
He now wished to further inform the Committee that the draft text by Brazil and India had been revised based on the comments made at the informal consultation in November 2007.  He said that he had held another informal consultation the previous week with some Members to consider this revised draft text.  The informal consultation had proved very useful, as it had allowed for a first detailed discussion of the content of the text.  He informed the Committee that he planned to hold further informal consultations as necessary before the next formal CTD meeting.  When he believed the time was right, his aim was to have the matter discussed fully in an informal, open-ended format.  He invited the proponents, Brazil and India, to take the floor.
&& The representative of Brazil said that good progress had been made on this matter. He expressed the hope that the CTD could now move speedily to a positive conclusion of its consideration of transparency for preferential trade arrangements (PTAs), and report to the General Council as required.  He called on all Members to show the necessary commitment and engagement to allow a satisfactory outcome to  the CTD's consideration of the matter.  
&& The representative of India expressed his support for the intervention by Brazil.  His delegation looked forward to working with Members to establish an appropriate transparency mechanism for PTAs.
&& The Chairman inquired whether any other Member wished to take the floor.  
&& The representative of the United States said that the US had a longstanding commitment to transparency.  Her delegation believed that an agreed framework for the provision of information on PTAs would yield important systemic benefits.  She informed the Committee that the US planned to join Brazil and India as a co-sponsor of the proposal.  
&& The representative of the European Communities said that though the EC shared the objectives of the proposed transparency mechanism for PTAs, it had a number of concerns relating to the burden to notifying Members that was implied in the proponents' draft text.  Her delegation was, nevertheless, ready to remain involved and engaged, and had been participating in the Chairman's informal consultations.  She noted that there were a number of parallels between the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements and the proposed PTA transparency mechanism, and expressed the view that there should be a balance between the two mechanisms.     
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation shared the objectives of the proposed transparency mechanism for PTAs.  Japan had been participating in discussions on this matter in both formal and informal settings, and looked forward to continuing to do so.
&& The representative of Brazil expressed appreciation to the US for its intention to co-sponsor the proposal by Brazil and India.  He believed that it was this type of commitment and engagement that would allow the CTD to fulfil its mandate.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation welcomed the initiative of the US to co‑sponsor the proposal by Brazil and India.  The base of co-sponsorship would now be extended to cover not only some of the largest beneficiaries of GSP schemes, but also a country that was a provider of one of the largest GSP schemes.  His delegation was confident that this would lend both weight and value to the proposal under discussion.        
&& The Chairman reiterated his intention to continue to hold informal consultations as necessary before the next formal CTD meeting.  When he believed the time was right, he would have the matter discussed in an informal, open‑ended format.  He said that this item would remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Ministerial Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for least-developed countries (LDCs) had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  He recalled that the CTD had to date undertaken two of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Ministerial Decision. He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that most developed countries were already providing  DFQF market access to LDCs as per the Hong Kong Ministerial Decision.  One developed country was currently undergoing a process of internal consultations to implement the Decision. He noted that the earlier Members were informed of the results of the internal consultations in this country, the better could exporters in LDCs prepare themselves.  He, therefore, urged a completion of internal procedures as soon as possible, and also asked that the CTD be kept informed.  In addition, he urged developing countries to declare themselves in a position to provide DFQF market access to LDCs, and to provide this market access as soon as possible.        
&& The representative of India said that his delegation supported the LDC position regarding early implementation of DFQF market access and full coverage by the end of the implementation period of the Doha Round.  He said that India had already announced that it was ready to offer DFQF market access in a progressive manner on a very large proportion of products from LDCs.  His delegation expected to shortly make a detailed announcement regarding India's scheme.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation fully shared the concerns of LDCs on the DFQF issue.  China was making efforts bilaterally to provide DFQF market access on the products that LDCs had the capacity to export to China.  He was pleased to inform the Committee that his delegation would be providing information under the next agenda item on some of the latest developments in China's bilateral efforts in the context of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation.   
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
LATEST DEVELOPMENTS OF MEASURES WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF THE FORUM ON CHINA-AFRICA COOPERATION (FOCAC) (WT/COMTD/W/164)
&& The Chairman said that a communication had been received from China concerning recent measures taken within the framework of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC).  The communication had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/164.  He invited China to introduce the communication.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation had since the end of 2006 been keeping Members posted on developments taking place within the framework of the FOCAC.  Relevant measures, which had the objective of forging a new type of China-Africa strategic partnership, had been announced by the Chinese President Hu Jintao at the opening ceremony of the Beijing Summit of the Forum.  These measures – which included aid, exemption from debt, DFQF market access, education and infrastructure construction provided by China – were directly or indirectly related to trade enhancement and capacity building for African developing countries.  They were complementary to the efforts of the WTO to make development objectives a reality. 
He said that bilateral aid agreements were signed with 47 African countries, while debt cancellation protocols were signed with 32 African countries.  Duty-free and quota-free market access was provided to 27 LDCs having diplomatic relations with China.  In addition, 5,931 professionals from Africa – including in the trade-related areas – were trained, and 2,700 government scholarships were provided to African students.  He also informed the Committee that the first Agricultural Technology Demonstration Centre was established, and official letters to establish 58 rural schools were exchanged.  These activities had been carried out in only half the committed time.  While China and Africa had implemented half of their mutual commitments with satisfactory results, it was even more satisfactory to note that such cooperation had brought mutual benefits to China and Africa.  Trade in goods between China and Africa reached US$73.55 billion in 2007, registering a more than 30 per cent increase over 2006, and making China the third largest trading partner of Africa.
He continued by saying that the FOCAC was just one example of China's partnership with other developing countries in seeking common development.  Similar measures had also been formulated and implemented on a bilateral basis with developing countries in Asia, Latin America and the Pacific.  China would continue to intensify its cooperation efforts with other developing countries in order to promote common development.
&& The Chairman opened the floor for questions and comments.
&& The representative of the European Communities welcomed the increased trade flows between China and Africa that had been observed in recent years.  He also welcomed more generally the positive trends in developing country trade and South-South trade.  He noted with appreciation the provision by China of DFQF market access to LDCs.  In this regard, he inquired whether further information could be provided on the DFQF product coverage, as well as on any conditions that LDCs might have to fulfil in order to benefit from DFQF access to the Chinese market.  With regard to the bilateral aid agreements signed between China and a number of African countries, he wondered whether any information could be provided on the type of aid being provided, for example the relative proportions of grants and loans in the agreements, and whether any conditions were attached.     
&& The representative of Bangladesh expressed appreciation for the initiatives being taken by China to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  He confirmed that trade between China and LDCs had increased recently, including in some categories of manufactured goods.  He said that he wished to take the opportunity to request China to broaden the coverage of products on which DFQF market access was offered to LDCs.  This would allow access to the Chinese market to be even more meaningful to the LDCs.  
&& The representative of China thanked the EC and Bangladesh for their interventions.  He said that the questions raised by the EC would be transmitted to his capital.  Any further information would be shared with the EC on a bilateral basis.    
&& The Committee took note of the communication from China and of all interventions.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that he had been informed that consultations had led to the proposal for Ambassador Jean Feyder of Luxembourg to serve for another year as Chairman of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.  He asked whether this was acceptable to Members.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman said that it was a great pleasure for him to welcome Ambassador Feyder to serve for another year as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  Ambassador Feyder had vast experience in development issues.  He was long responsible for development cooperation in his country, and this experience was valuable for the work of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.  The numerous posts he had occupied in his career included Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the European Union and Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations in New York.  He currently served as Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations Office, the International Organizations and the WTO in Geneva.
&& The Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs thanked Members for the trust they had placed in him.  He said that he would make every effort to fulfil his responsibilities as Chairman of the Sub‑Committee.  Issues of priority to LDCs would continue to be treated in the Sub-Committee.  These included issues relating to market access, technical assistance and capacity building, and the accession of LDCs to the WTO.  He added that the Ambassador of Lesotho would shortly be providing to the Sub-Committee a briefing on the recent LDC Trade Ministers' meeting which had taken place in Maseru, Lesotho.  With regard to the Maseru Ministerial Declaration, he noted that it not only covered issues directly linked to the Doha Round, but also more general trade-related concerns of LDCs.  He indicated that the Sub-Committee would make efforts to address these concerns.        
&& The representative of Bangladesh thanked Ambassador Feyder for having agreed to continue as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  He said that Ambassador Feyder had a profound understanding of the problems and concerns of LDCs.  He expressed appreciation for the initiatives taken by Ambassador Feyder to address the issues of particular interest to LDCs. 
&& The representative of Senegal welcomed Ambassador Feyder back as Chairman of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.  He expressed appreciation for Ambassador Feyder's commitment to the issues of interest to LDCs.  He assured Ambassador Feyder of his delegation's support for the work of the Sub-Committee.   
&& The representative of the European Communities congratulated Ambassador Feyder on his re‑election as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE CTD
&& The Chairman said that the General Council at its meeting on 6 February had announced the  Chairpersons for 2008.  It was with great pleasure that he had accepted to serve as Chairman of the CTD for another year.  He thanked Members for the confidence they had placed in him, and said that he would continue in his efforts to move forward the work of the CTD in Regular Session and Dedicated Session on Small Economies, as well as the CTD's work on Aid for Trade.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Servansing as Chairman of the CTD for 2008.
&& The representative of Barbados, on behalf of the small, vulnerable economies, welcomed the Chairman's re-election.  He commended the Chairman for the manner in which he had led the CTD's Regular Session and Dedication Session on Small Economies over the past year, and expressed willingness to continue working with the Chairman.     
OTHER BUSINESS 
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.

__________



WT/COMTD/M/68 Page  PAGE 10



	WT/COMTD/M/68 	Page  PAGE 9



 

 

 

 



