WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/71
20 November 2008


(08-5650)


Committee on Trade and Development
Seventy-First Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 16 OCTOBER 2008

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)

 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870565" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC214870565 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870566" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC214870566 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc214870567" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc214870567 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc214870568" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc214870568 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870569" C.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC214870569 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870570" -	communication from brazil on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC214870570 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870571" -	communication from china on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC214870571 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870572" -	communication from india on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC214870572 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870573" -	communication from pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC214870573 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870574" -	communication from the european communities – responses to questions submitted by brazil, china, india and pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC214870574 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870575" -	communications from brazil on the generalized system of preferences scheme of norway (WT/COMTD/65 AND WT/COMTD/65/ADD.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC214870575 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870576" -	communication from norway – responses to first set of questions submitted by brazil on the generalized system of preferences scheme of norway (WT/COMTD/65/ADD.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC214870576 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870577" D.	declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries	 PAGEREF _TOC214870577 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870578" -	presentation by the united nations conference on trade and development (unctad)	 PAGEREF _TOC214870578 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870579" E.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (WT/L/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC214870579 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870580" F.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC214870580 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC214870581" G.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC214870581 \H 11


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 71st Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3239/Rev.1 issued on 9 October 2008.  He drew Members' attention to item C of the agenda, and in particular the notification concerning the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA), contained in document WT/COMTD/N/29.  He informed the Committee that the notifying Members had requested that this notification be considered at the next CTD meeting, as they did not have appropriate representation in Geneva for the present meeting.  He went on to recall that the Committee had agreed at its last meeting to revert to the matter raised by the EC concerning the change in the notification status of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union from Article XXIV of GATT 1994 to the Enabling Clause.  As agreed, this matter would be treated under "Other Business".  He inquired whether there were any other requests to raise a matter under "Other Business".
&& The Representative of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) said that she wished to inform Members under "Other Business" of a recent UNDP publication believed to be of interest and relevance to the work of the CTD.
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide the Committee with a brief update on some matters concerning recent notifications of regional trade agreements (RTAs) under the Enabling Clause, and their consideration in the CTD.
He firstly reminded Members that immediately following the conclusion of the present Regular Session, the CTD's 1st Dedicated Session on RTAs would be held, at which the Egypt-Turkey Agreement would be considered.  In follow-up to his earlier briefings to the Committee, he informed Members that the GCC Customs Union would not be considered at the 1st Dedicated Session on RTAs.  He explained that the GCC Parties had yet to provide the Secretariat with the data required to allow the agreement to be considered by Members as per the provisions of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.  He understood that the Secretariat was in touch with the Parties and was attempting to sort out the data issue.
He also recalled that he had informed the Committee in past meetings of two other RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in Dedicated Sessions of the CTD, namely the Pakistan-Malaysia Agreement and the Pakistan-Sri Lanka Agreement.  With regard to the Pakistan-Malaysia Agreement, he recalled that he had previously indicated that the goods aspect of this agreement could be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD in March 2009.  However, he understood that this would no longer be possible, in view of some delays in the receipt of data from Malaysia.  It was now likely that the Dedicated Session of the CTD to consider the goods aspect of the Pakistan-Malaysia Agreement would be held in September 2009, to coincide with the meeting of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) at which the services aspect of the agreement would be taken up.  As for the Pakistan-Sri Lanka Agreement, he recalled that he had previously indicated that it could be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD in June 2009.  He said that he would keep Members informed of developments in this regard.  The Secretariat was presently waiting to receive the necessary data from the Parties.
-	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.3)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4, respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would continue his informal consultations on this matter and would report back to the Committee.  In this regard, he said that his consultations indicated that more time would be required before this item could be taken off the CTD's agenda.  
&& The Representative of India said that the responses provided by the EC did not fully address India's questions.  His delegation had, therefore, sought follow-up clarifications relating to the transparency and objectivity of the EC's GSP scheme, which were conveyed to the EC in July 2008, prior to the 70th Session of the CTD.  He requested the EC to expedite its responses to these follow-up questions.  He also asked that this item remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.
&& The Representative of Brazil said that no progress had been made on this issue since the last CTD meeting.  His delegation was still waiting for confirmation from the EC that 2007 data was available, so that a request for the data could be submitted bilaterally.  He noted that this item had been on the CTD's agenda for more than two years, and regretted that the issue had to be considered in this manner.  He welcomed the factsheet that the EC had placed at the back of the meeting room concerning the renewal of its GSP scheme.  He indicated that his delegation would be studying the factsheet, and may possibly come back with questions.   
&& The Representative of Pakistan said that his delegation was still examining the responses provided by the EC.  He, therefore, requested that this item remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  He also welcomed any initiative by the Chairman to continue his informal consultations. 
&& The Representative of the European Communities, observing that the EC's current GSP scheme would soon be terminated, said that his delegation's view was that the CTD had exhausted its discussion on the scheme.  With regard to the follow-up clarifications sought by India, he indicated that if responses had not yet been provided by his delegation, this was due to a misunderstanding.  The EC would look into this bilaterally with India.  He also confirmed, in response to the query by Brazil, that data for 2007 were available.  It was, in fact, his understanding that the data had already been transmitted to the relevant authorities in Brazil.
He next drew Members' attention to the factsheet concerning the EC's GSP scheme for the years 2009 to 2011, which had been made available at the back of the meeting room.  While the EC would be formally notifying its new scheme during the first quarter of 2009, the factsheet provided some advance information on the scheme.  He pointed to the various internet links that were given in the factsheet.  Regarding the new "GSP-plus" arrangement, he repeated what had been said by his delegation at the last CTD meeting, namely that applications to benefit from the arrangement should be submitted by 31 October 2008.  The factsheet provided information on the application procedure and requirements. 
&& The Chairman said that he would continue with his informal consultations, and would report back to the CTD at the next meeting.  The present item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.  
It was so agreed.
&&	COMMUNICATIONS FROM BRAZIL ON THE GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF NORWAY (WT/COMTD/65 AND WT/COMTD/65/ADD.2)
&& 	COMMUNICATION FROM NORWAY – RESPONSES TO FIRST SET OF QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL ON THE GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF NORWAY (WT/COMTD/65/ADD.1)
&& The Chairman recalled that Norway had made a notification at the 69th Session of the CTD concerning its GSP scheme.  A first set of questions from Brazil on the scheme were circulated in document WT/COMTD/65.  Responses from Norway to this first set of questions, which were made available as a room document at the last meeting, were subsequently circulated in document WT/COMTD/65/Add.1.  Some follow-up questions from Brazil were then received, and were circulated in document WT/COMTD/65/Add.2.  He understood that Norway had provided responses to this second set of questions, which were available at the back of the meeting room.  He invited the Representative of Brazil to take the floor, in particular to introduce the follow-up questions.
&& The Representative of Brazil said that, based on Norway's responses to Brazil's first set of questions, his delegation had submitted a second group of questions to Norway.  The new questions aimed at further clarifying the criteria and the rationale behind the extension of preferential treatment to a number of developing countries similar to that provided to LDCs, as well as the possible systemic implications of these provisions.  As indicated at the 70th Session of the CTD, Brazil did not intend to question the actions of any Member granting preferential treatment.  However, Brazil believed that differentiation between developing countries was a cause for concern, and should be carefully considered in the context of the provisions and requirements of the covered agreements and the Enabling Clause.  His delegation looked forward to discussing this issue bilaterally, as well as at the next CTD meeting, if necessary.
The representative of Norway said that responses to Brazil's follow-up questions had been made available as a room document for the present meeting.  They would be circulated to Members in  due course.  She said that she wished to highlight some of the main points from the responses.  She firstly indicated that a translation would be made available in English of the recommendations made by an inter-Ministerial working group reviewing the Norwegian GSP scheme.  Second, she confirmed that the OECD's list of official development assistance (ODA) recipients was used as the basis for establishing the list of beneficiaries of Norway's GSP scheme.  Partly due to their former status as LDCs, special preferences had been maintained for Botswana and Namibia.  Third, she informed the Committee that when the decision was taken to extend the list of countries eligible for duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access beyond LDCs, a population criterion of 75 million was used because this was one of the UN criteria for LDC status.  As a fourth point, she noted that the Norwegian Aid for Trade Action Plan, launched in November 2007, gave an overview of existing cooperation and an outline for future priority action.  This included matters relating to regional trade and trade between developing countries.  Targeted efforts were being made to ensure that the LDCs and other low income countries made use of their DFQF access to the Norwegian market.  Finally, she said that efforts were also being made to ensure that updated and correct information was readily available.  In this regard, she indicated that copies of the Norwegian Aid for Trade Action Plan 2007, as well as folders relating to the GSP scheme, were available at the back of the room. 
&& The Representative of India said that his delegation was interested in the clarifications sought by Brazil on Norway's GSP scheme, particularly in view of the possible systemic implications of the provisions of the scheme.  After a preliminary reading of Norway's responses to Brazil's first set of questions, his delegation had identified three distinct criteria – coming from different organizations – used in the process of revising Norway's GSP scheme.  The first was the OECD's Development Assistance Committee (DAC) list of aid recipient countries.  The second was the UN's population criterion of 75 million.  Third, there were the selective recommendations of the study by the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs.  It was his delegation's hope that the amalgamation of these three criteria would eventually result in a process that was objective, non-discriminatory, and did not lead to differentiation between developing countries.  He observed that differentiation between developing countries was a cause for concern.  India was, therefore, particularly interested in further clarification of the criteria used for selection or exclusion of developing countries receiving preferential treatment.  The information provided by Norway so far was useful and would be reviewed by his delegation, which might have further comments at the next CTD meeting.
&& The Chairman sought clarification from the Indian representative as to whether India wished to pursue this matter bilaterally, or in the Committee.
&& The Representative of India said that the matter could be taken up bilaterally.
&& The Representative of Brazil said that he would like to have the opportunity to continue to discuss the issue in the CTD, if necessary.  While his delegation would be pursuing the matter bilaterally, he requested that the item remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.
&& The Representative of Pakistan said that he wished to highlight his delegation's systemic concerns with the criteria that had been used to differentiate between developing countries in Norway's GSP scheme.  He also expressed some doubt on the desirability of using several criteria from different sources in establishing a classification of countries.  He in particular sought further clarification from Norway on the utility of the UN population criterion of 75 million.  
&& The Chairman said that this item would appear on the agenda of the next CTD meeting.  In the time until the next meeting, he encouraged the concerned delegations to pursue the matter bilaterally.    
It was so agreed. 
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
-	PRESENTATION BY THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT (UNCTAD)
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would continue his informal consultations with Members to get a better idea as to how the Committee could continue to add value in its discussion on commodities.  He recalled that it had also been agreed at the last meeting that UNCTAD would be invited to the present meeting to provide a brief outline of the organization's mandate on commodities, in particular in light of the UNCTAD XII Conference and the resulting Accra Accord, as well as the work that the organization had been undertaking in this area since the Conference.  He was pleased that UNCTAD had accepted the invitation.  He introduced Mr. Samuel Gayi, Senior Economic Affairs  in UNCTAD's Special Unit on Commodities.
&& The Representative of UNCTAD said that the Accra Accord instructed UNCTAD's work on commodities to be undertaken around the organization's three pillars of activities, namely research and analysis, the intergovernmental process and technical cooperation.  Work was to be carried out in coordination with other international and regional actors, and relevant international commodity bodies.  The Accord called for UNCTAD to continue to play a key role in addressing the trade and development problems associated with the commodity economy.  This included all commodity sectors, including agriculture, forestry, fisheries, metals and minerals, and oil and gas.  UNCTAD was also to monitor developments and challenges in commodity markets and address links between international commodity trade and national development, particularly with regard to poverty reduction.  In addition, the organization was instructed to enhance its efforts to help commodity‑dependent developing countries to harness development gains from the current commodity boom, and to deal with trade and development problems related to commodity dependence.
He went on to discuss some of the specific activities that UNCTAD's mandate entailed.  Under the research and analysis pillar, analytical studies on commodity development and trade were to be prepared.  The organization would also undertake research on sustainable strategies and policies, including supply-side capacity, value addition and diversification.  With regard to technical cooperation and advisory services, UNCTAD aimed to help countries develop national commodity strategies.  The organization assisted countries in building supply-side capacity, and in moving up the value chain or diversifying.  Other areas of assistance included:  compliance with public, private, or international trade standards;  the improvement of access to commodity information and databases; human resource development and institutional development;  and the promotion and improvement of transparency and accountability, especially in extractive industries.  He noted that UNCTAD's assistance on the last two elements he had mentioned were of a demand-driven nature, in the sense that assistance was provided at the request of a member country.  He added that UNCTAD was developing commodity financing and risk management schemes, including commodity exchanges.  The organization had been instructed to avoid duplication, and to work in coordination with other relevant actors already active in these areas.
With regard to the intergovernmental process, he said that UNCTAD would continue its work on consensus building.  This included looking at ways to integrate commodity policies into national, regional and international development, as well as into poverty reduction strategies.  In addition, the organization would work in finding the most appropriate trade-related policies and instruments to resolve commodity problems.  Investment and financial policies for accessing financial resources for commodity-based development would also be considered.  He said that an institutional innovation coming out of the UNCTAD XII Conference was the establishment of the annual sessions of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts.  These Multi-Year Expert Meetings (MYEMs) on commodities aimed to provide practical and actionable outcomes for addressing the challenges relating to the long‑standing commodity trade and development issues identified in the Accra Accord.  They additionally aimed to assure development gains from the commodity boom.  Also with regard to the intergovernmental process, he said that UNCTAD was building multi-stakeholder partnerships with non-governmental organizations and civil society organizations as part of the its innovative approach to resolving commodity-related problems. 
Finally, he briefly turned to the institutional arrangements that had been put in place within UNCTAD for delivering the organization's work on commodities.  He informed the Committee in particular that a new Special Unit on Commodities had been established, which reported directly to the Secretary-General of UNCTAD.  
&& The Representative of Nigeria requested that UNCTAD's presentation be provided in writing to interested delegations.
&& The Chairman observed that UNCTAD had been given a mandate of primary importance in the area of commodities.  He proposed that the Committee agree to periodically invite UNCTAD to provide updates on the progress of its work in this area.  He believed that this would be a useful way for Members to be kept abreast of the commodities-related work taking place at UNCTAD.  More generally, he believed that UNCTAD's presentation of its work would help the CTD in its consideration of how it could henceforth treat the commodities issue.  He suggested that he continue his informal consultations with Members on this matter.  At the Committee's next meeting, he hoped to be in a position to propose a manner in which commodities could henceforth be treated in the CTD.  
It was so agreed.  
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The Council had since extended the deadline to its December 2008 meeting.
He recalled that in his report to the General Council in July 2008, he had informed the Council of the progress that had been made on this matter.  He had referred in particular to the usefulness of the small-group informal consultations that he had held, on the basis of which the proponents were able to revise their draft proposal on more than one occasion.  He now wished to further inform the Committee that he had since continued with his informal consultations.  This had allowed the proponents to further refine their draft proposal, which had now been circulated in document JOB(08)/103.  He noted that this document had only just been made available, and Members would clearly need some time before they would be in a position to make detailed comments.  Therefore, he did not plan to have a substantive discussion on the document at today's meeting.  In line with what he had outlined at earlier CTD meetings, his intention was to initially consider the text in an informal, open‑ended CTD meeting dedicated to the issue of transparency for preferential trade arrangements (PTAs), which he would call shortly.  That being said, he indicated that he would like to invite the proponents to introduce their document at the present meeting, as this would be useful to Members.
&& The Representative of Brazil said that the proponents' draft proposal built upon the elements and guidelines contained in a conceptual paper by Brazil and India circulated as document JOB(07)/142 in October 2007.  The draft proposal was the result of discussions between the original proponents, joined in the course of the year by the US and China as co-sponsors, and interested delegations in Geneva.  The draft proposal set out procedures for the consideration of transparency for PTAs similar to those contained in the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, but with the necessary adaptations due to the specific nature of the preferences granted and the schemes that supported them.  In drafting the proposal, the aim of the proponents had been to guarantee an appropriate level of transparency for the beneficiaries of preferential treatment, and the WTO membership in general, while avoiding disproportionate burdens on notifying Members.  He said that the proponents were presenting the draft proposal as a contribution to a greater degree of transparency in the WTO.  The proponents strongly supported all forms of transparency, not only for PTAs, and were confident that the General Council would know how best to formalize this and other initiatives concerning transparency.  He welcomed the Chairman's initiative to convene an informal, open-ended CTD meeting and, in that regard, indicated the proponents' readiness to discuss any aspects of the proposal.
&& The Representative of India said that the circulation of the draft proposal, after several rounds of informal consultations, was a clear pointer that significant progress had been made.  He expressed appreciation for the constructive engagement shown by Members in the informal consultations.  On the draft proposal, he noted that Brazil had succinctly elucidated some of its salient features.  He looked forward to discussing further details of the proposed PTA Transparency Mechanism in an informal, open-ended CTD meeting.  His delegation was confident that the proposed mechanism would address the systemic issue of transparency for a large set of trade arrangements which fell outside the ambit of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.
&& The Representative of the United States supported the interventions by Brazil and India.  She said that her delegation looked forward to continuing to work with the co-sponsors and other Members on this initiative.  Her delegation appreciated the work that had been undertaken thus far in advancing the proposed PTAs Transparency Mechanism towards a positive outcome.  She supported the Chairman's proposal to have the proponents' draft proposal considered in an informal, open-ended session of the CTD as soon as possible.
&& The Representative of China associated his delegation with the interventions by Brazil, India and the United States.  He believed that the proposed Transparency Mechanism for PTAs would benefit the multilateral trading system and the WTO membership.  While the circulation of the draft proposal was a significant step forward, he also called on the Committee to accelerate its work.  China was committed to working with Members to try to conclude the CTD's consideration of transparency for PTAs by the end of 2008.
&& The Representative of the European Communities said that her delegation welcomed enhanced transparency for all preferential arrangements, whether reciprocal or non-reciprocal.  The proposed Transparency Mechanism for PTAs was an important complement to the work that was being undertaken in the context of the RTAs Transparency Mechanism.  She pointed out that the decision to work on transparency for PTAs was the result of discussions that had taken place leading up to the adoption of the RTAs Transparency Mechanism.  Her delegation welcomed the fact that the proposed PTAs Transparency Mechanism would shed more light on the preferential schemes of both developed countries and developing countries.
She continued by saying that her delegation would need to have further discussions with the proponents on some aspects of their draft proposal.  For one thing, clarification was sought on the form of an eventual decision to establish a Transparency Mechanism for PTAs.  In addition, in order to gain a clearer idea of what could be expected from the mechanism in a practical sense, her delegation was in favour of seeing a mock factual presentation of a PTA.  She noted that the annual reporting on PTAs envisaged in the draft proposal implied significant efforts by notifying Members, and in this regard appreciated Brazil's comment that the mechanism should not create a disproportionate burden on notifying Members.  Finally, she expressed hope that the eventual implementation of the PTAs Transparency Mechanism would address some of the difficulties that the Committee had encountered in recent years in considering some notifications under the Enabling Clause, in particular those concerning GSP schemes.     
&& The Representative of Japan emphasized the importance of transparency for preferential treatment. She said that her delegation had been participating in the small-group, informal consultations called by the Chairman on the issue of PTA transparency, and looked forward to Members' discussion on the issue in an informal, open-ended CTD meeting.  
&& The Representative of Canada thanked the proponents for having taken into account her delegation's comments in the draft proposal.  She expressed support for the draft proposal. 
&& The Representative of Barbados welcomed the Chairman's initiative to have the draft proposal discussed in an informal, open-ended CTD meeting.  He said that he had one specific question at this time on the proposal.  In particular, he wished to know whether the proponents envisaged the proposed PTAs Transparency Mechanism to be applied on a provisional basis, as was currently the case for the RTAs Transparency Mechanism.   
&& The Representative of Pakistan expressed support for the draft proposal.  His delegation looked forward to discussing it in an informal, open-ended CTD meeting.
&& The Representative of Mexico said that her delegation was interested in discussing the proposal in more detail in an informal, open-ended CTD meeting.
&& The Representative of Chile said that his delegation looked forward to discussing the proposal further in an informal, open-ended meeting of the CTD.  He observed that his delegation had a number of questions on the draft proposal.  He firstly noted that his delegation shared a similar concern to that raised by Barbados concerning provisional application.  He also requested some elaboration on the logic and rationale behind the proposed PTAs Transparency Mechanism.  
&& The Representative of El Salvador said that his delegation had been participating in the informal consultations which had been called by the Chairman, and looked forward to having the draft proposal considered by the CTD in an informal, open-ended meeting.  His delegation was particularly interested in discussing the scope of the proposed mechanism.  He also supported the suggestion by the EC of the desirability of seeing a mock factual presentation of a PTA. 
&& The Representative of Costa Rica said that the subject matter of the draft proposal was important and relevant.  His delegation would make efforts to provide comments on the draft proposal at the informal, open-ended CTD meeting.
&& The Representative of Nigeria said that he supported the Chairman's initiative to hold an informal, open-ended CTD meeting to give Members the opportunity to have an in-depth discussion on the draft proposal. 
&& The Chairman said that the CTD would need to have a systematic discussion on several aspects of the draft proposal.  He did not wish to go into the details of the proposal at the present meeting.  He also made a distinction between the technical issues to be resolved, and broader political issues.
&& The Representative of Brazil believed that the proposed PTAs Transparency Mechanism, once implemented, would help the CTD in overcoming the difficulties it had recently encountered in considering GSP schemes.  It was his understanding that a mock factual presentation of a PTA was already in the process of being put together.  He felt that this would help clarify some aspects of the draft proposal.  On the question concerning the nature of the application of the proposed mechanism, he observed that the mandate given to the CTD by the General Council did not foresee a provisional application.  With regard to the relationship between the proposed PTAs Transparency Mechanism and the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, he noted that differences between the two stemmed from the fundamental differences in the nature of PTAs and RTAs.  Additionally, the proponents had in their draft proposal taken into account the experiences gained in the application of the RTAs Transparency Mechanism. 
&& The Representative of the European Communities, referring to the observation made by Brazil concerning the mandate given to the CTD by the General Council, noted that the mandate did not even specifically mention that a mechanism for considering PTA transparency be established.  She added that her delegation considered issues relating to the implementation of the proposed mechanism to be an integral part of the technical work that needed to be completed.   
&& The Chairman said that important progress had been made on this matter.  He reminded Members that he would need to report to the General Council in December 2008.  It was his hope that the CTD would have come to a decision by then. In the time remaining until the December General Council meeting, he would continue to work with Members.  As he had already indicated, his intention was to call an informal, open-ended CTD meeting to consider the proponents' draft proposal.  The matter would also be taken up at the next formal meeting of the CTD.  
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  He recalled that the CTD had to date undertaken two of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision. 
&& The Representative of Lesotho, on behalf of the LDC Group, urged those developing countries in a position to provide DFQF market access to come forward and declare their DFQF packages, accompanied by simple and transparent rules of origin.  The Group expressed appreciation to those Members that had already taken steps to provide LDCs with DFQF market access, and asked them to ensure that their rules of origin were also simple and transparent.  
&& The Committee took note of the intervention by Lesotho.
OTHER BUSINESS 
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that the Committee would revert to the matter raised by the EC concerning the change in the notification status of the GCC Customs Union from Article XXIV of GATT 1994 to the Enabling Clause.  He informed Members that, after the last meeting, Saudi Arabia had circulated a communication in document WT/COMTD/66, providing replies to the questions raised by some Members on the GCC Customs Union.
&& The Representative of the European Communities said that, after having taken careful note of the replies provided by Saudi Arabia, his delegation could only reiterate its concerns concerning the change in the notification status of the GCC Customs Union.  He observed that Members' decision concerning the provision under which to notify an RTA should be driven by appropriate legal considerations.  The understanding of his delegation was that paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause did not provide the appropriate legal basis justifying the formation of a customs union.  In particular, his delegation believed that the Enabling Clause could not be invoked to justify the reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures, which was an essential component of a customs union.  His delegation's view was that the appropriate provision under which to notify a customs union was Article XXIV of GATT 1994.  In this light, he indicated that further discussions on this issue should take place in the CRTA, which his delegation saw as the appropriate forum for the consideration of customs unions.
&& The Representative of the United States said that her delegation, like the EC, was of the view that paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause did not provide the legal basis for the notification of a customs union.  Her delegation continued to have concerns about the change in the notification of the GCC Customs Union to be exclusively under the Enabling Clause.  The US did not support moving forward with the process of reviewing the agreement until clarification had been obtained from the GCC member countries.  She said that Saudi Arabia had observed at the last CTD meeting that the GCC countries were all developing countries, and that the GCC Customs Union was a regional agreement for the mutual reduction or elimination of tariffs.  It followed, in Saudi Arabia's view, that the agreement fell within paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause and that it was appropriate for the Parties to notify the agreement under the Enabling Clause.  While this interpretation was still under discussion, she noted that the Enabling Clause – in contrast to GATT Article XXIV – allowed for action inconsistent with Article I of the GATT only.  In the event that a regional arrangement under paragraph 2(c) resulted in measures inconsistent with other provisions of GATT 1994, that inconsistency would generally not be excused unless the regional arrangement were a free‑trade agreement (FTA) or a customs union covered by GATT Article XXIV.
She continued by saying that, upon review of the WTO tariff bindings of the GCC countries, it appeared that four out of six countries had bindings that were below the common external tariff of the GCC.  She noted that the application of tariffs that exceeded a Member's bindings would be inconsistent with a Member's obligations under GATT Article II, unless otherwise permitted under the GATT 1994.  It  appeared, therefore, that if the GCC countries sought to apply tariffs beyond their bindings, their agreement would need to be an FTA or customs union consistent with Article XXIV and, accordingly, would need to be promptly notified in accordance with paragraph 7(a) of that Article.  Her delegation encouraged the GCC to submit its notification under GATT Article XXIV, in accordance with paragraph 7(a) of that Article.  Her delegation also requested that this item be further discussed at the upcoming meeting of the CRTA, and be added to the agenda for that meeting as necessary.
&& The Representative of Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the GCC countries, noted that the interventions by the EC and the US at the present meeting raised issues that had not been raised previously.  He requested that the EC and the US provide their comments in writing for further consideration by the GCC countries. He added that the GCC countries maintained the position that they had the right to notify the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause, and did not agree that the matter should be referred to the CRTA.    
&& The Representative of Kuwait supported the intervention by Saudi Arabia.  He said that, at the last CTD meeting, Saudi Arabia had given a proper legal response to the questions raised by some Members on the change in the notification status of the GCC.  His delegation wished to see this matter closed at the present meeting.  This would allow the GCC countries to turn their attention to the issue of providing the Secretariat with the necessary data that would permit the preparation of the factual presentation on the GCC Customs Union.  
&& The Representative of Brazil said that this matter raised systemic concerns.  He requested that those Members that had raised questions on the change in the notification status of the GCC Customs Union put them in writing and circulate them for the benefit of the membership.  He was particularly interested in these Members' views regarding the legal status of customs unions notified under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.  He observed that MERCOSUR, a customs union, had been notified under this provision. 
&& The Chairman noted that there had been requests for the questions raised by some Members on this matter to be put in writing.  With regard to the view expressed that the matter should be considered in the CRTA, he observed that it was for the CRTA to make this decision.  He indicated, however, that the CTD would need to revert to this matter at its next meeting. 
It was so agreed.
&& The Representative of UNDP said that she wished to inform the Committee of a recent study that had been undertaken under the auspices of UNDP, which was believed to be of interest and relevance to the work of the CTD, particularly in the context of Aid for Trade.  The study – which had been prepared by Stephen Kosack of Brown University – was titled "Trade for Poverty Reduction – the Role of Trade Policy in Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers".  The objective of the study was to assess the level of integration of trade policy in countries' Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs).  A total of 72 PRSPs completed by 54 countries between 2000 and early 2008 had been examined.  The general conclusion was quite positive.  The author was of the view that PRSPs were playing an important role in trade policy.  At the same time, the author believed that there was room for improvement in the process of integrating trade into poverty reduction.  She said that UNDP saw a clear link between this study and the Aid for Trade agenda.  In this light, UNDP was willing to facilitate a presentation of the study in an appropriate WTO body.      
&& The Chairman said that he would consult on how UNDP's offer could be accommodated.   
The meeting was adjourned.
__________
WT/COMTD/M/71 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/71 	Page  PAGE 11



 

 

 

 



