WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/57
5 July 2006


(06-3243)


Committee on Trade and Development
Fifty-Seventh Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 11 MAY 2006

Chairman:  Mr. Faizel Ismail (South Africa) 


 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778811" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC139778811 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778812" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC139778812 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc139778813" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc139778813 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc139778814" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc139778814 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778815" C.	Report on the 39th session of the Joint Advisory Group on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG/(XXXIX)/208)	 PAGEREF _TOC139778815 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778816" D.	Notifications Under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC139778816 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778817" -	Communication from the European Communities on the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC139778817 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778818" -	Communication from the United States on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, the Protocol to Amend the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC139778818 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778819" -	Communication from Japan on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN And the People's  Republic of China and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC139778819 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778820" -	Generalized System of Preferences - Notification by the European Communities (WT/COMTD/N/4/Add.3 – WT/COMTD/57)	 PAGEREF _TOC139778820 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778821" -	Communication from Brazil on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC139778821 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778822" -	Communication from China on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC139778822 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778823" E.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC139778823 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778824" -	Presentation by the International Coffee Organization	 PAGEREF _TOC139778824 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778825" F.	Review of Steps Taken to Provide Duty-Free and Quota-Free Market Access to Least-Developed Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC139778825 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778826" G.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC139778826 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778827" -	Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/148)	 PAGEREF _TOC139778827 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778828" H.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC139778828 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC139778829" annex	 PAGEREF _TOC139778829 \H 20



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in document WTO/AIR/2803 circulated on 13 April 2006 and a revision issued on 5 May 2006.  
He said he wished to make some observations on the draft agenda.  He firstly noted that the report on the 39th session of the Joint Advisory Group (JAG) on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC) would be presented to the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) at the present meeting and that Ambassador Mary Whelan of  Ireland, Chairperson of the 39th session of the JAG, and Mr. Denis Bélisle, Executive Director of the ITC, were present for that purpose.  He also recalled what had been decided at the last meeting with regard to the CTD's consideration of the agenda item relating to paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration.  In particular, the Committee had agreed that its next review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations, for which the Secretariat would revise its background paper WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1, would take place at the 58th Session on 6 July 2006.  The item was, therefore, not included on the agenda for the present meeting. 
&& The Committee adopted the agenda.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
REPORT ON THE 39TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG/(XXXIX)/208)
&& The Chairman invited Ambassador Mary Whelan, Chairperson of the 39th session of the JAG, to introduce the report.  
Ambassador Mary Whelan, the Chairperson of the 39th session of the JAG made the following statement: 
"Mr. Chairman, distinguished Members,
The Joint Advisory Group on the International Trade Centre held its 39th session from 24 to 28 April 2006 and the report of the meeting is contained in document ITC/AG/(XXXIX)/208.  It is with pleasure that I submit this report to you this morning with a few remarks on the proceedings.
In the opening statements, the Director-General of WTO and the Secretary General of UNCTAD addressed delegates on the importance of ITC being an integral part of the 'trade triangle'.  They noted that ITC's work with the private sector would help to ensure that developing countries benefited fully from the opportunities presented by the multilateral trading system and the outcome of the Doha Round of negotiations.  
In his statement to the Group, Mr. Bélisle said that the outgoing ITC management team was proud to have contributed to increasing the delivery of ITC's technical assistance by over 80 per cent in the past five years and to have provided programmes, tools and publications that were in high demand throughout the developing world.  
The JAG congratulated Mr. Bélisle for his excellent leadership and expressed full confidence in the ability of the new senior management team to take the organization forward.  Countries requested more ITC programmes that have a real impact on reducing poverty, such as South-South trade, service exporting, export-led poverty reduction and initiatives to mainstream women in trade development.  Many representatives emphasized the important role that ITC should play within the framework of the Aid for Trade initiative as it was at the heart of the ITC's mandate.
Reflecting the widespread confidence in ITC, a number of government representatives announced voluntary contributions to the ITC.  On behalf of the Group I would like to express our thanks to the Governments of Canada, China, Denmark, France, Germany, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the European Commission for their support.
Under 'Other Business' the representative of the Government of Denmark recalled that the final report of the external evaluation of ITC had been completed and Denmark was in a position to hand over the follow-up on the evaluation to the JAG and to ITC Management.  The Group invited ITC to report back regularly on progress made in implementing the recommendations addressed to it.  ITC's Executive Director Designate, Ms. Patricia Francis, indicated her intention to put in place a 'transition team' to review the implications of each of the recommendations and propose concrete measures for their implementation.  The transition team would help articulate ITC's strategic orientation and future work programme by September 2006 in preparation for a discussion at the Informal JAG meeting later in the year.
A second item discussed under 'Other Business' was the ITC Strategic Framework for the biennium 2008-2009.  ITC's Executive Director observed that ITC had received a request from UN Headquarters in New York to submit a draft of its strategic framework in consultation with its Governing Body.  It was agreed that the proposed document would be sent to members of the JAG for their eventual comments.  I understand that a number of comments were received and have been incorporated in the strategic framework document.
The Executive Director and I are available to reply to any questions from Members.
Thank you Mr. Chairman."
&& The representative of Egypt said he had two questions.  The first related to evaluation.  He said an evaluation of technical assistance was also ongoing in the WTO, and he wondered whether anything could be learned from ITC's experience.  Second, he noted that the JAG Chairperson had mentioned the importance of Aid for Trade in ITC's work. He inquired about the format used by ITC in its work on Aid for Trade.
&& The representative of the Philippines, on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), said he did not have any particular questions or comments at this time.  He said ASEAN encouraged ITC to continue with its good work.  ASEAN also wished Mr. Bélisle good luck in his future endeavours.
&& The representative of the United States said she hoped the US would one day be one of the major contributors to the ITC.  The US would continue to remain active in substance on a number of initiatives.  She said her delegation had still not examined the JAG report and looked forward to doing so.  She wished to highlight that the US had participated in the TradeMap and Product Map programmes which had helped facilitate the non-agricultural market access (NAMA) negotiations, and in programmes sponsoring services assessments in various countries which had helped facilitate the services negotiations.  Her delegation wished to see the ITC continue to provide support to WTO Members.  She paid tribute to the leadership of Mr. Bélisle over the past several years.
&& The representative of Pakistan said her country was a beneficiary of a number of ITC activities and had found them very useful.  Her delegation acknowledged the efforts of Mr. Bélisle and his team in increasing ITC's delivery of services by over 80 per cent in recent years.
&& The representative of Zambia acknowledged the work undertaken by the ITC, particularly in LDCs.  He hoped that collaboration with the ITC would continue, particularly in the area of Aid for Trade.  He thanked Mr. Bélisle for his efforts.
&& The representative of the European Communities said his delegation had no specific points to raise on the JAG report.  He said his delegation had a high opinion of the work of the ITC and acknowledged the achievements of Mr. Bélisle and his team.
&& The representative of Ecuador said her country, and in particular the private sector, had been a beneficiary of ITC activities.  Her delegation wished to thank the donor countries and the ITC.  She noted that paragraph 12 of the JAG report said that development would come from four key areas:  market access, flexibility, Aid for Trade and better public-private sector connections.  In this regard, it was important to highlight that questions relating to market access were not in the hands of the ITC but in the hands of some countries that could offer greater access to products from developing countries.  With regard to flexibility, she said that different countries had different ways of seeing development and it was necessary to take into account countries' various needs and interests.  On the Aid for Trade initiative, she said her delegation did not want it to be a competitive process between countries.  Aid for Trade should also not reduce ambition for greater market access or go against the objectives of the Doha Round.  Finally, the relationship between the public and private sector was in the opinion of her delegation a way of creating effective synergies for development.  She thanked Mr. Bélisle for his efforts.
&& The representative of Guatemala said her country was a beneficiary of ITC activities.  She thanked the ITC for its efforts and encouraged the organization to continue with its highly effective work.
&& The representative of Senegal said his country had benefited from the support of the ITC.  He paid tribute to Mr. Bélisle and wished him success in his future endeavours.
&& The representative of Honduras said his country was a beneficiary of ITC activities.  His delegation encouraged the ITC to continue with its important work for developing countries.
&& The representative of India commended the useful work done by the ITC and in particular Mr. Bélisle.  The work of the ITC and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) was very useful for developing countries grappling with the development component of trade liberalization.
&& The representative of El Salvador thanked the ITC for the support it had provided to his country.  He hoped the ITC would continue with its good work.
&& The representative of Uganda said his country was a beneficiary of the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme (JITAP).  He added his voice to those that had thanked the ITC, and wished Mr. Bélisle success in his future endeavours.
Mr. Denis Bélisle, the Executive Director of the ITC, said he wished to first respond to the questions from Egypt.  On the question relating to evaluations, he said that in the case of the ITC this had been a long exercise.  The objective of the evaluation was to make the ITC function better.  It included 34 specific recommendations which presented opportunities for the enhancement of the organization.  His suggestion to the WTO when undertaking a similar exercise was to cooperate to the maximum extent with the evaluators and insist that they make specific recommendations.  On the question relating to Aid for Trade, he said the ITC was created solely for  this purpose.  Aid for Trade was, therefore, not a new activity for the organization.  The ITC was a small organization and was aware that its work was more effective when done in collaboration with others.  Collaboration was undertaken mainly with UNCTAD and the WTO, but also with other organizations including the World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and WIPO.  He agreed that the Aid for Trade initiative could not be a substitute for enhanced market access.  He also emphasized the importance of a private sector that had the skills and know-how to take advantage of market access opportunities.  The ITC was following very closely the discussions relating to Aid for Trade and the enhanced Integrated Framework (IF).  The ITC believed that the IF was a tool that worked, but could work better, especially if more funding was provided.  It would be welcome if the Aid for Trade initiative could bring in the necessary funding.  He thanked delegations for their support to the ITC and asked them to continue to give their support to the new senior management team.
&& The Committee took note of the report on the 39th session of the JAG and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption.  It expressed its support for the work of the ITC and its appreciation for the efforts of Mr. Bélisle.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	&& Communication from THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES ON THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.2)
-	&& Communication from THE UNITED STATES ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, THE PROTOCOL TO AMEND THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.3)
-	&& Communication from JAPAN ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S  REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman recalled that the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China was notified to the CTD at the 52nd Session in February 2005 and that the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China was notified to the CTD at the 54th Session in October 2005. 
He said that communications raising questions on the notifications had been received from the EC, the US and Japan.  The communications had been circulated as documents WT/COMTD/51/Add.2, Add.3 and Add.4 respectively.  He suggested that the three communications be treated together.  
&& The representative of the Philippines, on behalf of the ASEAN member countries, said that  senior officials from ASEAN and China had concluded a meeting in Hanoi, Viet Nam the day before the present meeting of the CTD.  The replies to the questions from the EC, the US and Japan were now being put in their final form.  They would be made available very shortly.
&& The representative of China said he wished to associate himself with the intervention made by the Philippines.
&& The representative of the United States thanked ASEAN and China for the information provided.  She said her delegation wished to retain the item on the agenda for the next CTD meeting and looked forward to receiving the replies as soon as possible so that capitals would have sufficient time to review them in preparation for the next meeting. 
&& The representative of the European Communities thanked ASEAN and China for the information provided and said his delegation awaited the replies with great interest.  He hoped they could be provided early so that delegations would have enough time to prepare for the next meeting.
&& The representative of Japan thanked ASEAN and China and said that his delegation also looked forward  to receiving the responses as soon as possible. 
&& The representative of China said his delegation had taken note of the request from the representative of the US that an item relating to the ASEAN-China notifications be placed on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  However, his delegation did not believe this was required.  The notifications had been on the CTD's agenda for a long time.  China and ASEAN had been very patient and had allowed enough time for Members to raise questions.  He said that the written questions had been received quite some time after the notifications had been made.  According to China's understanding of the procedures under the Enabling Clause, his delegation could not accept placing  an item relating to the ASEAN-China notifications on the agenda of the next CTD meeting.
&& The representative of the United States said she was surprised by the intervention by China, since the item relating to the ASEAN-China notifications was already on the CTD's agenda and the questions had been submitted to the Committee under this agenda item.  It was not an issue of putting something new on the agenda, but simply reverting to an item that was already there.  The US could not accept that this item should not be on the agenda for the next meeting.  
&& The representative of the European Communities said his delegation also wanted the item to remain on the agenda for the next meeting of the CTD.  This would allow the Committee an  opportunity to review and discuss the responses that would be submitted by ASEAN and China.
&& The representative of Japan said he wished to associate himself with the interventions of the US and the EC.
&& The Chairman said he would consult with the parties after the responses by ASEAN and China had been provided.  If the Members that had submitted the questions were satisfied with the responses, then there may not be a need for the issue to be discussed in the CTD.  Members were, however, also free to raise the issue during a future CTD meeting.  The consultations would then have to deal with the matter of how to treat the issue in the CTD.     
&& The representative of the United States said she appreciated the basic elements of the Chairman's proposal and welcomed the suggestion that consultations be held.  She said her concern was that an item concerning the notifications by ASEAN and China was already on the agenda.  Her delegation had been expecting responses to the written questions submitted to be provided by ASEAN and China at the present meeting.  The Committee had been told that the responses were being prepared and would be ready soon.  The Committee should, therefore, revert to the agenda item at its next meeting.
&& The representative of Switzerland said the item should remain on the agenda until the process of transparency had been fully satisfied.
&& The Chairman said that ASEAN and China were currently in the process of preparing responses to the written questions that had been submitted.  He proposed to wait to see whether the responses were satisfactory to the Members that had submitted the questions.  If this was not the case, he would be available for consultations with the parties concerned about how the issue could be addressed.
&& The representative of the United States said she had taken note of the Chairman's proposal.  Her delegation would leave the issue for the moment, but without prejudice to its position.  She said she would consult with her capital on this procedural point and would also consult with the Chairman on the position of her delegation.
&& The representative of the European Communities said his delegation would be happy to participate in consultations before the next CTD meeting.  The expectation of his delegation was that the responses by ASEAN and China would be circulated to the CTD and discussed by the Committee as part of the transparency process that Members had been engaged in.
&& The representative of China said his delegation had taken note of the interventions by previous speakers.  He said that China's concerns on this agenda item should also be recognized by the Committee.  His delegation had procedural concerns, though different from those of the EC and the US.  He said he would consult with his capital to see how the matter could be dealt with.
&& The Chairman said he recognized China's concern that the written questions had been submitted some time after the notifications had been made and that the notifications had been on the agenda for a relatively long period of time.  He also recognized that the CTD was committed to the principle of transparency.  As Chairman, he was suggesting that the parties attempt to resolve the matter before the next meeting in the manner that he had already described. 
It was so agreed. 
-	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES - NOTIFICATION BY THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/N/4/ADD.3 – WT/COMTD/57)
-	&& Communication from BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)
-	&& Communication from CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
&& The Chairman said the notification by the EC on its revised GSP scheme had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/4/Add.3.  The texts of the legal instruments on which the revised GSP scheme were founded had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/57.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil and China and had been circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 and Add.2 respectively.  He understood that India had also submitted written questions at the present meeting.  He invited the EC to introduce its notification.
&& The representative of the European Communities said the EC's revised GSP scheme came into force on 1 January 2006 for a three-year period until the end of December 2008.  The new GSP scheme was made up of two legislative pieces:  Council Regulation No 980/2005 of 27 June 2005 and Commission Decision (2005/924/EC) of 21 December 2005 on the list of the beneficiary countries qualifying for the special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance.
He said the EC's GSP scheme was the system of preferential trading arrangements through which the EC extended preferential access to its markets to developing countries.  The EC's GSP was the most widely used of all developed-country GSP systems.  The volume of EC imports from developing countries under the GSP was greater than the combined volumes of imports under the US, Canadian and Japanese GSP systems.  In 2005, EC imports under the GSP totalled €43 billion.
There were five sets of arrangements under the EC's previous GSP scheme: the general arrangement, the 'Everything but Arms' arrangement for LDCs, and three special incentives which granted additional tariff preferences for countries committed to fighting drug production and trafficking, and to countries committed to promoting labour rights and environmental standards.
The revised GSP system was designed to be simpler, more transparent and more stable.  Since 1 January 2006, there were three arrangements in place instead of five.  The general arrangement was available to all developing countries without any conditions.  The coverage of the general arrangement had  been increased by 300 products, mostly in the agriculture and fishery sectors.  The 'Everything but Arms' arrangement for LDCs remained unchanged.  Finally, a new GSP incentive for sustainable development and good governance – the 'GSP-plus' – had been introduced.  It provided duty-free and quota-free access for approximately 90 per cent of exports from beneficiary countries. 
In order to benefit from GSP-plus, countries had to meet a number of criteria.  For one, they had to have ratified and effectively implemented core UN and ILO conventions on core human and labour rights and conventions related to good governance and the protection of the environment.  They also had to demonstrate that their economies were "dependent and vulnerable".  This would include countries with poorly diversified economies, small economies, landlocked countries and small islands.  The dependence criterion was met when the five largest sections of a country's GSP-covered exports to the EC represented more than 75 per cent of its total GSP-covered exports.  A country was considered vulnerable if its GSP-covered exports represented less than one per cent of total EC imports under the GSP.
On the subject of graduation, he said certain products from GSP beneficiary countries could be removed from the GSP scheme if countries became highly competitive in the EC market.  This was a sign that these products no longer needed the GSP to boost the volume of exports.  Graduation was, therefore, not a penalty, but an indication that the GSP had successfully performed its function, at least in relation to the country and product in question.  This ensured that the GSP focused on the countries most in need and helped them play a greater role in international trade. Changes had been made to the graduation mechanism to make it simpler.  The previous system, which had three complex criteria, had been replaced with a single straightforward criterion:  share of the Community market expressed as a share of exports from GSP countries.  The share in question was 15 per cent of exports.
&& The Chairman inquired whether those Members which had submitted written questions on the EC's notification wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Brazil said his delegation was interested in receiving responses from the EC to the questions it had submitted.  His delegation expected the responses to be as comprehensive and detailed as the questions required.
&& The representative of China said the questions raised by his delegation were self-explanatory.  China also shared an interest in the questions submitted by Brazil and India.  This was not only for reasons of transparency but also because of the impact the EC's revised GSP scheme could potentially have on the multilateral trading system.  His delegation looked forward to receiving written replies from the EC.   
&& The representative of India said his delegation looked forward to receiving responses as soon as possible to the questions it had submitted.  His delegation also shared interest in the questions submitted by Brazil and China.  In order to make the response process more efficient his delegation had attempted not to duplicate their questions.
&& The representative of Guatemala said that the EC in its notification had identified two legal instruments relating to its revised GSP scheme.  Council Regulation No 980/2005 of 27 June 2005 gave detailed and precise information on the scheme.  Commission Decision (2005/924/EC) of 21 December 2005 provided a list of the beneficiary countries qualifying for the GSP-plus arrangement, which included Guatemala.  Guatemala's eligibility to participate in the GSP-plus arrangement had been confirmed through an assessment of the effective implementation of the main conventions on human and labour rights and conventions related to good governance and the protection of the environment.  The special treatment granted by the EC to imports from Guatemala was an important element of the economic relationship between the two parties.  Her delegation hoped the preferences would in the future be enhanced to give more certainty, stability and more market access opportunities to exports from Guatemala.
&& The representative of the European Communities said he would first respond to the questions submitted by Brazil in document WT/COMD/57/Add.1.  In response to the first question relating to the provision of figures on EC imports from GSP beneficiaries on a monthly and annual basis, he said that given the size and the complexity of the data concerned, the EC could on a bilateral basis provide monthly and annual figures in value (in Euros) and in quantity of imports covered by each arrangement of the EC GSP by beneficiary and by product (tariff line).  The second question from Brazil related to statistical requirements set by Regulation No 980/2005.  In this regard, he said the statistical requirements were set by the provisions of article 14.6 of Council Regulation No 980/2005 under which tariff preferences would be removed on the basis of the most recent COMEXT data.  The production of the COMEXT statistics on GSP trade was based on statistical data provided by EU Member States and collected by Eurostat.  These data were available on bilateral request.
He said the third question from Brazil concerned the removal of tariff preferences on products in Section IV of EC Regulation No 2658/87 (prepared foodstuffs; beverages; spirits and vinegar; tobacco and manufactures and tobacco substitutes).  The response of the EC was that the average value of EC imports from Brazil included in Section IV and covered by the EC GSP general arrangement enjoyed by Brazil represented 22.4 per cent of the value of EC imports of the same products from all GSP beneficiaries over three consecutive years (2001-2003).  As this figure was above the 15 per cent threshold set by article 14.1 of Council Regulation No 980/2005, tariff preferences for these products from Brazil had to be removed.  With regard to the fourth question on why the EC chose to use a graduation system that affected entire sections of the Harmonized System (HS), he said the new GSP scheme including its graduation mechanism had been designed to be simpler, more transparent and fully objective.  In particular, the 34 GSP-specific sectors set under the previous GSP regulation were no longer utilized and had been replaced by the twenty-first sections of the Common Customs Tariff of Council Regulation No 980/2005 which reflected the HS methodology.   
The fifth question from Brazil asked why the EC had decreased the graduation threshold of 25 per cent to 15 per cent.  He said the new GSP scheme including its graduation mechanism had been designed to be simpler, more transparent and fairer.  Under the previous GSP scheme, tariff preferences were removed on the basis of three different criteria, including the share of preferential imports, a development index and an export-specialization index.  These complex criteria had been replaced with a single straightforward criterion under the new GSP scheme, namely the share of the EC market as expressed as a share of preferential imports.  The sixth question sought information on the reasons for removing the mechanism of review of the graduation system.  He said the revised GSP scheme was designed to be more stable, providing predictability for importers and exporters.  As far as graduation was concerned, this implied that, as set by article 14.3 of Regulation No 980/2005, the removal of sections from the GSP scheme would apply as from 1 January 2006 until 31 December 2008.  However, as provided under Article 28.3 of the same regulation, the GSP Committee would examine the effects of the current scheme, on the basis of a report from the Commission covering the period from 1 January 2006.  This report would cover all preferential arrangements including changes in export trends and would be presented in time for discussion on the second GSP implementing regulation which would start on 1 January 2009.
The seventh question from Brazil requested the EC to provide background information on how the criteria to identify "vulnerable" countries were decided.  He said he had already discussed this point earlier and would therefore not repeat himself.  With regard to the eighth question on the criteria used to determine the sensitivity of products, he said the EC took decisions regarding the sensitivity of products after intensive consultation between Member States which took into account the situation of products in the respective industries.  The EC decisions were reflected in Annex II of the list of products included in each of the GSP arrangements.
&& The representative of the European Communities said he wished to move on to respond to the questions submitted by China in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.2.  He said he had answered China's first question when responding to the sixth question from Brazil.  China's second question related to rules of origin and whether China's products could enjoy GSP treatment based on origin accumulation within APEC and the ASEAN-China grouping.  He said that at present there were three regional groups benefiting from regional cumulation.  These were ASEAN, the Central American Common Market (CACM) together with the Andean Community, and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).   
In response to China's third question, he said there was no transitional arrangement which would continue processing applications made under the previous GSP scheme for the special incentive for the protection of the environment.  However, under the GSP-plus arrangement, two of the conventions to be ratified and effectively implemented, namely the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species and the Convention on Biological Diversity, included provisions relating to the protection of tropical forests.  China's fourth question concerned requests for information.  He said the EC could on bilateral request provide monthly and annual figures of imports covered by each arrangement of the EU GSP by beneficiary and by product (tariff line).  As far as the special arrangement for LDCs was concerned, all 'dutiable' products with the exception of Chapter 93 (arms and ammunition) were included.  The arrangement granted duty-free and quota-free access to the EC market.  Full liberalization of sugar and rice would be phased in during a transition period.  Duties on those two products would be gradually reduced until duty-free access was granted for sugar at the latest by 1 July 2009 and for rice at the latest by 1 September 2009.  In the meantime, the EC had offered immediate and real market access to the 50 LDCs through the creation of duty-free quotas for sugar and rice.  These quotas had increased annually.  He said that 9,776 products (tariff lines) imported from LDCs out of the 9,840 tariff lines of the Common Customs Tariff in 2005 (99.4 per cent) were covered by the 'Everything but Arms' arrangement. In trade value, this amount represented €15.88 billion in 2005. 
&& The representative of Norway said the Norwegian GSP scheme was in the process of being revised.  The revision aimed to simplify procedures and make information more easily available to interested exporting countries.  A study on the Norwegian preferential system had been carried out by the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs, which was an independent agency.  This study, which was without prejudice to the outcome of the revision process, was available electronically.  A working group in the government was in the process of identifying possible proposals for simplification and improved information procedures.  The conclusions were expected to be reached by the end of the year.  The Committee would be notified as soon as possible thereafter. 
&& The representative of India inquired whether it would be possible to receive responses from the EC at the present meeting to the questions his delegation had submitted.  Otherwise, his delegation would be satisfied to receive written responses at a later date.   
&& The representative of the European Communities said his delegation had only just received the questions from India and would therefore provide written responses at a later stage.   
&& The Committee took note of the EC's notification and of all interventions. 
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
-&& 	PRESENTATION BY THE INTERNATIONAL COFFEE ORGANIZATION 
&& The Chairman said that based on the discussion that took place under this agenda item at the previous meeting of the CTD, an invitation to make a presentation to the Committee had been extended to the International Coffee Organization (ICO).  He was pleased to inform the Committee that the ICO had accepted the invitation and that a representative of the ICO was in attendance at the meeting.  He introduced Mr. Pablo Dubois, who was the Head of Operations at ICO.  He invited Mr. Dubois to make his presentation.
In his presentation, the representative of the International Coffee Organization highlighted that coffee was one of the world's most important traded commodities and that many countries were heavily dependent on it.  He reviewed the development of the world coffee market in the last 25 years, and in particular outlined experiences under the export quota system period from 1980 to 1989, the free market period from 1990 onwards and the coffee price crisis which began in 2000.  In spite of the evidence of higher producer returns under a policy of international supply management, he observed that today's political, economic and technical conditions ruled this out as a realistic option.  The challenge was to improve the situation without overt market intervention.  He pointed to a number of areas where action was possible both with respect to national policies and international cooperation.  These included information and guidance, diversification, adding value to coffee, competing on quality rather than on price, capacity building and market development.  He also summarized a number of ICO activities relating to the setting of basic quality standards, the dissemination of statistical data and information, technical studies and seminars, coffee development projects and the promotion of consumption.  The full presentation made by the representative of the ICO is reproduced in the Annex.
&& The representative of Ecuador wondered whether specific examples of tariff escalation and of powerful companies that restricted competition could be given.  She said that Ecuador had great difficulty in obtaining market access, regardless of the quality of the coffee it produced.  Her delegation was interested in knowing whether there were any projects being undertaken by the ICO to promote alternatives to the production of coffee.  
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation recognized the difficulties faced by countries that were dependent on primary commodities such as coffee.  The presentation by the representative of ICO illustrated that the conditions in commodity markets contributed to the inherent volatility in commodity prices.  Though the ICO did not have a role in managing markets, her delegation believed the organization could do more to assist producers in managing the consequences of unpredictable market conditions.  In that context, her delegation saw a role for a rejuvenated, reformed ICO that strengthened its orientation towards freely functioning markets and that would devise and implement programmes to help coffee farmers improve quality, efficiency and access to markets.  She said the United States re-joined the ICO because the organization was seen as a valuable forum in which the US could work with its trading partners, the private sector and non-governmental organizations to address the full range of issues affecting coffee production, trade and consumption.  The US would work with the ICO to help ensure that the organization played a key role in the coffee sector and was increasingly effective in assisting the primary commodity exporting countries' understanding and adaptation to market conditions.
&& The representative of Brazil said his delegation appreciated the work undertaken by the ICO.  Brazilian coffee producers had been significantly affected by the price crash in recent years.  They also had serious concerns about tariff peaks and tariff escalation.  He wondered whether the representative of the ICO could elaborate on the effects of tariff peaks and tariff escalation on coffee producers.
&& The representative of Angola said his country had been one of the main coffee producing nations in 1973 and 1974, but the situation had since changed. He wondered whether the ICO was assisting his country in any way.
&& The representative of Pakistan inquired about the objective of the ICO's price-fixing function, since coffee growers did not significantly benefit from it.
&& The representative of the ICO said the organization did not operate a regulatory system because such a system was not feasible at the present time and under present conditions.  However, there were many other areas in which international cooperation could work effectively within the framework of the ICO.  Examples included the promotion and dissemination of sustainability initiatives, the provision of information and projects under very favourable terms for coffee producers.  He welcomed the intervention of the United States.  The US had an important contribution to make to the ICO and had one of the most dynamic markets.  The specialty sector in the US was a model to many other countries in terms of successfully marketing value-added coffees.  The US Agency for International Development had devoted considerable resources to support projects in some of the affected countries. He said the ICO had recently published a study on the tariffs that affected coffee. The study identified the countries for which problems occurred.  The ICO had also prepared another study which had not yet been published.  The second study, which would be published shortly, looked not only at the question of tariffs but also identified new markets for coffee producers.  He said the ICO had recently got a project approved with funding from the Common Fund for Commodities for coffee producers in Ecuador.  The project related to diversification of production.  With regard to the question from Angola, he said the ICO had recently launched a project in Angola worth several million US dollars.  The objective of the project was to rehabilitate quality areas and encourage the production of quality coffees. 
&& The Committee took note of the presentation and of all interventions.
&& The Chairman said he wanted Members to reflect where they wanted to go with the agenda item concerning commodities.  The Committee had now heard a presentation from one Member – Malaysia – and had also heard presentations from the Common Fund for Commodities, UNCTAD and the ICO.  The presentations had been very useful in helping the Committee to focus its work and discussions.  He, therefore, suggested that the CTD continue to hear from Members or relevant institutions.  Specific institutions that had been suggested in past discussions included the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the ITC, the World Bank and the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO).  He inquired whether Members wanted an invitation to be extended to any particular organization for the next meeting of the CTD. 
&& The representative of Kenya said a proposal that would be tabled in the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture was currently being finalized.  The intention was to share the proposal with the CTD.  She also proposed that the FAO be invited to make a presentation at the next meeting of the CTD.  
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman recalled that the Committee had agreed at its last meeting to include, for all remaining meetings of the year, an agenda item relating to the Decision taken at Hong Kong, China, on the provision of duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access to LDCs.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that his country had, on an autonomous basis, decided in 2001 to gradually introduce DFQF market access for products originating in LDCs.  Since then, all industrial products from LDCs benefited from a zero-tariff regime.  In the agricultural sector, tariff reductions had been undertaken in various steps.  Switzerland was currently revising its legal framework relating to GSP tariff preferences.  In this regard, Switzerland would take account of the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs with the aim of implementing the Decision as quickly as possible with maximum product coverage.  The legal text would be presented to Parliament in 2006 with the expectation that the relevant measures would be introduced by the beginning of 2007. The Swiss GSP scheme was part of a more comprehensive strategy to facilitate the integration of LDCs into the world economy.  In addition to measures to improve market access, Switzerland also granted support for trade-related technical assistance with the aim of ensuring that products originating from LDCs met the requirements of international markets.  He said the success of a DFQF market access regime did not only depend on the efforts made by the importing countries.  The stakeholders in the exporting countries also had a role to play.  The DFQF opportunities needed to be known to exporters in the LDCs, and the procedures to obtain the necessary origin certificates from the national certification board needed to be customer-friendly. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that developing countries, and in particular small and vulnerable economies, would need an extra push in order to make their full integration into the world trading system a success.  The acceptance by other developed countries in Hong Kong, China, to follow the EC in granting DFQF market access to products originating in LDCs was an important step.  His delegation believed it was important that the Decision be properly and quickly implemented.
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation welcomed the opportunity to begin a dialogue in the CTD on the implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs as directed by Ministers in Hong Kong, China.  The United States would participate actively in the dialogue by providing information to assist Members in understanding its implementation plans and to enable them to share their views at key decision points in its domestic process.  Her delegation hoped other Members shared the commitment of the United States to transparency and looked forward to understanding more fully the implementation plans of other Members, including developing countries in a position to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Her delegation recognized there was no requirement in the Hong Kong Decision that the present dialogue take place or that Members engage in transparency and share information at the present time.  There had, however, been much discussion on the DFQF issue in other forums where her delegation felt there had been insufficient understanding of the US domestic process for implementation.  Her delegation believed that the lack of understanding had led at times to an unfortunate dynamic in the discussion.  She said the US was committed to engaging constructively on the issue.  Although the Director-General's initial timeline called for the implementation plans to be submitted in the fall of 2006, her delegation felt it was critical to provide information on the US domestic process earlier so that discussions with other delegations could put all Members on a path of better understanding.
She said her delegation had circulated a paper at the present meeting.  The paper gave an overview of the US process for the implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs.  Her delegation hoped the paper would help to bring expectations in line with the realities that existed, and would provide enough information to allow Members to work together within a practical framework.  The US domestic process was designed to inform the decision-makers of the stakeholder views to the fullest extent possible as well as to maximize the transparency of the decision-making process.  All stakeholders, including WTO Members, would have the opportunity to provide input on the full range of decisions that would be required to implement the DFQF Decision.  Her delegation planned to continue to provide information in the CTD on the US domestic consultative process and on how Members could participate in the process.  This paper was the first in a series of submissions that would provide information to Members on the implementation by the US of the DFQF Decision.  Her delegation looked forward to discussing the issue further in the CTD. 
&& The representative of Norway said his country had been giving DFQF market access for all products from LDCs since 1 July 2002.  He wished to mention that in a recent presentation by the Secretariat on DFQF market access for LDCs, it had been stated that the product coverage of the Norwegian DFQF scheme for LDCs was 97 per cent.  This was incorrect and his delegation was in contact with the Secretariat on the issue.  While there were no tariffs on products from LDCs, Norway did have a safeguard mechanism on some tariff lines, in particular on grain and feedstuff.  The safeguard mechanism had as yet not been used.  He said the safeguard mechanism had been mentioned in the study that he had referred to during the discussion under agenda item D.  The question of whether to maintain the safeguard mechanism would be considered as part of the review currently being undertaken of the Norwegian GSP scheme.      
&& The representative of Senegal thanked the US for its submission, which he saw as a kind of a notification.  It was an illustration of how the transparency process should work.  Transparency was essential for the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs.  The US submission allowed Members to understand the implementation process of the Decision, which was particularly important for LDCs.  His delegation believed that it would have been useful if the US  had also communicated the content of its submission to the Negotiating Group on Market Access (NAMA), since the Group was discussing modalities.  Developed countries, and developing countries in a position to offer DFQF market access, should make such submissions when relevant proposals were discussed in the context of the agriculture and NAMA negotiations. He said these were his preliminary comments on the US submission while waiting for comments from his authorities. 
&& The representative of Zambia, on behalf of the LDC Group, thanked the representative of Switzerland for his intervention outlining the steps being taken to implement DFQF market access to products from LDCs.  He also acknowledged and took note of the document circulated by the US delegation on DFQF market access.  The LDC Group would study the document and make comments in due course.  He thanked the representative of Norway for informing the Committee of the steps that Norway had taken to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. 
He said the LDC Group attached great importance to the work of the CTD, in particular the critical role it had in facilitating discussions on issues that impinged on the development prospects of developing countries.  The LDC Group was committed to the faithful execution of the mandate of the CTD, which was limited to a review process and did not deal with issues that were being negotiated under the Doha Development Agenda. The Group fully appreciated the efforts that Members were making to provide enhanced market access to LDCs through their respective preferential market access schemes and was in full agreement that these schemes, once implemented, should be reviewed by the CTD. The LDC Group looked forward to finalizing modalities on DFQF market access, as well as on simplified and transparent rules of origin, as was agreed to by the Ministers at Hong Kong, China.  He explained that these modalities were currently being worked on in the Committee on Trade and Development in Special Session (CTDSS).  The Group would be presenting in the near future two papers in the CTDSS in order to expedite the process.  Once the process was concluded, the CTD would have an opportunity to review the implementation process as mandated in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.  The LDC Group looked forward to working with the membership towards an early conclusion of the work in the CTDSS so that the CTD could have some positive and progressive reviews at the earliest possible date.
&& The representative of Canada said his delegation was of the view that Members were at the present time in the implementation phase of the Hong Kong Decision.  The appropriate forum for discussions on the implementation process was the CTD.
&& The representative of Japan said his delegation was willing to notify the implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs in accordance with the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs.  He said Japan was still in the process of undertaking domestic consultations.  Japan wanted to implement the Decision as soon as it could. If possible, this would be done in 2007.  His delegation would inform the Committee after a date and a plan for implementation had been decided upon.      
&& The representative of the United States said the position of her delegation was similar to that of the delegation of Canada.  The United States did not interpret the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs to mean that negotiations on the issue were continuing in the CTDSS.  Her delegation would proceed to fulfil the implementation mandate of the Hong Kong Decision.  As an early exercise in transparency, information had been shared with the CTD at the present meeting.  The purpose was to allow Members to be fully aware as to how they might participate in the United States' process of implementation.
&& The representative of Djibouti thanked those delegations that had made interventions outlining the steps they were taking to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  He said, however, that once products from LDCs reached the borders of importing countries, they frequently came up against other obstacles.  For example, the products were sometimes said to be incompatible with international standards.  It was important for solutions to be found to such problems. 
&& The representative of Cambodia said he wished to recall that the Chairman of the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference had stated in his closing remarks that the Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs, and in particular paragraph (ii), was to be understood as a framework that was subject to further negotiations in Geneva.  While the CTD was mandated to review the implementation of the Decision, Members were not yet at the implementation stage.  The understanding of his delegation was that the CTDSS should engage in further negotiations on this issue.  The products that would be covered as part of the 97 per cent DFQF market access were as yet unknown and needed to be negotiated. LDCs were also concerned about the 3 per cent of products that would be excluded.  They did not want to experience a fall in their exports, especially of products such as textiles and clothing.   
&& The representative of Zambia, on behalf of the LDC Group, said he had listened carefully to the interventions made by the representatives of Canada and the US.  The understanding of the LDC Group was that negotiations would take place in the CTDSS.  The CTD would from time to time review the negotiations and the recommendations coming from the CTDSS.   
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	TECHNICAL COOPERATION AUDIT REPORT FOR 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/148)
&& The Chairman invited the Secretariat to introduce the Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2005, which had been issued as document WT/COMTD/W/148.  
The Head of the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit (TCAU) said the report contained in document WT/COMTD/W/148 was the fifth annual report of the Technical Cooperation Audit (TCA) and covered the period from 1 January to 31 December 2005. The report was distinct from past TCA reports as it systematically considered the implementation of TCA recommendations made in earlier reports. He noted that the 2006 Technical Assistance (TA) and Training Plan made specific references to the recommendations made in the previous year's TCA report and that the preparation of the TA plan for 2007 also paid attention to the TCA recommendations.  Most of the recommendations had been considered for implementation. Recommendations which were believed to be still valid had been repeated for future implementation.  Another new feature of the 2005 report was that an attempt had been made to measure TA by selected performance indicators.  The overall observation was that the TA process and the results achieved in the previous year coincided with the views expressed by Members at the 56th Session of the CTD when the Secretariat report on the implementation of the TA Plan for 2005 was discussed.
He said the TA and training activities in 2005 were similar to those delivered in 2004 in terms of quantity, and that the overall feedback from Members continued to be positive.  The significant number of TA workshops, seminars and courses of short duration included a very high number of beneficiaries.  The Secretariat had, therefore, continued to deliver TA activities for the benefit of as many people as possible and to satisfy the maximum possible number of requests.  The conclusion reached was that the quantitative approach still prevailed over a qualitative one. On the other hand, it was also found that the global planning framework did not hinder but rather gave enough flexibility and opportunities for the individual TA providers in the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) and the operational divisions to select the participants, limit their number more systematically and better tailor the programmes and delivery methods to their needs.  The very high rate of satisfaction of the participants showed that they welcomed the Secretariat's efforts to improve quality.  He observed that an explicitly quality-focused approach might result in a lesser number of TA activities of a generic type but longer in duration and more oriented to problem‑solving and capacity building. Such an approach would require not only the support of Members but also the exploration of new TA modalities and avenues.
With regard to the performance aspects of TA activities in the previous year, he said that the choice of the performance indicators, which  were derived from the concepts of results-based implementation and evaluation, demonstrated  a valid picture of TA.  The indicators in question were: the contribution to strengthening Members' trade-related human resources; the proportion of women among the beneficiaries; a broad representation of Members' organizations in WTO TA; substantive areas addressed by TA reflecting Members' demands; the percentage of back to office reports (BTORs) that showed participants' high satisfaction with the results; the percentage of BTORs demonstrating that TRTA objectives were fully achieved; evidence on feedback, effects and impact;  and the percentage of BTORs demonstrating high efficiency. As far as possible, data were collected and analyzed on all these indicators.  It was recommended that TA provider units should bear in mind these indicators when planning and delivering TA to Members.
He said that while the report noted the continued satisfaction of the participants with the quality of TA received, it also suggested areas for improvement throughout the TA cycle.  These recommendations were included in the last section of the report.  Among the newly developed approaches endorsed was the exploration of the potential of low-direct cost TA that would combine the modality of e-training (to cover a basic knowledge of WTO), followed by regional activities at advanced level with participants selected from among those that underwent e-training.  This approach could save the generic part of most TA activities, which might take more than one day.  The time thus saved could be used for the needed country or region-specific case studies and exercises and problem-solving. He said that a good results-based management should regularly utilize evaluative information.  The availability of such information and its dissemination was crucial.  The report, therefore, suggested improvements in the reporting and follow-up mechanism. 
&& The representative of Switzerland said his delegation supported the recommendations made at the end of the report to improve WTO's TA.  His delegation also took note of the progress that had been made in 2005 in identifying needs, defining measurable aims and enhancing collaboration between ITTC and the Trade Policy Review Division.  However, his delegation still had some concerns with regard to the large number of short-term activities and wondered if there were too many of them.  The relatively low rate of participation in regional events was also a matter of concern.  The fact that the Secretariat had no control on participation in national events made him wonder whether such activities were truly efficient, in particular if there were more than 60 participants.  His delegation noted that the TCA report was based on only 68 per cent of inputs due.  He believed this was insufficient and said the Secretariat should request that all inputs be submitted.  His delegation was still in favour of introducing performance indicators on particular products.  It was hoped that some progress could be made on this matter.
&& The representative of Japan said his delegation was satisfied that the new initiative on performance indicators had been introduced in the report.  He said he had a general comment to make based on paragraph 99 of the report.  The paragraph in question raised two questions.  The first question was whether the right TA programmes were being delivered.  The second question was  whether the TA activities should be reduced in number, made longer and benefit less people.  He said it would be necessary to look on a programme-by-programme basis when considering whether to reduce the number of activities or make them of a longer duration.  He believed that follow-up discussions on these issues would be necessary.
&& The representative of the United States said it was apparent that the quality and effectiveness of TA activities had improved.  This was due in part to better planning and execution by providers and more preparation and targeting of participants by recipient countries.  The recommendations in the report should be implemented.  Her delegation was particularly impressed by the Rules Divisions' experience in using e-training for introductory topics and as a prerequisite for more advanced training.  The model could also be used in other areas.  E-training was useful in reaching more participants than would be the case if only in-person training was offered.  Her delegation was also open to the issues raised by other delegations and was willing to participate in any consultations that might take place.
&& The representative of Pakistan referred to the table on page 15 of the report.  She said the table made a distinction between the Ministry of Trade and the Ministry of Commerce as recipient organizations.  In Pakistan, however, there was no distinction between the two entities.  With regard to the question regarding the length of TA activities, she said the Ministry of Commerce in Pakistan found it difficult to spare officers for longer periods. Shorter, more intensive courses were, therefore, preferred.
&& The representative of Zambia referred to the question of whether to reduce the number of TA activities.  He said he would prefer if the number was maintained, and if possible even increased.  Efforts should be made to improve the content of the training activities so as to further build the capacity of participants.  He said that further consultations on the training activities would be useful.
&& The representative of the European Communities said the overall picture on TA delivery was positive, in particular as almost all activities were rated highly by the beneficiaries.  He welcomed the emphasis that had been placed on needs assessment.  Ensuring that requests were made on needs assessments was the responsibility of the beneficiaries.  The WTO could assist if necessary.  He inquired whether the Secretariat could indicate how many of the requests received had been based on  needs assessments.
He said the report mentioned many possible sources of needs analysis.  His delegation was willing to accept this as long as these were part of a broader analytical approach.  Needs analyses which were carried out in a vacuum did not really address the problem of strengthening the consistency of TA.  The exceptions were the needs identified in the various WTO Committees, which were often similar for a number of countries and could therefore be dealt with in a multi-country context. 
He said his delegation agreed that more work needed to be undertaken to build indicators in the design of TA activities.  He wondered whether the Secretariat could indicate how this could be taken forward. He noted two fundamental questions in paragraph 99 of the report.  The first was whether the right trade-related TA programmes were being delivered.  The second was whether the number of TA activities should be reduced, but extended in duration with fewer participants.  His delegation did not have an answer at this time, but was interested to hear the view of the beneficiaries.  The questions could then be returned to at a future date.
The Head of the TCAU said the issue of the number of TA requests that were based on needs assessments had been discussed in the informal consultations organized by the ITTC.  A model developed by the Secretariat was ready for use by Members to undertake their needs assessments.  Some Members had used this model while others preferred defining their needs in different ways.
With regard to the issue of the duration of TA activities, he said the question had been raised in the report mainly with regard to regional activities.  Providers of TA were increasingly introducing new, more interactive, methods of imparting knowledge such as exercises, group activities and mock negotiations.  These were perceived by beneficiaries as more useful than a typical lecture followed by questions and answers.  More interactive activities, however, required more time.  It was in this context that the issue had been raised in the report.  He said the bulk of the cost of TA activities was most likely airline tickets, so the additional cost of extending an activity by a day or so would probably not be that high.
On the question of reducing the number of TA activities, he said that representatives from several beneficiary countries had told him that staff could often not be spared to attend too many activities.  He also noted that the level of participation in some activities was quite low.  He, therefore, believed that the impact on capacity building would be higher if  there were fewer activities.
&& The Committee took note of the Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2005 and of all interventions.   
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.
ANNEX
&& Presentation by the International Coffee Organization

Coffee in the last 25 years
Coffee is one of the world's most important traded commodities, produced in more than 60 countries and providing a livelihood for some 25,000,000 coffee farming families around the world.  Many of these countries are heavily dependent on coffee, which can account for over 75% of their total export earnings.  Among consumers, coffee is a universally popular drink, with over US$80 billion in retail sales a year.  There are two main types of traded coffee, Coffea Arabica and Coffea canephora, the latter usually called Robusta.

To facilitate an effective assessment of the current market situation and outlook for coffee, I shall start by briefly reviewing the development of the world coffee market in the last 25 years.  In this time the market has gone through two distinct phases, from 1980 to 1989 and from 1990 to the present, punctuated by periods of volatility and, from 2000 to 2004, crisis conditions for producers.  As well as analyzing the market, I shall refer to activities pursued by the ICO designed to promote equilibrium between production and consumption.  As such, this paper should be seen to be complementary to the Non-Paper on the decline in prices of primary commodities circulated to the Committee by Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania in May 2003 (WT/COMTD/W/113). 

Briefly, I should like to remind Members that the ICO is an intergovernmental organization established under the auspices of the United Nations in 1963 and designed to facilitate international cooperation on coffee in view of the great economic importance of the product.  The ICO has continued to operate under 6 successive International Coffee Agreements since then, of which the 2001 Agreement is the latest.  It has 74 Members of which 44 are exporting Member countries accounting for over 97% of world coffee production and 30 are importing Members responsible for around 80% of world coffee consumption.

Quota system period
During the first period from 1980 to 1989, the market was stabilized through the ICO export quota system.  As might be expected, the medium term volatility in this period was relatively low in spite of marked movements in 1986 (Graph 1).  The ICO composite indicator price reached a high in March 1986 of 204.23 US cents/lb and a low of 69.05 cents in August 1989, following the suspension of quotas on 4 July 1989, giving an average price for the period of 127.08 cents and 23 points of variation from the standard deviation of the average (see Graph 1).
Graph 1:  Volatility of the ICO composite indicator price – 1980/81 to 1989/90
 EMBED Excel.Chart.8 \s 
There was one serious frost in Brazil in 1981, leading to a drop in world production of nearly 16%, followed by a price rise in annual average terms of 8% the following year (see Table 1).  As is normally the case with replantings, global production rose after a 5 – 6 year lag by 27% in 1987 relative to 1981 with a corresponding drop in prices relative to that year of 14%.  Again, as could be expected, average prices for the period were substantially higher than during the period when the system no longer operated (Table 2).

Table 1:  Volume of production and exports, value of exports and ICO composite indicator price – 1980 to 1989
 EMBED Excel.Sheet.8  1/  Refers to 1981


Table 2:  Coffee prices in the last 25 years
US cents/lb

 EMBED Excel.Sheet.8  

The regulatory mechanisms for coffee involved the setting by the ICO of a price range agreed by both producing and consuming governments, which was maintained through a system of export quotas with documentary controls both at the exporting and importing ports.  Although there was some fraud, this was never sufficient to impede the success of the system in maintaining the agreed price ranges.  

There is no doubt that in terms of earnings the system was beneficial to producers.  Table 3 shows export earnings in the 1980s (with quotas) compared with the subsequent free-market years.  Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that current conditions are not conducive to reinstating such a mechanism.  Politically, developed countries are not in favour of measures to regulate trade.  Technically, without the cooperation of importing countries it is unlikely that an effective quota system can be set up.

Table 3:  Average annual coffee export earnings of coffee producing countries
(1980-1989, 1990-1999 and 2000-2005)
Million US$

 EMBED Excel.Sheet.8  

Free market period
The period of uncontrolled markets from 1990 to the present shows greater medium-term price volatility with highs of 202.39 cents in September 1994 and a low of 41.17 in September 2001, with 31 points of variation from the standard deviation of the average (Graph 2).  The average for the ICO composite indicator price during this period was 82.37.  Again, during this period there was a severe frost in Brazil in 1994.  Although this led to a drop in world production of some 10% in 1995, compared with the 16% in 1982, with prices rising some 118% between 1993 and 1994, it is interesting to note that, with replanting, production by 1999 had risen by 35% relative to 1994 and prices had dropped by 38% (Table 4).  This indicates that the global increase in production and subsequent price fall caused by climatic shocks under free market conditions was considerably greater than under a controlled market. 

Moreover, contrary to what has often been asserted, the short-term price incentive caused by shortages under free market conditions appears to have caused greater over-production than under quotas, which had a built-in disincentive to produce over and above quota entitlements.  In addition, the mechanisms used in the regulatory period favoured stock holdings in producing rather than consuming countries, which to an extent also strengthened the producers' position.

Graph 2:  Volatility of the ICO composite indicator price – 1990/91 to 2004/05

 EMBED Excel.Chart.8 \s 

Table 4:  Volume of production and exports, value of exports and
ICO composite indicator price – 1990 to 2005

 EMBED Excel.Sheet.8  1/  Refers to 1995 for 1999 and 2004, otherwise it refers to the previous year

Looking at prices to coffee farmers, ICO data (see Table 5) shows that in the period 1980/81 to 1988/89, prices paid to growers averaged 69.24 US cents/lb, with annual average highs of 98.36 cents in 1985, and lows of 61.36 cents in 1983/84.  In the period from 1990 to 2005, the average had dropped to 63.97 cents/lb with highs of 113.32 cents in 1994/95 and lows of 31.28 cents in 2001/02.  I want to emphasize that these are annual averages of all available country prices weighted by volume of exports; the figures will of course differ for specific countries (Graph 3).

Table 5:  Prices paid to growers (weighted by exports levels) – 1980/81 to 2004/05

 EMBED Excel.Sheet.8  


Graph 3:  Prices paid to growers (weighted by exports levels) – 1980/81 to 2004/05

 EMBED Excel.Chart.8 \s 

The coffee crisis
The coffee price crisis began in 2000 and continued until the end of 2004.  During these five years a large number of coffee producers were unable to cover their production costs and many only continued to produce coffee because of the lack of alternatives or because they still cultivated subsistence food crops.  The effects on farmers have been clearly documented by the ICO (see document ICC-89-5 Rev. 1) and included an exacerbation of poverty in coffee communities worldwide, with additional social effects such as migration to urban areas, illegal emigration, and cultivation of illicit drugs.  With respect to the balance of payments of coffee producing countries, it must be noted that whereas in the late 1980s and part of the 1990s, earnings by coffee producing countries in terms of FOB exports were around US$10 – 12 billion p.a., during the crisis years they slumped to just over US$5 billion, implying losses in earnings in excess of US$30 billion.  On the other hand, it is worth noting that the coffee market in industrialized countries continued to be relatively healthy with steadily rising retail sales, particularly in terms of value.

This striking discrepancy was publicized by the Executive Director of the ICO, for example in submissions to the G8 and to UN fora and has been recognized by many organizations concerned with development in low-income countries.  The consequences are now being seen in the form of a number of initiatives designed to promote greater sustainability in coffee.  Obviously, in accordance with the UN Rio Principles, this must include economic sustainability and it remains to be seen how effective these initiatives will be in this respect since several of them are unwilling or unable to address the issue of covering production costs through adequate prices.  Moreover, for successful implementation of such schemes, representatives of producers should be involved in the decision-making process to ensure their concerns are met.  Finally, care is needed that such schemes are equally accessible to small as to large producers.

Other ICO activities
Quality 
The ICO has strongly promoted quality through setting basic quality target standards for coffee in terms of defects count and moisture content (see ICC Resolutions numbers 407 and 420).  This is seen by the ICO as a means of encouraging consumption by setting a basic standard and has the added benefits of reducing the risk of contamination by mycotoxins. 

Statistical data

The ICO from its inception has disseminated statistical data on trade and other variables relevant to coffee.  These are mainly disseminated electronically.  In addition the Executive Director issues a Market Situation Letter every month.  Great care is given to using the most reliable statistics including official data transmitted at monthly intervals by Members.

Technical studies and seminars

Regular analysis of the market situation is complemented by studies on areas such as volatility and tariffs.  On technical issues the ICO has held regular seminars such as those on electronic trading and genetically modified coffee.

Coffee development projects

The ICO has an important projects programme, working closely with the Common Fund for Commodities, but also involving other sources of finance.  During the period since 1995 the ICO has secured approval of 21 projects, mainly dealing in areas such as quality, improvement, market structure improvement, diversification, combating pests and diseases and modernizing infrastructures.  This programme is worth some US$72 million.

Promotion and information

The ICO also looks at areas such as promotion of consumption, disseminating information contained in published studies on all aspects of coffee and communication and action on phytosanitary issues.

The present situation
As a result largely of the stresses on the productive sector worldwide caused by the crisis, the imbalance between supply and demand from 2000 - 2004 which led to the price crash has now been reversed (Graph 4).  Our estimates for 2005/06 are for world production of around 106 million bags compared with world consumption of 115 million;  for 2006/07 we see a balance of around 120 million bags.  There are clear signs of a drawdown in stocks in producing countries, estimated at 23.35 million bags on 1 October 2005 compared with 28.11 million on 1 October 2004.  This has led to a marked upward move in Arabica prices.  The ICO Other Mild Arabicas indicator more than doubled from the beginning of 2004 to mid-March 2005, with the main increase starting in December 2004 and is now (9 May 2006) 113.79.  Robusta prices, on the other hand, continued depressed until the beginning of 2005, where the price was virtually identical to that on the first trading day of 2004 (37.59 cents).  There has been further upward movement here too, with the Robusta indicator reaching over 61.93 cents on 9 May, a rise of around 65%.  There is a significant difference between the supply/demand dynamics of the two main types of coffee. 

Again, it is worth noting that the price recovery still does not reach levels attained during the 1980s, as shown in Table 2.
Graph 4:  Supply and demand 1990 to 2005

 EMBED Excel.Chart.8 \s 

Lessons from the crisis
It is clear from the figures I have given you that climatic events and other supply shocks remain a real threat to the development of a balanced market and sustainable conditions for the world coffee economy.  In spite of the evidence of higher producer returns under a policy of international supply management, I must re-emphasize that the political, economic and technical conditions of today rule this out as a realistic option.  The challenge then is to improve the situation without overt market intervention.  The whole question of learning lessons from the crisis and seeking sustainable solutions were addressed by the very important Second ICO World Coffee Conference in Salvador, Brazil last September.  I would urge all interested in coffee to study the papers presented, which may be accessed on the ICO Website,  HYPERLINK "http://www.ico.org" www.ico.org.

From the experience of recent years, I would like to draw your attention to six areas in which action is possible both with respect to national policies and international cooperation.

Information and guidance

The first one is information and government and institutional attitudes to production policy.  It is essential for policies in coffee producing countries to be established to create conditions for farmers to understand the perils of indiscriminate planting in periods of higher prices, and to discourage planting in sub-optimal areas wherever possible.  With respect to information, the ICO has emphasized communication via its website and provides important research facilities through its Library.  It has also cooperated with the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO to produce a comprehensive guide for coffee exporters, now complemented by a Web-based Question and Answer service. 

Diversification

A second area is to encourage appropriate diversification, both in terms of national dependence on coffee and a reduced number of other commodities, and also at the farm level to create a more diversified productive portfolio, to the extent possible and using all available instruments.  In this context, the ICO is giving considerable priority to diversification projects (in the last year two projects have been launched in Mexico and Ecuador) which do not eliminate coffee production but encourage alternatives, and vertical diversification into higher value types of coffee.  I must add that this process would be greatly assisted by the removal of trade barriers to agricultural product imports in developed countries, and the elimination of tariffs.  The ICO has recently sponsored a project, funded by the European Community and the Common Fund for Commodities, firstly to analyze coffee production costs and profitability in representative producing countries, and then following this up with an analysis of the options for diversification.  The results will be presented at a workshop at the ICO on 24 May 2006.  

Adding value

Thirdly, I also believe that adding value to coffee through increasing quality and, where conditions are appropriate, producing coffees for niche markets such as the organic market makes sense to all stakeholders in the coffee market.  The ICO's first project funded by the Common Fund for Commodities in 1995 was the gourmet coffee project, which gave considerable impetus in a number of countries to the production and marketing of high quality, premium-priced coffee.  In Brazil, it led to a new international perception of the high quality of pulped natural Arabica (descascado) coffees and pioneered internet auctions for marketing.  Furthermore, ICO Resolutions 407 and 420 stimulate producers to attain basic quality standards which can also be used in marketing programmes.  The bottom line is that consumers will drink more coffee if the quality is good, leading to gains in all sectors of the market.  This area is closely linked to promoting domestic consumption in producing countries since this gives invaluable experience before embarking on exports of processed coffee.  Finally, I should mention that new transport technologies are making it more technically feasible to export roast coffee but tariff escalation on processed coffee in many markets remains a problem (see ICO document ICC 94-6). 

Competing on quality rather than price

Fourthly, it would be of great benefit to farmers if large roasters switched from a policy of competing on price, which is becoming (at least in mature markets) less and less effective as an incentive in terms of sales volumes, to competition on quality, where there is empirical evidence that improved growth in sales is more likely.  This is clearly demonstrated by the success of quality-oriented roasters such as Illycaffè but must be balanced by considering price pressures on mainstream roasters from supermarkets and pressure to maximize short-term margins driven by the effect on share prices of quarterly results.  At present, regular coffee traders in producing countries tend not to offer premiums for quality.  The lessons of the ICO gourmet coffee project were that growers with a superior product must contact traders acting for roasters anxious to secure premium quality and willing to pay an appropriate premium.  Hence competition on quality would effectively guarantee premiums to farmers who worked to secure a good quality crop.  Some companies are beginning to do this with success but in many others a mind-set persists in which competition and price remain key linked considerations.  In this context, a study in 2001 concluded that “increased corporate financialisation of giant roasting firms entails that their more pressing goal is not expansion of activity per se any more.  Their goal is rather the maximisation of profit in the short term to increase the value of shares".  And with this perception it is crucial to acknowledge that the prime, and indeed legitimate, duty of large companies is to their shareholders, not to their suppliers.  While this remains the case farmers must accept that they will continue to face an environment in which powerful companies endeavour to use all their organizational resources to secure the keenest prices.  Any countervailing influence on this dynamic must, therefore, come from governments or perhaps through schemes agreed by companies in pre-competitive frameworks.
Capacity building

The development of farmers' organizations such as associations and cooperatives can help in improving services, bargaining power and access to credit and risk management instruments.  It can also facilitate the work of extension services, which also need strengthening in many cases, particularly since the drive for internal market liberalization in the 1990s often led to the weakening or even disappearance of such structures.

Market development

Finally, I believe that it is crucial, particularly in view of the promotional efforts by competitive beverages such as soft drinks, to maintain effective programmes for market development.  In most industrial countries, this is already being done effectively by the private sector.  However, in some countries, such as emerging markets like China, or in the producing countries themselves, the private sector lacks the strength or coordination to make a large impact.  Here, the ICO has already shown that it can act as a catalyst for umbrella education and image building campaigns in cooperation with the private sector, which can have a positive effect on consumption.  I am delighted in this context to note the very useful Guide to promote coffee consumption, which makes comprehensive use of the experiences of Brazil, commissioned by the ICO and disseminated at our last Council Session.  The Guide can be downloaded from the ICO website (www.ico.org) and is also available as a CD.  This gives in English, French and Spanish comprehensive methodologies and techniques for the promotion of coffee consumption, with emphasis on producing countries.  Not only does developing local consumption provide a valuable alternative market outlet but it increases producer awareness of consumer demands, promotes small and medium enterprise and provides vital experience for the eventual export of value-added products.  Following this up, there are now some positive signs that some international donors are beginning to recognize the importance of support for market development.  

While still on market development, and this affects all areas, I must add that I am also very pleased that the major coffee roasters in Europe are cooperating with us in the Positively Coffee Programme to disseminate a new generation of objective and positive research findings which indicate real beneficial effects on health of coffee consumption.  

Conclusion
A sustainable coffee economy requires attention to the three UN criteria of economic, environmental and social sustainability.  In looking at initiatives to achieve this end, it is crucial to recall the causes and effects of the period of crisis from which we are just emerging.  Not only must this be done at national level, but also in the context of international initiatives, which is why i am pleased that the United States has now rejoined the ICO, restoring the representative nature of the Organization as a forum to develop appropriate policies to achieve a healthy and prosperous market for all players in the world of coffee.  There is much to be gained in many areas through cooperation rather than confrontation, but to achieve this all stakeholders must be allowed an equal voice to defend and explain their legitimate concerns.  

__________

 The questions from India were later circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.3.
 The paper was later circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/149.
 Ponte, Stefano – Standards and Sustainability in the Coffee Sector; a global value chain approach.  Winnipeg, IISD, 2004.
 Ponte, Stefano – The ‘Latte Revolution’?  Winners and Losers in the Global Coffee Marketing Chain.  Copenhagen, Centre for Development Research, 2001.  CDR Working Paper  01.3.

WT/COMTD/M/57 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/57 	Page  PAGE 3



 

 

 

 



