WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/84
10 July 2012


(12-3749)


Committee on Trade and Development
Eighty-Fourth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 11 APRIL 2012

Chairperson: H.E. Ms. Elin Østebø Johansen (Norway)


 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702536" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC329702536 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702537" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC329702537 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc329702538" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc329702538 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc329702539" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc329702539 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702540" C.	report of the 45th session of the joint advisory group on the international trade centre unctad/wto (itc/ag(xlv)/242)	 PAGEREF _TOC329702540 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702541" D.	trade and development - work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC329702541 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702542" E.	electronic commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC329702542 \H 18
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702543" - 	work programme on electronic commerce - decision of  17 december 2011(wt/l/843)	 PAGEREF _TOC329702543 \H 18
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702544" F.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC329702544 \H 20
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702545" -	gulf cooperation council (gcc) notification of customs union – communication from china, egypt and india (wt/comtd/w/175)	 PAGEREF _TOC329702545 \H 21
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702546" -	notification of the agreement on trade in goods between the association of southeast asian nations (asean) and korea	 PAGEREF _TOC329702546 \H 27
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702547" -	notification of the comprehensive economic partnership agreement  between india and korea (goods)	 PAGEREF _TOC329702547 \H 27
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702548" G.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC329702548 \H 28
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702549" -	preferential tariff treatment for least‑developed countries - notification by Korea (wt/comtd/n/12/rev.1/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC329702549 \H 28
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702550" H.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC329702550 \H 28
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702551" I.	database on preferential trade arrangements - presentation by the secretariat	 PAGEREF _TOC329702551 \H 29
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702552" J.	election of the chairperson of the sub-committee on least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC329702552 \H 30
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702553" K.	election of the chairperson of the committee on trade and development	 PAGEREF _TOC329702553 \H 30
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC329702554" L.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC329702554 \H 30

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairperson said that the draft agenda for the 84th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3918 circulated on 30 March 2012.  She said that she wanted to add a matter under "Other Business" concerning the reduction of documentation costs in the CTD. 
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairperson recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations (IGOs) on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  She said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  She proposed that these organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed. 
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairperson said that the positions of delegations were on the record.  She asked whether there was any change in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants.
&& The representative of Qatar, on behalf of the Arab Group, said that the established WTO principles of full participation, inclusiveness and transparency needed to apply across all areas of the organization's work.  In this light, the Arab Group continued to engage with other Members to improve the guidelines for granting IGOs permanent observer status in the WTO.  She informed Members that the Arab Group would shortly be submitting a communication to facilitate the consultations of the General Council Chair on this matter.  
&& The representative of Egypt expressed his delegation's support for the intervention by Qatar. He said that his delegation had been highlighting since the 82nd Session the need to ensure the participation of IGOs in the activities of the CTD.  In particular, Members' attention had been drawn to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the WTO, which emphasized that all IGOs should be allowed to cooperate with the WTO and its subsidiary bodies. It had also been emphasized that, pursuant to the WTO's trade and development principles and objectives, the CTD should be permitted to collaborate with IGOs whose activities related to trade and economic development.  The guidelines for granting observer status to IGOs, as set out in Annex 3 of the CTD's rules of procedures, had been devised to facilitate the representation of IGOs in the Committee's activities. In a trading environment that was both more integrated and more complex, it was important for specialized and regional IGOs with an evident trade and development mandate to be fully aware of the work undertaken by the CTD. This would ensure coherence when establishing strategies and developing synergies that were conducive to economic development and that would promote the integration of both developing and least-developed Members into the multilateral trading system. 
He recalled that the Chair of the General Council had indicated at the Council's February 2012 meeting that consultations had been undertaken on this matter and that an agreement had been reached to launch a process to uphold and fine-tune the rules of procedure applicable to IGOs.  The General Council Chair had urged continued engagement to address this issue, no matter how challenging it might be.  While Egypt acknowledged that the issues surrounding IGOs may have a horizontal and cross-cutting element to them, the rules of procedure and guidelines nevertheless stipulated that all requests for observer status would be considered on a case-by-case basis by each WTO body.  Therefore, the CTD had an outstanding responsibility to address all such requests, including the request that had been submitted by the League of Arab States (LAS) in 1999.  He recalled that the LAS had maintained observer status under GATT 1947, and that only two Members continued to deem it appropriate to bar the LAS from being granted similar status in the WTO.  Such positions ran contrary to the procedures established by the WTO, which stated that favourable consideration was to be given to requests submitted by IGOs that had been associated with the work of the GATT Contracting Parties.
He said that Israel had indicated at the 83rd Session that it had been consulting on the matter, while the US had announced that it was not in a position to accept any new observers to the CTD.  His delegation had urged Israel to provide feedback on its position as soon as possible and had also requested the US to provide further detail on the nature of the reservations that it had with respect to the LAS' request. He hoped that the two delegations would be able to provide some detail on their positions at the present meeting.  Also at the 83rd Session, the CTD Chairman had indicated that further consultations would be held on the matter.  Egypt would have wished the CTD Chairman to brief Members at the present meeting on any consultations that had been held.  He noted that his delegation had not participated in any consultations convened by the CTD Chairman. 
He went on to say that the Arab Group, supported by several other Members, had indicated its readiness for work to be undertaken in the CTD in order to allow an early resolution to the issues surrounding the granting of observer status to IGOs by the Committee.  It had been proposed that a working group be tasked to look into ways to fulfil the CTD's rules of procedures with respect to granting IGOs permanent observer status. Unfortunately, any signs of constructive engagement had yet to be witnessed.  It was in this context that Egypt wished to renew its proposal for launching a process in the CTD to fine-tune the rules of procedure. The intention was for this to be done in a manner that would pave the way to resolve all pending IGO requests, particularly that of the LAS.  Egypt would continue to question the basis upon which two Members had for more than a decade continued to obstruct work.  Consensus in this case seemed to have its limitations.  His delegation hoped that a favourable decision would be taken in this regard at the present meeting.  In conclusion, he said that Egypt maintained that any request by an IGO to gain permanent observer status in the CTD should only be gauged on the basis of the technical merits of the request and on the premise of the agreed guidelines.  The objective and technical consideration of all IGO requests needed to be safeguarded so as to avoid jeopardizing the integrity of the CTD, and to avoid eroding the Committee's development mandate as called for and emphasized by Ministers at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8).
&& The representative of India said that this issue had been pending in the CTD for many years.  It was high time that the specific and systemic issues relating to the granting of observer status to IGOs were resolved.  Constructive engagement from all Members was needed.
The representative of the United States said that the negotiation of guidelines for observership was a cross-cutting issue that could not be resolved in any individual Committee.  The General Council was the appropriate forum for the discussion.  He recalled that the General Council Chair was holding consultations on the matter, and that detailed discussions had already taken place in that forum.  With respect to Egypt's question to the US, he said that the US was not in a position to join in a consensus at the present time.
&& The representative of China thanked Qatar and Egypt for bringing up an important issue.  He said that observer status was an issue of systemic importance to the WTO.  It not only helped to foster a sound relationship between the WTO and other IGOs, but also played a significant role in enhancing the visibility and relevance of the WTO in global governance.  Clear and appropriate procedures would facilitate achieving these objectives. Annex 3 of the rules of procedure for sessions of the Ministerial Conference and meetings of the General Council adopted in July 1996 provided the basic guidelines for the granting of observer status.  However, the failure to grant observer status to any applicants during the past years had demonstrated that the Annex, despite its merits, still needed further improvement.  In particular, procedures and criteria to grant observer status needed to be established. According to paragraph 4 of the Annex, requests for observer status would be considered on a case-by-case basis in a particular WTO body.  Therefore, in China's view, the CTD had the prerogative to develop the procedures and criteria to grant observer status based on the existing guidelines. This could also constitute a valuable contribution of the CTD to the whole system.
&& The Chairperson thanked the delegation of Qatar for having informed Members of the communication that was to be circulated by the Arab Group in the context of the consultations being held by the General Council Chair.  She also invited the CTD Chairman to continue his own consultations.  She noted that there were no changes in Members' positions and proposed that the Committee revert to this matter at its next meeting. 
It was so agreed. 
REPORT OF THE 45TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XLV)/242)
&& The Chairperson said that the report of the 45th Session of the Joint Advisory Group (JAG) on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC) was contained in ITC document ITC/AG(XLV)/242.  She welcomed Ambassador Hisham Badr of Egypt, the Chairman of the 45th Session of the JAG.  She also welcomed Ms. Eva Murray, the Director of the ITC's Division for Programme Support, and Mr. Anders Aeroe, the Director of the ITC's Division of Market Development.  She invited Ambassador Badr to introduce the report.
&& The Chairman of the JAG said that the Group had held its 45th Session on 30 June and 1 July 2011.  The meeting was convened to discuss the ITC’s Annual Report for 2010.  Government representatives had also announced their trust fund contributions to the ITC. In addition, two panel discussions were held.  The first was on project formulation in the context of the Enhanced Integrated Framework while the second concerned follow-up to the UN's LDC IV meeting held in Istanbul.  He added that it was a pleasure for him to have chaired the JAG meeting at a historical moment for the Arab world, which offered both opportunities and challenges for the people in the region. He believed that the ITC had an important role to play in this regard.  
He went on to say that the Director-General of the WTO and the Secretary-General of UNCTAD had in their opening statements reiterated the importance of the ITC's work in supporting the private sector in LDCs.  The Deputy Executive Director of the ITC, Mr. Jean-Marie Paugam, had noted that the ITC was striving to make four significant and innovative contributions to building more inclusiveness into the world trading system.  The four contributions concerned access to trade and market information, to decision-making tools, to markets and to income.  The Deputy Executive Director had also provided an update on the ITC's activities.  The JAG had been informed that the growth in the ITC’s delivery in 2010 had been satisfactory and sustained, with a 13 per cent expansion compared to 2009.  The target of US$40 million had been exceeded and 55 per cent of delivery had focused on the least-developed countries (LDCs), landlocked developing countries (LLDCs), small island developing states (SIDS) and sub-Saharan Africa.  
The Group had broadly welcomed progress made in the development of a results-based management (RBM) approach to project development and delivery, as well as the introduction of quality assurance mechanisms.  The ITC was commended on its technical-assistance programmes and on its progress in implementing RBM.  Appreciation was expressed for the ITC's increased focus on delivery to the most vulnerable countries, namely the LDCs, LLDCs, SIDS and sub-Saharan African countries.  Some delegates from other regions not falling into these categories had expressed the hope that the donors would not forget their needs.  The ITC had noted that the organization was currently in the implementation phase of RBM, with an emphasis not only on establishing procedures but also on ensuring that RBM was embedded in the organization. 
He added that the ITC was currently working on a new programme called the Sustainable Employment through Export Development (SEED) programme.  The programme aimed to support Arab countries after the Arab Spring.  The focus of the programme was on supporting export facilitation and related job creation and entrepreneurial opportunities. Finally, on behalf of the Group, he thanked the Governments of Canada, China, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland for their expressions of financial support to the organization.
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation recognized the importance of the ITC's work in making a real difference in the capacity of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in developing countries to gain access to, and take advantage of, the global economy.  This had been borne out in the ITC's project-based work, including with regard to promoting regional integration in Africa and enhancing the capacity to trade for five Arab countries.  Canada was a major contributor to this work.  He noted the efforts of the ITC in integrating RBM and quality assurance in its project planning and implementation, while mainstreaming gender, environment and poverty reduction as cross-cutting themes.  Under the leadership of Ms. Patricia Francis, the institution had positioned itself to become a model for good practice in RBM in trade-related assistance.  His delegation urged the ITC to continue these efforts. He assured the ITC of Canada's full support in this regard.  Maintaining a focus on impact helped to ensure strong and sustainable development results.  
He moved on to observe that, from a procedural perspective, there was a significant time-lag between the JAG meetings and the presentation of the JAG reports to the CTD.  In particular, he noted that the last JAG meeting had been held in June 2011, while the 2012 JAG meeting would take place in May.  In Canada's view, this time delay was too long.  As such, Canada encouraged that all efforts be made to ensure that the JAG was reported back to the CTD at the earliest opportunity following the finalization of the JAG report.
&& The representative of the European Union indicated the EU's support for the work of the ITC.  He noted in particular the ITC's technical-assistance programme and the progress in implementing RBM, as well as the organization's focus on the most vulnerable countries.
&& The representative of Mexico expressed appreciation for the ITC's work on technical assistance and capacity building.  He indicated that it would be important for more countries in the Latin American and Caribbean region to be included in the ITC's programmes. 
&& The representative of Peru expressed appreciation to the ITC for the various projects that the organization had undertaken in Peru, especially in favour of SMEs in a number of regions in the country.  He said that Peru was strongly committed to market opening and to an efficient and inclusive multilateral trading system that boosted foreign trade and contributed to poverty alleviation, growth and sustainable development.  In this context, he highlighted the usefulness and efficiency of ITC projects in identifying concrete measures that could be implemented in key economic sectors.  He also highlighted the outstanding results of these projects with regard to capacity building and enhancing the participation of SMEs in international trade.
&& The representative of El Salvador said that the JAG reports allowed Members to keep abreast of the activities of the ITC.  He emphasized the importance of trade cooperation projects and cited as an example the cooperation between the ITC and El Salvador's export and investment promotion agency.  His delegation believed that this type of programme would produce concrete results of benefit to El Salvador's strategy of integration into global trade.  He also highlighted the importance of increases in the services provided by agencies such as the ITC.  This would help to increase trade opportunities and create a more balanced distribution at the level of the Latin American and Caribbean region, so as to benefit countries with small economies such as El Salvador. 
&& The representative of Tunisia commended the ITC for its activities to assist developing countries face trade challenges and increase the competitiveness of their enterprises.  Tunisia had been enjoying the ITC's support for many years and was a beneficiary of an export support programme financed by Switzerland.  The project, which began in 2009, had enabled Tunisia to set up a commercial and trade policy monitoring system which allowed the authorities to analyze trade and design export strategies. Tunisia was also one of the five beneficiary countries of the trade capacity building project for Arab countries, financed by Canada.  His delegation believed that the project offered significant possibilities to enhance trade relationships between the beneficiary countries, particularly in the wake of the Arab Spring.  He expressed his hope that Canada would be able to continue funding the project so as to allow its long-term goals to be realized.  He called on donors to continue in their efforts to assist Arab countries in transition.  He also called on the ITC to continue to realign its approach in order to assist Arab countries facing challenges as a result of democratic processes which had arisen.
&& The representative of Cuba expressed appreciation for the work of the ITC, from which Cuba had seen very positive results.  She noted in particular the benefits of the ITC's work in training and capacity building.
&& The representative of Tanzania expressed appreciation for the work that the ITC was undertaking, particularly with regard to LDCs.  She called for more capacity-building projects to enable the LDCs to increase their participation in the multilateral trading system.
&& The representative of Kenya said that his delegation had taken note of the useful work that the ITC was undertaking, especially with regard to support for exporting enterprises.  He expressed appreciation for the two on-going enterprise support programmes that the ITC was running in Kenya. He cited in particular the Ethical Fashions Initiative, which had become very popular and successful in the low-income areas.  He also expressed appreciation for the support that the ITC was receiving from the donor community.
  && The representative of Pakistan said that the ITC's support was very important in strengthening the linkage between trade and development.  The organization's RBM and benchmarking approaches were particularly appreciated.  It was hoped that this would make the organization's work more result-oriented.  She particularly emphasized the importance of the work that the ITC had initiated to ensure gender empowerment.  Her delegation believed that this initiative would play an important role in mainstreaming the marginalized.  Pakistan hoped to benefit from this initiative, and had already shared data on women-owned enterprises with the ITC. 
&& The representative of Nigeria thanked the ITC and donors for the continued support, particularly to the most vulnerable countries.  Nigeria had been a beneficiary of technical assistance from the ITC, which had undertaken a large number of projects in the country.  He noted that it was stated in the JAG report that delegates had broadly welcomed progress made in the development of an RBM approach to project development and delivery, and also the introduction of quality assurance mechanisms.  His delegation believed that an evaluation of the results of the ITC's interventions was key, especially with regard to the organization's work in ensuring the integration of economies into the international trading system through an export-based development strategy.  He indicated that it was important to evaluate the ITC's performance, particularly in relation to outcomes versus impacts in ITC reporting.
&& The JAG Chairman expressed appreciation for delegations' support for the ITC's mandate, programme and strategy.  He said that the particular needs of small countries, especially LDCs, had been taken note of. He congratulated the ITC's Executive Director for her leadership of the organization.  On behalf of Egypt, he thanked the ITC and the donors for their support.
&& The Directors of the ITC's Division for Programme Support and the Division of Market Development thanked delegations for their expressions of support.
&& The Committee took note of the report of the 45th session of the JAG and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption.
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairperson referred Members to the concluding statement from MC8 by the Chairman of the Conference - circulated in document WT/MIN(11)/11 - and in particular the Elements for Political Guidance, which were the subject of consensus.  Here, under the heading "Trade and Development", the CTD had been directed to undertake some work.  She read out the relevant paragraph as follows: "Ministers reaffirm that development is a core element of the WTO's work.  They also reaffirm the positive link between trade and development and call for focused work in the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) which is to conduct this work in accordance with its mandate and report the results achieved to Ministers at the Ninth Session.  Ministers call on WTO Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work."
She went on to say that, on 29 March 2012, the CTD Chairman had convened an informal, open-ended CTD meeting. One of the items for consideration at this meeting was how the CTD could proceed on its mandated work on trade and development.  A wide range of issues had come up, and a good discussion had taken place on this subject. She thanked delegations for their active engagement, and indicated that the CTD Chairman looked forward to working with Members so as to translate some of the suggestions and ideas into concrete and focused work that could be undertaken in the CTD.  The Chairman believed that it would be useful to identify some broad elements that the Committee could work on, which would not necessarily be exhaustive.  She added that the Chairman intended to hold informal consultations soon to see how work could proceed on this matter.  In conclusion, she said that the present agenda item would henceforth provide a useful forum for Members to take stock of where things stood with regard to the CTD's mandated work stemming from MC8. 
&& The representative of El Salvador expressed appreciation to the CTD Chairman for having convened the 29 March informal CTD meeting.  He welcomed the many positive contributions that had been made by Members during the meeting.  He also welcomed and agreed with the guidelines provided by the Chairman for continued progress in the discussions so as to achieve results under the MC8 mandate.  He cited in particular the objective to identify a list of concrete elements, as well as the indication that the list would not necessarily be exhaustive.  He added that Members needed to avoid rhetoric and focus on finding concrete and operational solutions geared towards practical results for developing countries. 
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation recognized the important contributions of the CTD to the WTO. The US valued the engagement that it had had with its trade and development partners in the CTD.  He welcomed Ministers' reaffirmation at MC8 of the positive link between trade and development and the call for focused work in the CTD.  The CTD embodied WTO Members' shared commitment to maximizing the potential of that positive link.  He also welcomed the accomplishments of the Committee, including in relation to the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for Preferential Trading Arrangements (PTAs), and the decisions taken at MC8 to address the specific concerns of LDCs.  The US believed that it was important for the CTD to continue to be productive in the coming years.  
Reflecting on priorities going forward, the US was prepared to engage constructively with its trade and development partners in the CTD in order to work towards concrete results and to devote the time, resources, and attention needed to do so.  However, the Committee's success – and the US' appetite for robust participation in the Committee – depended on all Members sharing the US' commitment to constructive engagement and concrete results.  Members therefore needed to work together to consider ways to enhance the enabling conditions for trade to boost economic growth and development.  The US would welcome an exchange of views on Members' priorities for the CTD going forward and a confirmation of a shared commitment to concrete results.
At the 29 March informal CTD meeting, Members had expressed some views about possible areas of focused work for the Committee.  For example, the US welcomed the suggestion by several Members that the Committee could hear from developing country Members regarding their experiences with trade-led development. In this regard, he said that it would be particularly useful to hear developing country Members' experiences with the benefits of, and challenges to, trade liberalization.  This would help to identify and analyze trends in trade-led development in order to assist other developing countries, and in particular LDCs, in harnessing the benefits of trade for development.  He indicated that his delegation was open to additional suggestions on areas of focused work for the CTD.  The US had noted with interest the proposal that the CTD examine the impact of certain global economic trends on developing countries' experiences in the multilateral trading system.  While this proposal struck his delegation as being very broad, the US was open to hearing further specifics on the concrete issues to be explored so that Members could have a clear basis on which to consider the proposal.  
On the other hand, a number of suggestions made at the 29 March informal CTD meeting were troubling. Some of these suggestions had been heard in the lead-up to MC8.  For example, some Members had proposed that the CTD should review all development-related issues and development work undertaken by other WTO bodies.  While Members agreed that the CTD was the focal point on development matters at the WTO, the US considered this proposal to be unnecessarily disruptive to the functioning of the WTO system - in addition to exceeding the already-extensive CTD mandate.  It was unclear how much of the work of other WTO bodies would get swept up in this proposal.  Other WTO bodies addressed a wide range of issues that might relate to development, but did so in areas where they had the requisite technical expertise.  Adding another layer of Committee review simply because a particular issue could have a development nexus not only went well beyond the CTD's mandate, but also was not the best use of the CTD's - or the WTO's - time and resources.  Where the CTD could add value was in addressing general and cross-cutting trade-related development issues.  The US recognized that an examination of these general or cross-cutting issues should include consultation with other WTO bodies, as appropriate, to understand issues addressed in those Committees that may relate to development.  His delegation was open to proposals for the CTD to work within this mandate.
The US had previously stated its views clearly on other systemic issues, such as the CTD's role in discussing WTO observership or the proper notification procedure for regional trade agreements (RTAs).  He indicated that he would not rehash those points.  He also expressed his sincere hope that the CTD did not spend the coming months rehashing discussions on issues that should be closed.  Simply put, Members had a decision to make.  In particular, Members needed to consider whether to continue on a path that had led to a dead end, or whether to pursue a new and more constructive pathway forward. Members also needed to consider whether discussions in the CTD were about scoring debating points, or whether they were about seeking solutions to important problems.  Members would assess the answers to these questions through the interventions under the present agenda item and, more importantly, in observed actions in the coming weeks and months.  The US hoped to be an active part of problem-solving focused on real issues.  Such work could help fulfil the potential of the CTD.
&& The representative of the European Union said that his delegation supported the idea of using the CTD to further explore the positive link between trade and development.  The CTD could notably look at emerging economies and see whether it would be possible to identify best practices that other, less successful, developing countries - with emphasis on LDCs - could learn from their experience.  This needed to be related to progress towards the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), in particular in the context of how trade had contributed to the MDGs and under which conditions, and especially with regard to the role of domestic reforms.  Other issues could also be linked to this, for example whether there was a relationship between the success of emerging countries and the relative position of the poorest countries, or the question of the appropriate role for emerging economies' RTA policies.  Another question concerned the impact of emerging economies' policies towards LDCs, for instance regarding the provision of duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access.
He went on to suggest areas for additional, specific research in the CTD.  The first area concerned the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system.  Here, the emphasis needed to be on the more marginalized countries - notably the LDCs - and on ways to better integrate them into global trade.  The second area concerned domestic reforms. While openness to trade was a necessary condition to development, it was clear that openness needed to be accompanied by adequate domestic reforms that were fully owned by developing countries themselves.  The question, therefore, was what an enabling environment for trade and economic growth was, and how it translated into progress towards the MDGs.  He suggested that the CTD could also start paying more attention to sustainable development in its three components – economic, social and environmental – and their relation to trade. Other areas of EU interest included regional integration and the role of the private sector.  These orientations were in line with some of the key issues raised in the new EU Communication on Trade, Growth and Development.  The EU had recently informally presented the main characteristics of the Communication, and was in a dialogue with LDCs.  He believed that in building on these orientations and by observing a cross-cutting focus on LDCs, the CTD could do useful work of real interest to development. 
&& The representative of Ecuador said that the General Council had established the CTD in 1995 to serve as a focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development.  More specifically, the CTD was to take responsibility for the review of the application of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions and the consideration of any issue raised in that regard.  In addition, the CTD was to review the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system and consider measures and initiatives to promote the expansion of their trade and investment opportunities.  The Committee was also to provide guidelines for, and to review periodically, technical cooperation activities. 
The minutes of CTD meetings held between April 1995 and early 2002 showed that these subjects were considered regularly.  Particular attention was paid to reviewing the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members.  However, since 2002, the Committee had tended to concentrate on matters relating to notifications and the transparency of trade agreements.  Even though discussions had taken place on technical cooperation, on paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration, and on the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs, the substantive agenda of the Committee had been significantly reduced. In this light, he believed that it was appropriate for the CTD to resume the responsibilities that had been assigned to it under the 1995 terms of reference.  Specifically, he proposed that the CTD include an item on its agenda to review the application of S&D provisions and to consider any issue raised in that regard.  Furthermore, with regard to the CTD's consideration and coordination of work on development, he believed that it would be appropriate to consider holding specialized meetings for each covered WTO Agreement.  These meetings would be held with the participation of other IGOs, and would have the objective of exchanging views on possible alternatives to give effect to the development dimension in the multilateral trading system. 
In conclusion, he said that the main issue had to be the considerations explicitly recognized in the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the WTO, namely that progress needed to be achieved in a manner consistent with the respective needs and concerns of Members at different levels of economic development.  Furthermore, positive efforts needed to continue to be made to ensure that developing countries secured a share in the growth in international trade commensurate with the needs of their economic development.  The basic premise was to respect the prevailing diversity between Members and to avoid "one size fits all" approximations. It was necessary to give real, effective meaning to the development dimension.
&& The representative of India said that the Preamble to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the WTO was very clear.  It stated that trade and economic endeavours needed to be conducted with a view to raising standards of living, ensuring full employment and a large and steadily growing volume of real income and effective demand, and expanding the production of and trade in goods and services, while allowing for the optimal use of the world's resources in accordance with the objective of sustainable development.  It also recognized the need for positive efforts to ensure that developing countries secured a share in the growth of international trade commensurate with the needs of economic development.  The Preamble further stated that in order to contribute to the stated objectives, Members could enter into reciprocal and mutually advantageous arrangements directed to the substantial reduction of tariffs and other barriers to trade and to the elimination of discriminatory treatment in international trade relations.  Thus, the principal objective of the WTO was not to promote trade.  Rather, the objective was to raise living standards, work towards full employment and the growth of real income while ensuring that developing countries secured a fair share in global trade growth.  This was to be achieved through the reduction of tariffs and non-tariff barriers and the elimination of discriminatory treatment. 
Unfortunately, the reality was in complete contrast. Discussions had been hijacked by a few developed countries, and the focus of all WTO Committees - including those related to development - had shifted towards the obligations of developing countries to reduce their tariffs, achieve trade liberalization and counter discriminatory treatment.  Thus, the means for achieving the objectives set forth before the WTO had become secondary, while the instruments had become the ends in themselves. Ministers were well aware that the direction of the WTO's work had shifted.  They had, therefore, wanted to refocus on development. It was the responsibility of the CTD to reassert and operationalize its mandate to ensure that the WTO took the path set forth in the Preamble to the Marrakesh Agreement. In order to realize its mandate, the CTD needed to work in a focused manner. India wished to highlight some of the important issues that needed to be prioritized. 
It was firstly critical for the Committee to protect the policy space required for promoting the socio-economic development of developing countries. Policy space had shrunk since the days of the GATT, and had been further eroded through the inclusion of the GATS and the TRIPS Agreement. The CTD needed to ensure that developing countries participated in the world trade system on their own terms, and not on the terms dictated by global markets and international institutions.  The Committee could achieve this by coordinating with other WTO bodies and other international organizations as per its terms of reference.  Second, the CTD, in consultation with other WTO bodies, needed to ensure that developing countries were not forced to liberalize against their wishes.  Any forced liberalization could have disastrous consequences.  Efforts needed to be made to strengthen the supply side of these economies so that important pillars such as agriculture, industry or health remained unaffected. 
Third, since the establishment of the WTO, developing countries had highlighted several difficulties in pursuing development strategies and objectives.  These included technology upgrading, the development of local industries, the survival and growth of local farms and the agricultural sector, the attainment of food security goals, and the fulfilment of health and medicinal needs.  Developing countries had also pointed to the problems arising from the structural imbalances and weaknesses in a number of WTO Agreements by identifying several implementation-related issues. However, for the last decade, despite sustained efforts by developing countries - and despite putting these issues into the Doha Round - some Members had not shown the constructive engagement needed to address the issues. It was high time that the CTD took stock of the issues and set a target for itself to resolve them. Furthermore, the matters before the Special Session of the CTD needed to be addressed expeditiously so that developing countries did not lose faith in the WTO. 
As his fourth point, he said that developing countries were moving forward with one leg in the multilateral system, while the other was getting entangled in bilateral and plurilateral agreements. In this regard, the Committee needed to make efforts to ensure that the Enabling Clause did not get eroded on account of the attempts being made by some Members to undermine this important pillar of strength to the developing countries.  It was high time that the systemic issues surrounding the "dually notified" RTAs - which were listed separately on the agenda of the present meeting and had been pending consideration for a number of years - were addressed expeditiously so that the policy space of developing countries did not get impinged on by the interests of few developed Members. Furthermore, the CTD needed to focus its work on other issues relating to the Enabling Clause, as well as issues relating to the TM for RTAs and the Committee's terms of reference, which were of interest to developing countries.  Fifth, in the interests of developing countries, the Committee needed to ward off attempts to include new issues in the WTO architecture or to bypass the multilateral process.  New issues would not only burden the already heavy agenda before the WTO Committees, but would also shift the focus away from development.  
With respect to the interest of some developed country Members to discuss the market liberalization experiences of emerging economies, he said that all developing countries would be forthcoming in sharing their positive and negative experiences.  However, it would also be of interest to developing countries to hear from the already emerged economies like Japan and South Korea about their experiences with market liberalization.  He said that it would be of particular interest to know the kinds of flexibilities these countries had utilized to achieve their present levels of development, and whether it would be possible to replicate their experiences in the post-WTO world.  He noted that WTO rules severely constrained the use of subsidies for local industries, prohibited investment measures favouring the use of local components, and hindered local industries from using patented technology. 
He concluded by quoting from the Delhi Declaration, issued on 29 March 2012 at the occasion of the Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa (BRICS) Summit, which he indicated could serve as a goal post for future work in the CTD.  He said that the five heads of state, while reiterating the need for a successful conclusion of the Doha Round by ensuring the centrality of development, had also stated the following: "We do not support plurilateral initiatives that go against the fundamental principles of transparency, inclusiveness and multilateralism. We believe that such initiatives not only distract members from striving for a collective outcome but also fail to address the development deficit inherited from previous negotiating rounds."  The Delhi Declaration further stated that: "Accelerating growth and sustainable development, along with food, and energy security, are amongst the most important challenges facing the world today, and central to addressing economic development, eradicating poverty, combating hunger and malnutrition in many developing countries. Creating jobs needed to improve people's living standards worldwide is critical.  Sustainable development is also a key element of our agenda for global recovery and investment for future growth."
&& The representative of China expressed support for the intervention by India.  He said that the importance of development had been long recognized in the multilateral trading system, and had been further highlighted through the establishment of the CTD at the time that the WTO was established. Several provisions and decisions were specifically drafted to consider the needs of developing and least-developed countries. He noted, however, that these were drafted more than a decade ago.  In this light, Members needed to examine whether the provisions and decisions were effective in solving the problems that developing countries were facing at the present time.  In particular, in the current challenging economic circumstances, countries tended to discuss the relationship between trade and growth, as well as trade and job creation. 
He went on to say that the relationship between trade and development was of utmost significance for the WTO. His delegation believed that this was why Ministers at MC8 had called for focused work in the CTD, and for a report to be submitted to the Ninth Session.  To achieve what was required by Ministers' instructions, his delegation believed that the first thing that needed to be done was to trace where the CTD had come from, and where it needed to go.  Members could then explore the gaps between the language and the reality with a view to narrowing them down.  For that purpose, his delegation felt that it would be useful if the Secretariat prepared a factual background document, summarizing what the CTD had done in the past.  In preparing the document, the Secretariat could match each area of work to the specific elements of the CTD's mandate.  This would provide Members with a clear and full picture of the CTD's work based on its mandate, and allow them to analyze whether each element of the mandate had been fulfilled.
The terms of reference of the CTD adopted by the General Council in January 1995 provided a very comprehensive and clear-cut mandate. Members had made great efforts to fulfil the mandate and had made a lot of progress, especially in the field of technical assistance and Aid for Trade. However, further improvement was needed.  He went on to list some of China's preliminary ideas on what could be done.  First, there could be an improvement in intra-consulting and reporting procedures.  He explained that the key element of the CTD's mandate was that it would serve as the focal point for the consideration and coordination of all work on development in the WTO. This meant that all issues and decisions taken by other WTO bodies which were of particular interest to developing Members and LDCs needed to be regularly reported to the CTD.  However, the reality was not satisfactory.  In this light, China believed that it was necessary to establish a coordinating mechanism between the CTD and other WTO bodies.  This would enhance the latter's awareness of the existence and function of the CTD, and would also facilitate more timely and effective communication. 
Second, the role of the CTD in reviewing the application of S&D provisions needed to be strengthened.  Elaborating on this point, he said that the CTD had an important role to play in reviewing the application of special provisions in the WTO in favour of developing countries, considering any questions which may arise therein, and reporting to the General Council for appropriate action.  He noted that the Special Session of the CTD was conducting negotiations on the S&D Monitoring Mechanism and on the Agreement-specific proposals within the framework of the Doha Round. China supported the early conclusion of these negotiations with meaningful results, which would allow the CTD to realize this particular element of its mandate.  Meanwhile, his delegation called on the Secretariat to continue preparing its report on the utilization of S&D provisions, which had been suspended since 2002.  He also encouraged more Members to actively engage in the review of the implementation of DFQF schemes.  The topic was of vital importance to LDCs and the CTD's work could enhance transparency and promote domestic actions.  He additionally recognized the establishment of the TM for PTAs and looked forward to making the best use of it.
His third point concerned the preservation of the CTD's role in the implementation of the TM for RTAs.  Under this Mechanism, the CTD had been entrusted to consider RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  However, some efforts had been witnessed in the past three years to dilute this important function. A number of legal, procedural and systemic issues raised by developing Members had not been substantially touched upon. On the contrary, Members had regrettably spent most of their energy and time discussing the agenda for CTD meetings.  He urged all Members concerned to work seriously and constructively to break this deadlock as soon as possible.  China would continue its active engagement in the CTD Chairman's informal consultations.  Finally, he said that he had heard certain Members highlight the role of emerging economies.  In this regard, he indicated that China was willing to share its development experiences with the Committee.  However, he also emphasized that developed Members were the active players in the implementation of S&D provisions, and the major providers of technical assistance and Aid for Trade. In this light, the role of developed Members could not be ignored by simply shifting the burden to emerging economies. China encouraged the more active and constructive participation of developed Members in the CTD.
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation recognized the positive link between trade and development.  Canada saw trade openness as an important means to achieve economic growth and expand opportunities for all by accessing global markets.  The CTD remained an important forum to address the linkage between trade and development at the WTO.  The Committee and its subsidiary bodies had undertaken extensive reviews of areas such as Aid for Trade, market access for LDCs, and S&D.  This was in keeping with paragraphs 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of its terms of reference, as contained in document WT/L/46. 
In response to the conclusions from MC8, the view of his delegation was that the CTD could explore how to deliver more fully on the second paragraph of its terms of reference.  This paragraph enjoined Members to keep under continuous review the participation of developing countries and LDCs in the multilateral trading system, and to consider measures to assist in the expansion of their trade and investment opportunities, including support for their trade liberalization measures.  Some progress had been made on this front, for instance by occasionally reviewing trends in global trade and the involvement of developing countries.  However, more could be done to highlight how trade could be used as a tool for growth and development by, for instance, reviewing practical experiences and lessons learned.  If the discussion on trade and development at the WTO was restricted only to derogations from core WTO rules and to technical assistance, an opportunity would be missed to highlight the positive role trade was playing in the development strategies of its Members.  Canada supported the idea of using the CTD to look at the experiences of those developing countries that had successfully employed trade to promote their own development, and identifying best practices from which other developing countries could learn. Country presentations could be a good approach in this respect.
&& The representative of Australia welcomed the discussion on how to implement Ministers' call at MC8 for focused work in the CTD on the positive link between trade and development. This indicated that development was a core element of the WTO's work.  Australia's view was that Members had the opportunity to undertake substantial work in the CTD to strengthen the Committee and make full use of its mandate.  To follow up on Ministers' directions at MC8, the CTD could undertake work on identifying and enhancing the benefits of open markets, and discussing their contribution to economic growth, development, and poverty reduction.  The work could be centred on Members' own experiences, ensuring that developing Members' economic circumstances informed the discussions.  This could be complemented by a more detailed discussion of reports and analysis by the Secretariat, or work introduced by Members into the Committee from relevant IGOs or other institutions. Work of this nature would complement the discussions in the CTD's Aid for Trade sessions.  It would be one of a number of useful inputs into the on-going process of ensuring that current Aid for Trade programmes continued to meet developing country needs.  Any work in the CTD would need to complement the existing work of other regular Committees, to ensure there was no overlap or duplication of Members' efforts.
He said that Australia fully recognized the importance of S&D, which was the traditional focus of the CTD's work.  His delegation remained open to a discussion of S&D in the CTD.  In terms of the present discussion on the MC8 mandate, Australia's view was that reaching agreement in the CTD's Special Session on a practical, simple and efficient Monitoring Mechanism would be the best and most pragmatic step Members could take for a more focused discussion of S&D.  Australia was committed to these negotiations and hoped that all Members shared the view that the early creation of the Monitoring Mechanism would be a valuable contribution to the CTD's work.
He added that Australia would always be open to proposals to maximize the effectiveness of discussions on S&D in the CTD.  He cautioned, however, that proposals should not create any new bodies or coordinating mechanisms before the crucial negotiations on the Monitoring Mechanism were concluded.  He also indicated that his delegation was encouraged by the strong interest demonstrated by many Members in having an on-going discussion in the CTD on Members' own experiences of the link between trade and development, focusing on the opportunities and challenges that integration into the global economy presented for developing Members.  This work would allow the Committee to take up a new, useful debate that focused on practical issues.  It could be taken up as an early stream of discussion in the CTD following MC8.  His delegation hoped that other Members recognized this and that the initiative would not be held hostage to any other issues.  Finally, he emphasized the importance of the present discussion for the work of the CTD, and indicated that his delegation was ready to take part in further informal consultations called by the CTD Chairman. 
&& The representative of Thailand said that the WTO Agreements recognized the positive link between trade and development.  The Preamble to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the WTO was very clear in this regard.  The Agreement also recognized the need for positive efforts designed to ensure that developing countries and LDCs secured a share in the growth in international trade commensurate with the needs of their economic development.  He highlighted the importance of capacity building to assist the further integration of developing countries, and in particular LDCs, into the multilateral trading system.  The most pressing issue for his delegation at the present time concerned the accession of LDCs to the WTO.  He explained that Thailand was the fifth largest importer of LDC products, and Lao PDR - a fellow member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) - was negotiating its accession. He hoped that Members would make progress in this regard by July 2012.  He also indicated that Thailand was willing to discuss other trade and development issues.
&& The representative of Cuba said that her delegation had made an intervention on this matter at the 29 March informal CTD meeting.  At the present time, she wished to reiterate that Cuba fully agreed on the need to begin to work on a specific programme as quickly as possible to meet the interests and needs of developing countries, and in particular LDCs.  Her delegation agreed with the points made by India, China and Ecuador.  She indicated that the positive link between trade and development was not as automatic as theory might suggest.  Most developing countries had not been able to achieve effective integration into the multilateral trading system, or in the most dynamic areas of international trade.  She was surprised to be hearing suggestions for new work to be undertaken in the CTD when the Committee had a very clear mandate, and Members had been unable to resolve even the most critical issues of the LDCs.  There appeared thus far to be no willingness on the part of developed countries to help to resolve the problems of developing countries, in spite of the WTO's longstanding obligations on development. Cuba was willing to work constructively with Members on the matter. 
&& The representative of Kenya said that the CTD had a pivotal role to play on trade and development matters.  It was with this understanding that Ministers at MC8 had agreed to fully operationalize the mandate of the Committee.  He went on to specify some areas which he believed required particular attention.  He firstly highlighted the importance of S&D for developing countries and the need for Members to move forward in addressing the relevant issues, including with regard to the Monitoring Mechanism and the Agreement-specific Proposals.  Another question related to how the CTD could address the outstanding implementation issues in line with the Doha mandate.  On Aid for Trade, there was a need to continue to explore how to build productive capacities in developing countries.  He also called on the WTO and the ITC to build the synergies necessary to support enterprises and to ensure that market access opportunities were fully utilized.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that his delegation was open to considering ways forward. At the present time, he wished to underline that the WTO Agreements recognized the link between trade and development.  At the Doha Ministerial Conference, Ministers had placed development issues and the interests of developing countries at the heart of the WTO's work.  Furthermore, at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference, the central importance of the development dimension of the Doha Work Programme was emphasized, as was the commitment to making it a meaningful reality. Most recently, at MC8, Ministers had reaffirmed that development was a core element of the WTO's work and had also reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development.  Focused work in the CTD had been called for, including on the need to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as the focal point for development work.  Ministers had also reaffirmed the integrality of S&D provisions to the WTO Agreements and their determination to fulfil the Doha mandate and make S&D provisions more precise effective and operational.  They had agreed to expedite work on the Monitoring Mechanism and to take stock of the 28 Agreement-specific Proposals in Annex C of the draft Cancún Ministerial Declaration with a view to their formal adoption.  He noted that Members were faced with the challenge of assessing how the development dimension had been interpreted in the negotiations, and how far the proposals on the table had met the aspirations of developing countries.  Finally, he expressed his delegation's support for the proposal for the Secretariat to compile a report on the activities of the CTD to date, particularly in relation to its terms of reference.  He also indicated that further consultations were necessary on how to carry forward the mandate given by Ministers at MC8. 
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the direction that had been given by Ministers at MC8 was very clear and lucid.  It emphasized the development dimension of the trade liberalization process and expected Members to re-energize the work of the CTD as the focal point. After recalling the wording of the MC8 mandate, she highlighted that the utilization of S&D provisions was one of the key components of the CTD's work.  The Special Session of the CTD was currently undertaking work on S&D within the context of the Doha negotiations.  She also noted that technical assistance and Aid for Trade were important vehicles to address supply-side gaps. Meanwhile, Members also needed think of a process within the CTD to fulfil the MC8 mandate.  For this, her delegation was open to suggestions and looked forward to working with Members in a constructive manner.  She noted that it was important to avoid a duplication of work, particularly with respect to what was already being done through the Trade Policy Review Body process.  Pakistan was looking for constructive engagement to work in the direction given by Ministers at MC8.  She hoped that Members would be able to achieve meaningful results before the Ninth Session.
&& The representative of Egypt, on behalf of the African and Arab Groups, pointed to the complexity of the link between trade and development, and said that his intervention would not tackle this issue.  His intervention would also not cover the work of the CTD in Special Session or the CTD's work in specific areas such as Aid for Trade.  The focus would be on revitalizing the work of the Regular Session of the CTD, for which the African and Arab Groups were putting forward seven baskets of proposals. He recalled that the concluding statement of the Chairman of MC8 had called for the need to make the WTO more relevant and more responsive to the needs of its Members.  This was particularly emphasized in light of the economic crisis and the global economic environment. Ministers had underlined the importance of the work of the regular WTO bodies, including their role in the oversight of implementing existing Agreements, in transparency through monitoring and reporting, and as forums for the consideration of trade-related issues raised by Members.  Ministers had therefore called for the strengthening and improvement of the functioning of these bodies. Furthermore, in recognition of the important interlinkages between trade and development, the Elements for Political Guidance included language to capture the contours of what needed to be done in the CTD. He recalled the wording of the MC8 mandate in this regard.
Turning to the first basket of proposals, he said that the African and Arab Groups believed that the global financial, economic, food and debt crises, as well as commodity and exchange rate volatilities, posed unyielding challenges to the multilateral trading system, and foremost to its developing and least‑developed constituencies.  Protectionist pressures and global structural and macroeconomic imbalances were on the rise.  World trade patterns were altering commodity and services terms of trade, both in magnitude and product composition.  The CTD had yet to discuss how these economic and trade challenges affected the development dimension of the multilateral trading system, and what were the implications for S&D provisions.  Further work was required in this area to satisfy the mandate given by Ministers.  Discussions needed to be launched on the basis of analytical papers prepared by the Secretariat, in collaboration with UNCTAD and other development-oriented IGOs.
The second basket of proposals was related to the operationalization and the reinvigoration of the work of the CTD, in line with its mandate to serve as the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on all development issues in the multilateral trading system. It appeared that not all issues and decisions taken by the various WTO bodies of particular interest to developing and least-developed countries had been regularly reported to the CTD.  Furthermore, the CTD had not been consulted on a range of development-related issues that had been taken up in other bodies. There was a need to improve intra-reporting procedures and to operationalize the CTD's terms of reference to periodically review the development-related work being undertaken in other WTO bodies.  This was the mandate given by Ministers. The Secretariat had an obligation to provide Members with consolidated reports on all development-related issues and development work undertaken by other WTO bodies. 
Moving on to the third basket of proposals, he said that Ministers had highlighted the monitoring function of the WTO and the CTD. According to the CTD's terms of reference, the Committee was mandated to review periodically, in consultation as appropriate with the relevant bodies of the WTO, the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and in particular LDC Members.  However, it appeared that the CTD had not fully exploited and capitalized on its mandate.  As an example, he said that there had been no report on the utilization of S&D provisions since 2002.  There had also been a lack of continuity in following up on the implementation of Decisions in favour of LDCs and other Decisions relating to measures concerning the negative effects of the reform programme on LDCs and net food-importing developing countries. 
In introducing the fourth basket of proposals, he said that Ministers had reaffirmed the integrality of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements.  He pointed to the ongoing negotiations to establish a Monitoring Mechanism for S&D and to fulfil the Doha mandate to make S&D provisions more precise, effective and operational.  The African and Arab Groups, as well as the ACP Group, had previously proposed that a development review of S&D provisions take place. He elaborated on the usefulness of this proposal, in particular because it appeared that the existing S&D provisions were of limited value.
 The fifth basket of proposals related to RTAs.  He said that the CTD had a central role in reviewing and considering RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause. Since 2007, developing and least-developed Members had raised several legal and procedural issues with respect to how RTAs among developing countries were being considered in the WTO. These issues continued to have implications for the multilateral trading system.  They needed to be swiftly addressed so as to avoid any further infringement on the mandate and terms of reference of the CTD, as well as to prevent the disruption of its future work and to avoid any prospects of eroding the scope and legal stature of the Enabling Clause. 
He said that the sixth basket of proposals concerned the CTD’s role in implementing the 2006 General Council Decision which established the TM for RTAs.  This Decision clearly specified that the CTD was the body entrusted with the implementation of the Mechanism as it applied to RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  However, it appeared that the CTD was unable to maintain the proper application and implementation of the Mechanism's transparency procedures.  The CTD needed to discuss how it could contribute to the work of the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR) in order to improve the disciplines and procedures of the RTAs TM.  It was proposed that the Committee deliberate on the findings in the letter sent by the CTD Chairman to the Chairman of the NGR, which relayed the CTD's experience in implementing the RTAs TM. 
The seventh basket of proposals, which put forward an Arab Group position, related to the granting of permanent observer status to IGOs.  The Arab Group was aware that this was a cross‑cutting issue which was being deliberated in other forums.  However, the Group also believed that the CTD, given its special stature and development mandate, could contribute to resolving the matter.  He said that the participation of IGOs with a clear development mandate would not only be of added value to Members, but would also maintain coherence in tackling development issues internationally and regionally.  The Arab Group had previously submitted some proposals on this matter, and the intention was to make further proposals on how the matter could be tackled by the CTD.  He recalled that Annex 3 of the rules of procedure stipulated that it was the prerogative of each WTO body to decide how to grant permanent observer status to IGOs.
In concluding, he emphasized that it was necessary to make a distinction between the work of the Regular Session of the CTD, and the work of the CTD in Special Session and the various Dedicated Sessions.  Under the present agenda item, the purpose of the discussion was to explore the work of the Regular Session.  He also did not believe that it would be useful to dwell on the experiences of Members on whether trade had led to development, and under what circumstances. The relationship between trade and development was, in any case, not a simple one.  Rather, it was a complex relationship with several variables that needed to be taken into account.  He cited a number of examples, including the impact of economic and financial crises, protectionism and non-tariff barriers.  There was, therefore, a whole list of issues that needed to be addressed before Members could be in a position to determine how trade could lead to development.  Finally, given that the present discussion was concerned with the MC8 mandate on trade and development, he said that developing countries and LDCs should play the leading role in determining what the priorities should be.  He also expressed his delegation's support for the interventions by India, China, Ecuador, Cuba, Kenya, Nigeria, El Salvador and Pakistan.
&& The representative of Hong Kong, China said that her delegation had made an intervention on this matter at the 29 March informal CTD.  She indicated that her delegation supported pursuing more focused work in the CTD by building upon the Committee's terms of reference and monitoring the fulfilment of its mandate in a systematic way.  Hong Kong, China also shared the view that an early conclusion of the Monitoring Mechanism should be a priority, and would strengthen the CTD's role as the focal point on development issues.
&& The Chairperson said that the CTD Chairman would be holding informal consultations on the MC8 mandate. The Committee could also continue the discussion under the present agenda item at the next formal meeting.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
	- 	WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE - DECISION OF 	17 DECEMBER 2011(WT/L/843)
&& The Chairperson referred to the 17 December 2011 Decision of the Ministerial Conference, contained in document WT/L/843.  She said that she wished to draw Members' attention to the fact that, through this Decision, the instruction had been given to "emphasize and reinvigorate the development dimension in the Work Programme particularly through the CTD and examine and monitor development-related issues such as technical assistance, capacity building, and the facilitation of access to electronic commerce by micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, including small producers and suppliers, of developing countries and particularly least developed Members".  While there was more contained in the Decision, she believed that, from the point of view of the CTD, what she had read out broadly captured what the Committee needed to look at.
She went on to say that, at the 29 March open-ended informal CTD meeting that she had referred to under the previous agenda item, Members had been provided the opportunity to discuss how the CTD could proceed on electronic commerce (e-commerce) on the basis of the 17 December 2011 Decision.  The discussion had shown that some Members felt that it would be useful to understand more about what were the problems and needs of developing countries in the e‑commerce area.  Additionally, it was suggested that experiences and best practices could be shared. There was also the indication that work on e-commerce needed be undertaken in a complementary manner across the WTO bodies that were mandated to work in this area.  Among the proposals, the idea of holding workshops on issues related to e-commerce, and the suggestion of coordinating with other IGOs, were noted.  She observed that these could be some of the feasible ways to proceed, if Members were willing.  She invited those delegations that had suggested holding a workshop to come forward with a possible programme and structure.  She also invited any further contributions from Members at the present meeting.
&& The representative of Cuba indicated that she wished to repeat some points from her delegation's intervention at the 29 March informal CTD meeting.  She observed that, in the area of e‑commerce, the asymmetries and the problems facing many developing countries were considerable.  During the preparatory phase of MC8, a group of countries including Cuba had outlined a few ideas aimed at resolving these issues and reinvigorating the Work Programme on e-commerce within the framework of the CTD in a transparent, inclusive and participatory manner.  She suggested that workshops and specialized meetings could be organized with the participation of UNCTAD, the ITU and other appropriate institutions.
&& The representative of Ecuador said that the discussions and negotiations on e-commerce held at the end of 2011 had allowed a better understanding of trends in e-commerce, as well as the relationship between e-commerce, development and poverty reduction.  With regard to these negotiations, he said that recognition needed to be given to the substantial flexibility shown by the proponents in an effort to move towards the finalization of a Ministerial Decision on e-commerce.  What the proponents had in mind was the continued reinvigoration of the mandates under the Work Programme on e-commerce.  He emphasized in this regard the basic principles of the WTO, the development dimension of e-commerce and the role of small producers and suppliers in developing countries. He mentioned the importance of creating and developing the capacities of small producers and suppliers - including micro, small and medium-sized-enterprises (MSMEs) - in developing countries to use e-commerce, and information and communications technologies (ICTs) more generally. 
In this light, he suggested that the CTD could organize workshops to promote the sharing of experiences, to analyze best practices in public support, to consider regulatory and institutional issues, and to discuss technical-assistance needs.  The CTD could also coordinate with other organizations such as UNCTAD, the ITU and WIPO in preparing periodic reports on the participation of developing countries in global e-commerce. It was also suggested that e-commerce be incorporated into the Aid‑for‑Trade Initiative in order to facilitate improvements in the technical capacity of developing countries in the formulation of relevant policies, laws and regulations.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation welcomed the 17 December 2011 Decision and was open to hearing suggestions on ways to re-invigorate the Work Programme on e-commerce.  As the US and some other Members had noted at the 29 March informal CTD meeting, a number of other WTO bodies were also exploring issues related to the Work Programme.  It was, therefore, important to coordinate and consult with those bodies regarding their efforts and discussions.  His delegation had noted with interest the ideas that had been put forward on areas of work for the CTD in relation to e-commerce.  With respect to the idea of holding workshops, he said that it would be helpful to get a sense of the concrete areas that the proponents wanted to see addressed.  This could also help to focus discussions on technical assistance and Aid for Trade.  The US welcomed input from the proponents regarding their priorities and specific needs in the area of technical assistance for e-commerce, so as to allow Members to address e-commerce development needs effectively.  In relation to the proposal that the CTD promote the use of e-commerce, he indicated that it was still unclear to his delegation how the Committee could do this within its mandate. He welcomed further clarification from the proponents.  Similarly, further clarification as to the basis for coordinating with other organizations such as UNCTAD or the ITU would be helpful for Members.
&& The representative of El Salvador said that the ideas that had been put forward at the 29 March informal CTD meeting warranted further attention and analysis by the CTD.  The mandate given by Ministers was broad enough to address the various proposals that had been put forward, including with regard to the organization of a range of events at which e-commerce could be discussed.  In addition to these proposals, she said that the possibility could also be explored of the Secretariat preparing a paper analyzing the situation of MSMEs in developing countries in terms of access to e-commerce.  A range of literature was available which could be used as the basis for such a document.  While similar initiatives had already been suggested in other WTO bodies, El Salvador felt that a document of this nature in the CTD could contribute to discussions in the Committee, and to a better understanding of the situation. Finally, he expressed his delegations willingness to continue to participate actively in the discussions on this matter in the CTD.
&& The representative of the European Union said that the reinvigoration of the Work Programme on e-commerce remained very high on the EU's agenda.  The EU looked forward to receiving more information on the organization of workshops and the possible role of the CTD and other WTO Committees in this regard.
&& The representative of Nicaragua expressed her delegation's willingness to participate in the reinvigoration of the development dimension of the Work Programme on e-commerce.  Nicaragua believed that the Work Programme had to embrace the principle of non-discrimination. The Work Programme also needed to look into the adoption of standards enabling enhanced connectivity and access to ICTs and public internet sites, particularly for SMEs in developing and least-developed countries. Technical assistance and capacity building were key factors in achieving these objectives.  
&& The Chairperson encouraged Members to consult amongst themselves to see whether some of the proposals that had been put forward could be further concretized.  She said that updates from Members on the progress that was being made would be welcome. The CTD could also continue its discussion on this matter at its next formal meeting.
The Committee took note of all interventions.   
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairperson said that she wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs.  She firstly informed the Committee that for a number of RTAs – namely, RTAs between India and Malaysia, India and MERCOSUR, India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, and India and Bhutan – the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties.  Of these agreements, only data relating to India-MERCOSUR and India-Malaysia had been provided to date.  With regard to India-MERCOSUR, the Secretariat had received all the necessary data from MERCOSUR, but was still waiting to receive some data from India.  In the case of India‑Malaysia, the delegation of Malaysia had provided the required data. She urged all the parties to these Agreements to provide the data as soon as possible.
She also recalled that it had been mentioned in past meetings that there were a number of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties.  Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), an RTA falling in this category would only be considered by the CTD after it had been ratified by all the parties.  There were three RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that fell within this category, namely the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA), the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) and the ASEAN-India Agreement.  The parties to these Agreements were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
She additionally drew Members' attention to the implementation reports which were required under paragraph 15 of the TM for RTAs.  According to this paragraph, at the end of the implementation period of an RTA, the parties were to submit to the WTO a short written report on the realization of the liberalization commitments in the RTA as originally notified.  Thus far, no such reports had been received from Members. To begin the operationalization of paragraph 15 of the RTAs TM in the context of the CTD, she said that the Secretariat had been requested to compile an informal list of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause, along with the date of the end of the implementation period of each RTA.  This list would be circulated to Members shortly after the present meeting.  She requested Members to check the dates of the end of the implementation periods in the list, and to inform the Secretariat of any discrepancies.  
She added that a discussion was to take place at the next CRTA meeting on how to proceed with implementation reports for RTAs notified under GATT Article XXIV and GATS Article V.  She noted that it would be important for the CTD to monitor the outcome of this discussion, and to hold its own discussion shortly thereafter on implementation reports for RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  From a practical point of view, she believed that it was in Members' interests to continue to maintain similar procedures between the two Committees when it came to implementing the TM for RTAs.  
Having concluded her introductory remarks under the present agenda item, she indicated that the Committee could turn to the three listed sub-items.  She said that, at the last meeting, the delegations of China, Egypt and India had requested that the three sub-items be retained on the agenda for the present meeting. As Members were aware, divergent views had been expressed on issues relating to the three sub-items.  She informed the Committee that the CTD Chairman had held informal consultations after the last meeting with a number of delegations, in order to hear suggestions on how Members could move forward.  While the consultations had provided a useful forum for an exchange of ideas, it appeared that there was a need for more informal discussions. Therefore, the CTD Chairman intended to continue with his informal consultations.
&&	GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL (GCC) NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMS UNION – COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA, EGYPT AND INDIA (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairperson said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification.  The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The representative of Egypt said that the present sub-item was introduced at the 73rd Session at the US' request.  At that meeting, the US had expressed its concern over the fact that the notification of the GCC Customs Union had been made in 2007 exclusively under the Enabling Clause.  The US had requested the GCC countries to re-notify their customs union under GATT Article XXIV and had announced that it would not support moving forward with the process of considering the Agreement until the Agreement was re-notified.  Two years later, the RTA was notified once again to the CRTA under Article XXIV of GATT.  In reaction, the delegations of China, India, and Egypt had raised several legal and procedural concerns over the manner in which RTAs continued to be dealt with.  The three delegations had requested that the present sub-item be retained on the CTD's agenda until the time that the issues and their implications were resolved by the Committee and a determination could be made on how to consider RTAs with a dual notification status.  He emphasized that this needed to be done without further undermining the CTD's mandate and its terms of reference.  It was also important to not undermine the CTD's role in considering RTAs, or the scope of application of the Enabling Clause. 
He went on to say that the GCC Customs Union notification presented a peculiar challenge to the CTD.  During informal consultations, some Members had argued that the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union was different from the other two RTAs with a dual notification status.  It had also been argued that the GCC Customs Union should not have been notified under the Enabling Clause, and that customs unions in general were not covered by the provisions of the Enabling Clause.  China, Egypt and India had illustrated through more than a dozen arguments - both specific and systemic in nature - the issues that needed to be resolved in the CTD in order to safeguard that a decision taken with respect to the GCC Customs Union was coherent, unbiased, transparent and compatible with the disciplines and procedures that these delegations were so keen to maintain and uphold.  To this end, the three delegations continued to highlight several legal and procedural concerns and questions that needed to be addressed by the CTD.
He went on to list several points in this regard.  As his first point, he inquired whether there was any legal understanding to substantiate the views that had been expressed by some Members that the Enabling Clause did not provide legal coverage for the GCC Customs Union or any other custom union.  If this was the case, he sought clarification as to why Members had approved several other customs unions between developing countries that had been notified to the CTD under the Enabling Clause.  These included the Andean Community, MERCUSOR, the East African Community, the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa and the West African Economic and Monetary Union. Second, according to the Secretariat's Legal Note of 2003, the provisions of the Enabling Clause sufficed to authorize the creation of a customs union among developing and least-developed Members, even if the requirements authorizing the establishment of these unions as per GATT Article XXIV were not completely satisfied.  It seemed, therefore, that custom unions were in fact authorized and covered by the Enabling Clause. 
As his third point, he said that the Unified Economic Agreement, which established the GCC Customs Union, was notified to the WTO in 1984 exclusively on the basis of the Enabling Clause.  According to GATT records, the Contracting Parties had agreed to consider this Agreement in the CTD within the realm of preferential arrangements among developing countries.  This raised serious questions on the consistency of the positions that some Members had maintained with respect to the consideration of the GCC Customs Union and other customs unions.  Fourth, since the Agreement establishing the GCC Customs Union had already been notified under the Enabling Clause in 1984, he questioned whether the 1995 General Council Decision on the avoidance of procedural and institutional duplication had been applied in this case.  In particular, he questioned why the GCC had been requested to make a second and third notification as part of accession commitments.  His fifth point followed from this observation. In particular, since the Unified Economic Agreement had been notified under the Enabling Clause in 1984, he indicated that the notifications of the GCC Customs Union in 2007 and 2009 needed be treated as subsequent notifications in the context of the RTAs TM.
To make his sixth point, he referred to the procedures for reporting on RTAs adopted by the CTD in 1998 in document WT/COMTD/16.  According to this document, any information subsequent to an initial notification under the Enabling Clause had to be notified under paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause.  In this light, he questioned the extent to which Members had adhered to these procedures in the case of the GCC Customs Union.  He also questioned whether it was legal to obtain accession commitments in violation of existing WTO provisions.  Moving on to his seventh point, he said that it appeared that a member of the GCC had in 2007 notified the implementation procedures for the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause.  Subsequently, in 2009, the same implementation procedures had been notified under GATT Article XXIV.  However, in 1984, another GCC member had notified the Agreement establishing the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause.  He questioned how such unilateral actions affected the rights and obligations of the parties to this RTA. He also indicated that it would be important to clarify the legal implications of having an Agreement establishing a customs union notified under the Enabling Clause while another notification regarding an amendment to that Agreement was notified under GATT Article XXIV. 
His eighth point was related to WTO Members' accession commitments. In particular, he inquired to what extent a Member's accession commitment to notify an RTA under GATT Article XXIV took precedence over another Member's right to notify the same RTA to the CTD under the Enabling Clause. Ninth, he questioned whether the CTD had fulfilled its mandate in considering the GCC Customs Union.  In particular, he pointed out that the CTD's terms of reference required it to consider any questions in relation to either the application or the use of special provisions in favour of developing country Members, including with regard to the Enabling Clause.  For his tenth point, he referred to rule 33 of the CTD's rules of procedure. In particular, as required by this rule, he questioned whether the Committee had reported to the General Council on the impasse in the interpretation and scope of application of the Enabling Clause, as well as the impasse with regard to other specific and systemic issues arising from dual notifications. He pointed out that no decision was ever taken in either the GATT or the WTO to review the scope of application of the Enabling Clause. 
Eleventh, he asked whether Members had agreed to set a practice whereby notifications of RTAs among developing countries were contested at first sight without a factual presentation prepared by the Secretariat to substantiate such a challenge.  If this was the case, he questioned how by doing so Members were respecting the obligation contained in paragraph 5 of the TM for RTAs.  He followed up on his question by making his twelfth point.  In particular, he asked whether Members would be in a position to accept a similar practice in the case of RTAs that were notified under GATT Article XXIV. He added that such actions were not prescribed in the TM for RTAs.  Moving to his thirteenth point, he asked why the transparency procedures of the TM for RTAs had not been triggered when the notification of the GCC Customs Union was made in 2007 under the Enabling Clause.  He elaborated by asking what had delayed the CTD from carrying out its functions under the RTAs TM for more than two years, until a subsequent notification was made under GATT Article XXIV in 2009.
Turning to his fourteenth point, he said that RTA transparency and notification obligations in the CTD were distinct from any action that a Member might wish to take in other WTO bodies with respect to an RTA.  This led him to his fifteenth point, for which he referred in particular to the provisions in Section C of the RTAs TM.  These provisions stated that, upon notification and without prejudging the substance under which an RTA had been notified, the RTA would be considered by Members on the basis of a factual presentation.  Sixteenth, he indicated that, from the reaction of some developed Members and from a number of panel and appellate body rulings, it was the applicable WTO legal provision - and not the venue of consideration - that was the core issue.  As his seventeenth point, he asked whether the positions maintained by some Members regarding the GCC Customs Union could be seen as a reversion to the practice of making legal judgments on the compatibility of RTAs notified to the WTO under either the Enabling Clause or GATT Article XXIV.  He noted that the only RTA notified under GATT Article XXIV that was ever deemed to be fully compatible was the Czech-Slovak Customs Union. Neither the North America Free Trade Agreement nor the Treaty of Rome establishing the European Economic Community had been decreed as compatible with GATT Article XXIV.
As his eighteenth point, he questioned whether Members had the right to challenge the legality of an RTA or describe a notification of a customs union as "incorrect" for having invoked the Enabling Clause.  In particular, he indicated that this was not in conformity with the ad referendum commitment found in Annex C of the draft Cancún Ministerial Declaration, where Members guaranteed that the Enabling Clause would apply whenever action was taken by developing Members under the provisions of this Clause.  For his nineteenth point, he questioned on what basis some Members advocated that the GCC Customs Union, notified on the basis of the Enabling Clause, be reviewed by the CRTA.  He elaborated by noting that, according to the CRTA's terms of reference, it could not do so.  This was because there were no provisions that allowed the CRTA to proceed with the consideration of an RTA notified on the basis of the Enabling Clause. 
He went on to say that the points he had made were just a few of the specific and systemic issues that needed to be addressed.  He emphasized that any review of an RTA, wherever it occurred, had to be performed according to the legal provision that had been invoked to justify the WTO consistency of the RTA in question.  In the present context, any review of an RTA notified under the Enabling Clause had to be carried out in accordance with the terms of reference of the CTD.  Furthermore, the CTD had the overall responsibility for the operation of the Enabling Clause.  The legal obligations arising from the application of the Enabling Clause were very different from those found in GATT Article XXIV.  This was why his delegation had called for prudence in addressing the specific and systemic issues at hand.  It was clearly a legal and procedural understatement to merely address the issue of the venue of consideration of an RTA.  It was also arguable that customs unions among developing countries could continue to be notified under the Enabling Clause.  The objective and purpose of the Enabling Clause clearly distinguished it from other exceptions such as those found in GATT Articles XXIV, XX and XXI.  Finally, he requested that the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union and the other two RTAs with a dual notification be considered by the CTD. His delegation further requested that these items be retained on the CTD's agenda for further consideration on the basis of the Enabling Clause. 
&& The representative of India said that his delegation associated itself with the intervention by Egypt.  He emphasized the clear similarities between the three RTAs listed under the present agenda item, and indicated that there were common concerns relating to the three.  He said that his delegation had not requested the insertion of an agenda item, but rather to retain the GCC sub-item.  This was in keeping with past practice that an agenda item was retained until the time that discussions were exhausted and Members decided by consensus to drop the item.  His delegation hoped that there would be substantive engagement at the present meeting from those delegations that had so far avoided discussions on issues of serious concern to developing countries.
He recalled that the issue had first been discussed at the 69th Session under "Other Business".  Since the 73rd Session, it had appeared as a sub-item on the CTD's agenda, initially at the request of the US.  He noted with concern that during the last few years, discussions had largely focused on procedural matters.  Some Members continued to create hurdles, even in correctly reflecting in the CTD's annual report the discussions that had taken place.  In an effort to promote constructive and substantive engagement, China, Egypt and India had made a formal submission in September 2010. The submission was a constructive effort to list some systemic and specific concerns that needed to be addressed in order to facilitate a resolution of the issue.  Concerns which were systemic as well as specific to the GCC notification had been highlighted.  The systemic concerns related to the Enabling Clause, the mandate and terms of reference of the CTD, and the TM for RTAs. Specific concerns emanated not only from the suggestions of some Members regarding the consideration of the GCC Customs Union in a certain procedural way.  There were also concerns arising from the notification, the re-notification, the withdrawal of notifications and the efforts to deny developing countries the right to notify under the Enabling Clause.  
He said that there had also been suggestions that the concerns voiced by some developing countries be discussed in the NGR.  In India's view, the NGR had a mandate on transparency. The Doha Declaration, in paragraph 29, mandated negotiations aimed at clarifying and improving disciplines and procedures under the existing WTO provisions applying to RTAs.  Paragraph 29 also stated that the negotiations would take into account the developmental aspects of RTAs.  He cautioned that not all the concerns raised in the submission by China, Egypt and India could be addressed in the NGR.  Furthermore, at the present time, the work schedule of the NGR was uncertain.  It was therefore even more important to discuss the issue in the CTD.  
He went on to say that his delegation wanted an early resolution of the issue so that there could be continued progress in the transparency of all RTAs. It was clear that the RTAs TM in its present form did not provide procedures for RTAs with a dual notification.  Furthermore, the NGR could do justice to only a few issues highlighted by developing countries. It was the responsibility of the CTD to deal comprehensively with the systemic and specific issues relating to the three RTAs and to justify its mandate as the focal point for the consideration and coordination of developmental work in the WTO.  Finally, he expressed appreciation for the efforts of the CTD Chairman in holding numerous informal consultations.  Unfortunately, because of a lack of engagement by a few delegations, the consultations had not brought Members any closer to a resolution.  Constructive engagement was needed from all Members so that this long-pending issue concerning the protection of developing countries' rights under the Enabling Clause was resolved, and so that the pivotal role of the CTD was maintained.
&& The representative of China expressed support for the interventions by Egypt and India.  He also expressed his appreciation to the CTD Chairman for holding informal consultations.  He indicated that the present sub-item had appeared on the CTD's agenda for 12 consecutive meetings, and that Members were familiar with the history and evolution of the discussion. As China had repeatedly stated, the issue was not simply a procedural one concerning the venue of consideration.  More seriously and fundamentally, the issue related to the legal rights and obligations of Members under WTO Agreements.  Members needed to consider its profound implications in a systemic and substantive way.  In China's view, the proper solution needed to consist of a number of elements.  First, the rights of developing Members under the Enabling Clause had to be respected, especially the right to invoke paragraph 2(c) of this Clause. Second, the central role of the CTD in development‑related issues, as stipulated in paragraph 1 of the Committee's terms of reference, needed to be maintained and strengthened.  Any issue relating to the application of the Enabling Clause was certainly within the competence of the CTD.
He recalled that China, together with Egypt and India, had tabled a joint communication in September 2010 illustrating specific and systemic concerns arising out of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union.  The aim was to remind Members of the complexity of the implications of dual notifications, and to trigger the necessary brainstorming to find an appropriate solution.  However, he noted with disappointment that little progress, if any, had been achieved.  The numerous specific and systemic issues listed in the communication remained to be addressed.  Some Members had indicated on previous occasions that the issue of dual notifications should be addressed in the NGR.  China did not have any fundamental objection to this, and had seriously engaged in the discussion in the NGR.  However, some of the concerns illustrated in the communication could not be fully resolved in the NGR.  He cited as examples the question of whether the Enabling Clause provided the legal justification for the formation of a customs union that involved the elimination or reduction of non‑tariff measures, and the question of whether a Member's accession commitment to notify an RTA to the CRTA under GATT Article XXIV took precedence over other Members' rights to notify the same Agreement to the CTD under the Enabling Clause.  Another concern was whether the discussion in the NGR would yield any results in the near future.  In conclusion, he said that his delegation firmly believed that Members needed to discuss this issue in the CTD without further delay.  He urged the relevant Members to actively and constructively engage in the discussion. 
&& The representative of Australia said that his delegation recognized the importance of the issues raised for the Members whose communication was listed under the present sub-item.  Australia had a strong systemic interest in these issues.  However, it was clear that there was no consensus in the CTD on how to move forward.  The protracted and frustrating negotiations in the Committee at the end of 2011 on how to reflect discussions under the present sub-item in the annual report underlined this.  Members needed to bear in mind that the CTD had met five times in November 2011 to discuss this issue in the context of the annual report, in addition to a number of informal meetings.  This was the twelfth time that this sub-item appeared on the CTD's agenda. Continued inclusion of this sub-item was placing a heavy burden on the work of the Committee.  This was at a time when there was a range of pressing issues before Members in the CTD, in particular in terms of follow-up from MC8. Nevertheless, Australia believed that interested Members should continue informal discussions on this matter.  Australia remained willing to engage in these informal consultations and was ready to discuss any proposals for reaching consensus on a way forward.
&& The representative of Japan said that he wished to comment on the status of implementation of the TM for RTAs in the context of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  In particular, he expressed his delegation's concern that the CTD was not able to hold any Dedicated Sessions on RTAs, as the parties to several RTAs had not provided the necessary data to the Secretariat.  He encouraged the concerned Members to submit the data to the Secretariat as soon as possible so that the RTAs TM could be implemented in the CTD. With regard to the discussion under the present sub‑item, he supported the intervention by Australia.  He said that Japan was willing to actively engage on this matter in the NGR, but also welcomed the informal consultations called by the CTD Chairman.
&& The representative of the United States thanked the Chairperson for clarifying which delegations had requested the present sub-item.  He also appreciated that the present sub-item was being treated individually, as it was separate and distinct from the other sub-items.  His delegation continued to have concerns with the present sub-item being listed on the agenda.  The sub-item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made, and needed to be removed from the agenda.  He regretted that this matter had taken up so much of the Committee's time over the past few years.  These were the types of issues that his delegation had referred to under agenda item D that took time, resources and attention away from other pressing matters. 
The US wanted to be very clear that it had no quarrel with any developing country notifying a qualifying agreement under the Enabling Clause.  However, this was not what the GCC Customs Union notification issue was about.  The GCC Customs Union notification concerned a customs union, which made it different from non-customs union RTA notifications.  It appeared that the paper referenced with the present sub-item was seeking a systemic discussion of RTAs, particularly with regard to the issue of dual notifications.  However, given that the GCC Customs Union was incorrectly notified under the Enabling Clause and that this was subsequently corrected by the notifying Members, the GCC Customs Union notification was not a dual notification.  The US had stated its position on this issue clearly and there was no need to rehash those points at the present meeting.  He expressed his hope that Members could move forward constructively, recognizing that the GCC Customs Union issue was not an issue of dual notification, but rather something to be addressed under the RTAs TM in the CRTA.
&& The representative of Canada regretted that this procedural matter remained on the formal agenda, as it continued to prevent the CTD from undertaking focused work on more substantive issues.  As discussions had demonstrated, the only way that these issues would be resolved was through more frank discussion in informal mode. He urged the Chairman and those Members involved to follow this track.  Canada was ready to participate in any informal discussions and contribute in good faith.  He noted the critical role played by the CRTA in reviewing relevant RTAs, and indicated that this delegation would not wish to see such a transparency role weakened in any way.
&& The representative of the European Union supported the interventions by the US, Canada and Australia. He called for an early resolution to this matter so that the work of the CTD would not be further disrupted.  The EU was willing to continue to participate in informal consultations in this regard.  He also indicated that he objected to the allusions used by Egypt.
&& The representative of Egypt said that he wished to respond to the US' intervention, and in particular the comment that an incorrect notification had been submitted to the CTD.  He questioned whether Members were in the habit of making incorrect notifications.  If the GCC Customs Union notification was not a dual notification, he did not see why Members would have been discussing the matter for so many years.  He requested clarification from the Secretariat as to whether the GCC Customs Union was notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.  He also indicated his surprise with the EU's intervention.  He said that his delegation had raised issues which were of interest to a number of other delegations including China, India and the Arab Group, as well as several African and LDC Members.  Interest had been indicated not only in the CTD, but also in other WTO bodies.    
&& The Chairperson said that the Secretariat would get back to Egypt on the question concerning the GCC Customs Union.  She also indicated that the Chairman intended to continue his informal consultations.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that it was regrettable that this systemic issue remained unresolved.  His delegation shared the view that the continued inclusion of this sub-item on the CTD's agenda was burdensome. He called for further consultations and welcomed any input from the Secretariat in terms of legal clarification.
The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND KOREA
&& The Chairperson said that the second sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement.
&& The representative of Viet Nam, on behalf of ASEAN, said that ASEAN attached great importance to the RTAs TM.  He informed Members that ASEAN would be conducting internal consultations on the relevant issues and would get back to the CTD at a later stage.
The Committee took note of the intervention by Viet Nam. 
	-	NOTIFICATION OF THE COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT 	BETWEEN INDIA AND KOREA (GOODS)
&& The Chairperson said that the third sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the India-Korea Agreement.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation continued to have concerns with the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea notifications being listed on the CTD's agenda as the second and third sub-items under the present agenda item.  These sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. The issue of dual notifications was directly linked to the functioning of the RTAs TM, and the US believed that the NGR was the appropriate forum for this discussion.  The US requested that the issue be removed from the CTD's agenda for the next meeting.
&& The Committee took note of the intervention by the United States.
In closing the discussion under this agenda item, the Chairperson reiterated that the CTD Chairman intended to continue his informal consultations.  She also indicated that she would inform the CTD Chairman of the discussion that had taken place at the present meeting. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairperson said that she wished to begin the practice of providing a brief update to Members under the present agenda item of the PTAs notified under the TM for PTAs that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on PTAs.  She added that the present agenda item also provided the possibility for Members to consider other matters relating to PTA notifications.  Thus, the notification by Korea of its Preferential Tariff Treatment for LDCs appeared as a sub-item under the present agenda item.
She went on to say that three notifications of PTAs to be considered in Dedicated Sessions had been made to the CTD since the establishment of the TM for PTAs.  These concerned PTAs being implemented by India, China and Chinese Taipei. India's notification was circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/38, while China's notification was circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/39.  In the case of China's PTA, she also referred Members to document WT/COMTD/N/39/Add.1/Rev.1, which contained the tariff lines covered by the scheme.  Finally, the PTA being implemented by Chinese Taipei was notified to the CTD in document WT/COMTD/N/40 and WT/COMTD/N/40/Corr.1.  All three PTAs had been notified in 2011 under paragraph 1(b) of the PTAs TM.  This paragraph concerned PTAs taking the form of preferential treatment accorded by any Member to the products of LDCs.  She informed the Committee that the Secretariat had been in contact with the notifying Members regarding the provision of data for the preparation of the factual presentations of the three PTAs.  At the present time, the data had not yet been provided to the Secretariat.  However, if the data for one or more of the PTAs were submitted soon, it remained feasible to hold a Dedicated Session on PTAs in 2012. 
-	PREFERENTIAL TARIFF TREATMENT FOR LEAST‑DEVELOPED COUNTRIES - NOTIFICATION BY KOREA (WT/COMTD/N/12/REV.1/ADD.1) 
&& The Chairperson said that the notification by Korea was circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/12/Rev.1/Add.1.  The notification concerned changes to a PTA that was already in force when the TM for PTAs was established, and that was previously notified to the WTO.  The PTAs TM required changes affecting the implementation of a PTA to be notified.
She said that she wished to draw Members' attention to the fact that the notification by Korea also appeared on the agenda of the 65th Session of the Sub-Committee on LDCs that was to be held on 16 April 2012. In light of the longstanding practice for the substantive consideration of notifications concerning market access for LDCs to take place in the Sub-Committee, she suggested that Members' detailed discussion of the notification by Korea take place at the 16 April Sub-Committee meeting.
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairperson said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  The CTD had to date undertaken six of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that his delegation, as a member of the LDC Group, had a well expressed position on this issue that was known to all.  He wished to highlight a few pertinent points. He said that all would agree that S&D was a cornerstone of the multilateral trading system. Since the GATT days, the value of the system had been recognized as an important tool for integrating the LDCs into global trade.  The same principle had been enshrined in the WTO since its inception. In this regard, the Decision found in Annex F of the Hong Kong Declaration was the logical outcome in that direction.  Members were aware that Bangladesh relied on a limited number of export products.  Destination markets were also limited.  Bangladesh, as a member of the LDC Group, would grow to its potential if it was given enhanced market access through the fullest implementation of the Hong Kong Decision, coupled with targeted supply-side assistance.  At MC8, Ministers had once again urged the full implementation of the Decision.  However, more than six years had elapsed since the Decision was taken, and the fullest outcome had yet to be achieved. 
He went on to say that his delegation was encouraged to note the progress made towards the implementation of the Decision. Some developed Members were offering DFQF market access autonomously, without waiting for the conclusion of the Doha Round.  It was also encouraging to note that a number of developing countries had come forward to provide LDCs with a significant degree of DFQF market access.  He expressed appreciation to Members for their endeavours to implement the Decision. Bangladesh was also encouraged to see progress in the CTD on the transparency of DFQF schemes. This would certainly strengthen the relevance and efficacy of the multilateral trading system. He urged all developed Members to implement the Decision without any further delay.  A full implementation of the Decision would enhance confidence in the Doha Round and the multilateral trading system.  He observed that almost all developed Members had implemented the Decision and that the remaining Member should also extend the same cooperation at the earliest. Finally, he said that in July 2011 the US International Trade Commission (USITC) had initiated an investigation on the probable economic effect of providing DFQF treatment for imports from LDCs.  He inquired whether the US could share the outcome of that process.
&& The representative of Korea indicated that Members would have an opportunity to have a detailed discussion of Korea's notification of Preferential Tariff Treatment for LDCs at the upcoming meeting of the Sub-Committee on LDCs, which would be held on 16 April 2012.  At the present time, he said that he would make a few brief points on Korea's non-reciprocal preferential scheme for LDCs.  He informed the Committee that, on 25 November 2011, Korea had decided to further extend its DFQF market access to LDCs to 4,802 tariff lines at the six-digit level of HS 2007.  This corresponded to 95 per cent of Korea's tariff lines. The preferential treatment was offered to the 48 countries designated as LDCs by the UN.  In addition to the extension of product coverage, Korea had also lowered the numeric threshold of the value of LDC origin, from 50 per cent to 40 per cent.  In accordance with the Hong Kong Decision, and the Multi-year Action Plan on Development agreed to at the G-20 Summit in Seoul in 2010, Korea had taken steps to make progress in the provision of DFQF market access for LDCs by widening the product coverage to 95 per cent.  Korea hoped and expected that this enhanced market access would contribute to LDCs' export diversification, trade capacity building and economic growth.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation was fully committed to implementing the DFQF decision in a manner that would result in meaningful opportunities for the products of LDCs, and that was consistent with the commitments made at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference. He indicated that the question from Bangladesh would be forwarded to his capital.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
DATABASE ON PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS - PRESENTATION BY THE SECRETARIAT
&& The Chairperson said that the TM for PTAs required the Secretariat to maintain an updated electronic database on individual PTAs that would be available to the public.  The Database on PTAs was presented to the CTD by the Secretariat at an informal, open-ended meeting held on 14 December 2011.  The database was subsequently made available only to Members for a three‑month period, during which comments from Members were invited.  The database became available to the public on 14 March 2012.  For the benefit of Members - and in particular those that were not present at the 14 December meeting - the Secretariat would once again present the database at the present meeting. Before giving the floor to the Secretariat, she said that she wished to say a few words of introduction on the database.  
She recalled that, at the 82nd Session of the CTD held on 5 July 2011, the Committee had agreed to a number of modalities to implement the TM for PTAs.  In the context of that discussion, it had been agreed that the Secretariat would prepare a preliminary, informal list of PTAs being implemented by WTO Members.  The CTD Chairman had remarked that such a list would provide clarity as to which PTAs would initially form part of the electronic database on PTAs.  The informal list of PTAs prepared by the Secretariat was faxed to Members on 23 August 2011.  A total of 24 PTAs were included in the list.  The CTD Chairman had indicated in the fax that this was only a first attempt to compile a list of PTAs being implemented by WTO Members, and that the list may not necessarily be exhaustive or fully up to date.  Since no specific comments were received on the list, the database currently contained entries for the 24 PTAs.  The Secretariat had remained in contact with the Members implementing PTAs for several months, so as to work towards having a complete set of information for each PTA.  While a significant amount of information had been made available by implementing Members, there were still some gaps that needed to be filled.  She invited the Members implementing PTAs to continue to work with the Secretariat so that the database could be complete as soon as possible.
The remainder of the discussion under this agenda item took place in informal mode.  
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairperson said that she had been informed that consultations had led to the proposal for Ambassador Steffen Smidt of Denmark to serve for another year as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairperson said that it was a great pleasure to welcome Ambassador Smidt to serve for another year as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  Members were well aware of the Ambassador's commitment to LDC issues, and in particular of the work that he had undertaken on the issue of LDC accession. 
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
&& The Chairperson said that at the General Council meeting of 24 February 2012, the names of the Chairpersons for 2012 had been announced.  As a formality, she requested the Committee to elect Ambassador Mothae Anthony Maruping of Lesotho as the CTD Chairman for 2012.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Maruping as the CTD Chairman for 2012.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairperson said that she wished to raise a matter concerning the reduction of documentation costs in the CTD.  She recalled that discussions on cost savings in document production had taken place at the meeting of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration in October and November 2011.  The minutes of that meeting could be found in document WT/BFA/128.  Members had agreed to a number of cost-cutting measures in the production of documents.  All WTO bodies were to undertake efforts to reduce the overall volume of official documents.  Efforts were also to be made to substantially reduce the printing and distribution of documents.  Thus, for instance, as of January 2012, the distribution of official documents in meeting rooms had been discontinued.  She said that she wanted the CTD to do its part in reducing the volume of documentation. She also believed that it was important to encourage the electronic distribution of documents. 
She said that one measure she proposed at the present time concerned the minutes of CTD meetings, which could be rather lengthy at times. Specifically, she proposed that, wherever possible, the Secretariat could look into putting the discussions that took place in CTD meetings into summary form.  She additionally proposed that the CTD document series henceforth no longer be distributed in paper form.  Documents in the series would be available on the WTO's publicly available "documents online" system.  Documents that were initially restricted would be placed on the Members' website until they were derestricted.  She said that she would welcome any additional suggestions from Members to reduce documentation costs going forward.  For the present time, however, she asked whether the Committee could agree to the two proposals to reduce documentation costs that she had outlined.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation supported the proposal concerning the electronic dissemination of CTD documents.  However, the US had reservations about a shift to summarized minutes of CTD meetings.  It was important for Members' discussions to proceed on a shared understanding of what had occurred at prior meetings.  Detailed minutes would help to ensure that Members had a full record of previous discussions so as to help inform future discussions.
&& The Chairperson said that the objective of summary records was for the main messages to get across. Summaries would be more feasible in some types of discussions or interventions - for example, a presentation using PowerPoint - than in others. She added that some WTO bodies already used the summary form. In this light, she inquired whether the US would consider the possibility of the CTD's meeting records being presented in summary form where possible.  
&& The representative of the United States said that he was not in a position at the present time to join in a consensus to agree to summarize CTD meeting records.  Members were aware that there were many issues discussed in the CTD which were of importance to all delegations. It was critical that Members understood and had a complete record of these discussions.   
&& The Committee agreed to the proposal that the CTD document series would henceforth no longer be distributed in paper form. With regard to the proposal for CTD meeting records to be presented in summary form where possible, the Chairperson indicated that the Committee could return to the matter at a later date.
The meeting was adjourned. 



__________
 The meeting was exceptionally chaired by H.E. Ms. Elin Østebø Johansen (Norway), the Chair of the General Council, who stood in for the Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development, H.E. Dr. Anthony Mothae Maruping (Lesotho).
 Australia's intervention up to this point was made at the open-ended informal CTD meeting held on 29 March 2012, and is reproduced here at the request of Australia. The remainder of Australia's intervention under this agenda item was made at the 84th Session. 
 Egypt's intervention up to this point was made at the informal open-ended CTD meeting held on 29 March 2012, and is reproduced here at the request of Egypt.  The remainder of Egypt's intervention under this agenda item was made at the 84th Session.
 This intervention by Ecuador was made at the informal open-ended CTD meeting held on 29 March 2012 and is reproduced here at the request of Ecuador.









WT/COMTD/M/84 Page  PAGE 30



	WT/COMTD/M/84 	Page  PAGE 31



 

 

 

 



