
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 27 NOVEMBER 2014

Chairman: H.E. Mr. Pierre Claver Ndayiragije (Burundi)


 TOC \O "1-3" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011196" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC407011196 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011197" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC407011197 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011198" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc407011198 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011199" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc407011199 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011200" C.	report of the 48th session of the joint advisory group on the international trade centre unctad/wto (ITC/ag(XLVIII)/256)	 PAGEREF _TOC407011200 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011201" D.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC407011201 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011202" -	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training 2013 (WT/COMTD/W/205)	 PAGEREF _Toc407011202 \h 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011203" E.	trade and development - work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (WT/MIN(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC407011203 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011204" (i)	Proposals by Members	 PAGEREF _Toc407011204 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011205" -	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc407011205 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011206" -	A proposal that the Committee on Trade and Development reports to the General Council on development work in the WTO in compliance with Ministers' request issued at MC8 - proposal from Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho and Mauritius (WT/COMTD/W/202)	 PAGEREF _Toc407011206 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011207" -	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: review of the application of S&D provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members - proposal from Ecuador (WT/COMTD/W/204)	 PAGEREF _Toc407011207 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011208" (ii)	Post-2015 Development Agenda - Statement by the Chairman	 PAGEREF _Toc407011208 \h 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011209" F.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC407011209 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011210" -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc407011210 \h 11
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011211" -	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc407011211 \h 12
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011212" -	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement  between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc407011212 \h 12
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011213" -	Latin American Integration Association - Report to the WTO on instruments concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, for the period 1 January 2013 – 31 December 2013 (WT/COMTD/85)	 PAGEREF _Toc407011213 \h 13
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011214" -	Generalized System of Preferences notification by Canada (WT/COMTD/N/15/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _Toc407011214 \h 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011215" G.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC407011215 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011216" H.	review of the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC407011216 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011217" -	Statement by the Chairman	 PAGEREF _Toc407011217 \h 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011218" I.	annual review of the steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC407011218 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc407011219" -	Report by the Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/206)	 PAGEREF _Toc407011219 \h 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011220" J.	draft annual report for 2014 (WT/COMTD/W/207)	 PAGEREF _TOC407011220 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC407011221" K.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC407011221 \H 17


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The draft agenda as contained in document WTO/AIR/4392 of 17 November 2014 was adopted.
OBSERVERS
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD), Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record. He indicated that if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed. 
REPORT OF THE 48TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XLVIII)/256)
&& The Chairman said that the report of the 48th Session of the Joint Advisory Group (JAG) on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC) was contained in ITC document ITC/AG(XLVIII)/256. He welcomed Ambassador Mariam Salleh of Malaysia, the Chairperson of the 48th Session of the JAG, and Ms. Dorothy Tembo, the Deputy Executive Director of the ITC. He invited Ambassador Salleh to introduce the report.
&& The Chairperson of the JAG said that the Group had held its 48th Session on 11 and 12 June 2014. At the meeting, the ITC had presented its Annual Report for 2013 and its draft Strategic Plan for 2015-2017, which had since been finalized. A discussion had also taken place on the results and recommendations emanating from the recent independent evaluation that reviewed the ITC's operations for the 2006-2013 period.  
She went on to say that the JAG had expressed strong support for the role and vision of the ITC. There was acknowledgement that the ITC had a clear mandate, as well as the technical expertise, to assist small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to enhance their competitiveness. There was also recognition of the ITC’s potential to expand the scope of its work within the current mandate, and endorsement of the organization's new strategic focus areas. A strong call was made for the ITC to continue its work on regional integration, in particular in Africa. Support was also expressed for other areas of the ITC's work, including with regard to strengthening trade support institutions, youth employment, women's economic empowerment, and strengthening the focus on services. The ITC’s Environmental Mainstreaming Strategy was noted with appreciation. In addition, the organization's technical assistance in the area of trade facilitation, including with regard to the implementation of the Trade Facilitation Agreement, was welcomed. Delegations had called on the ITC to continue its prioritization of least-developed countries (LDCs), landlocked developing countries, small-island developing states, small and vulnerable economies, Sub‑Saharan Africa, and post conflict and fragile states. Delegations also expressed the wish that the ITC expand its assistance in Latin America, the Caribbean and the Pacific, as well as in middle income countries. 
She added that, at the 48th JAG Session, the results of the recent independent evaluation of the ITC were presented. The evaluators recognized that, since the last evaluation of the organization in 2006, the ITC had made progress in improving the delivery of its mandate and its internal management procedures. There were no instances of regression on recommendations made in the 2006 evaluation. The new evaluation underlined the ITC’s continued relevance and the growing demand for its services, and noted that the organization, with its strengthened management and technical expertise, was well placed to respond to the demand. The evaluation also pointed to a number of challenges, such as embedding results-based management (RBM) in all of the ITC’s programmes; improving the project management cycle; fine-tuning frameworks for needs and risk assessment and accountability; enhancing client relationship management; streamlining internal work processes; and developing a costing process. All of these issues were being addressed by the organization, and the process and timelines in this regard had been set out in the ITC management response to the evaluation. The evaluation also noted that, for the ITC to be able to fully address all the recommendations, there was a need for more stable and predictable funding. It was agreed that the JAG would reconvene in informal session in January 2015 to have a more fully informed discussion on the collective response to the evaluation and the progress achieved. Finally, she noted that 2014 marked the ITC’s 50th anniversary, and for this purpose a special publication titled “50 Years of Unlocking SME Competitiveness: Lessons for the Future” had been launched at the JAG.
&& The Deputy Executive Director of the ITC said that she wished to provide information on the ITC's activities since the 48th JAG Session. She indicated that the ITC's Strategic Plan for the 2015‑2017 period was the result of an inclusive consultative process. The Plan had allowed the organization to develop and embed a strategic response to the main findings of the recent independent evaluation. The new strategy, which would enable the ITC to further enhance its focus and ability to deliver demand-based integrated solutions for beneficiary countries, would be operationalized through annual operational plans starting in 2015. She also informed Members that, as had been stated at the JAG meeting, the ITC's management had met with the Consultative Committee of the ITC Trust Fund in October 2014 to discuss the management response to the independent evaluation. Building on these discussions, a detailed response had been prepared with clear deliverables that would be monitored and reported on periodically. She emphasized that the successful implementation of the strategy would require the collective efforts of all stakeholders.  
She went on to say that efforts were also being made to build capacity within the ITC. The organization would continue to invest in people, processes and methodologies, and would continue to invest in upgrading skills around core areas such as project cycle management and impact assessment. With regard to improving its internal processes, the organization had invested a considerable amount of effort in moving to more automated ways of working, cutting down on non-essential procedures and enhancing interfaces. For example, the time required to recruit staff and consultants had been cut down, and a new integrated project portal was being enhanced with the aim of simplifying project management functions and creating necessary linkages within the organization. She added that the ITC remained committed to improving governance and accountability, and was implementing a full accountability framework, in conjunction with the UN’s Office of Internal Oversight Services. The organization was also developing a robust risk management framework, and was additionally advancing on a costing exercise that would provide a better sense of where investments could be maximized. Furthermore, the organization recognized the changing demands and dynamics in beneficiary countries, and therefore the need to ensure that the ITC's responses remained relevant. In this regard, she highlighted the importance of facilitating innovation through exposure to the latest techniques and thinking. She explained that the vision was for the ITC to become a thought leader in its area of specialization, which was SME competitiveness. Finally, she informed && The Committee that the ITC's World Export Development Forum and the Women Vendors Exhibition and Forum were successfully held in Rwanda in September 2014 with participants from over 70 countries. 
&& The Committee took note of the report of the 48th Session of the JAG and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption.  
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training 2013 (WT/COMTD/W/205)
&& The Chairman said that the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2013 was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/205. The main content of the report had already been presented by the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) at the informal, open‑ended CTD meeting that was held on 6 November 2014. The report was on the agenda of the present meeting to allow the Committee to formally take note of it. He invited the Director of the ITTC to briefly introduce the annual report.
The Director of the ITTC said that, for the first time, the annual report presented an analysis of the technical assistance (TA) activities together with an assessment of the results. It was hoped that Members would find the format of the report useful. She began her presentation by informing the Committee that, in 2013, the ITTC had continued with a tight management of TA resources, in line with the need to do more with less. While efforts were made to operationalize the TA monitoring and evaluation online system, the system had not been completed due, inter alia, to limited resources.
Turning to the implementation of planned TA activities, she said that 279 activities had been organized. This figure excluded the Secretariat's participation in conferences and similar activities. While an increase in national activities had been observed in 2013, there was a slight reduction in the number of regional activities, due partly to the increase in e-learning courses. The organization of the Ninth Ministerial Conference (MC9) in December 2013 had also contributed to the observed reduction in regional activities. She said that the Secretariat had worked to enhance the substantive content of the courses in an effort to better tailor activities to the needs of beneficiaries. As an example, she pointed to the benchmarks in the Progressive Learning Strategy (PLS) that had been developed. She also noted that exams had been introduced in all the regional trade policy courses (RTPCs), while case study training had been introduced in the advanced trade policy courses. LDCs remained a priority in TA activities, and an increase in LDC participation had been observed. Global activities represented about 30% of the total. Africa had the highest number of activities at the regional level, followed by the Asia-Pacific region. With the exception of the Middle East, TA activities were predominately delivered at the national level. A total of 13,734 individuals were trained, which was an increase of 9% from the previous year. About 40% of the participants followed e-learning courses, representing slightly over 5% of the total cost. A total of 47 trainees had benefited from the internship programme, which was an increase of 15%. In terms of the gender mix, 44% of the participants in the face-to-face activities were women.
Finally, with regard to the achievement of results, she said that the rate of success in achieving immediate results was high, as 97% of the set objectives in the training activities were achieved. However, the measurement of long term results was more difficult, given that the RBM online system was not being implemented yet. She noted, however, that the ITTC had conducted an ex-post evaluation of the advanced sanitary and phytosanitary measures (SPS) training programme, which revealed that the programme had met its objectives and made a significant contribution to the better implementation of the SPS Agreement in the countries concerned. The programme had also created a pool of SPS experts in beneficiary countries. Finally, she informed the Committee that the annual report listed a number of recommendations which were based on the lessons learned during the implementation of the TA activities in 2013. These had been taken into consideration in the implementation of activities in 2014.
&& The Representative of the United States said that his delegation appreciated many of the ITTC's initiatives in 2013 to enhance the WTO's TA. He pointed as an example to the enhancement of e‑learning opportunities, which had led to an increase in the number of chat sessions and e‑learning courses offered. He observed that e-learning would allow more participants to take advantage of the assistance offered. He also noted that it was mentioned in the report that the participants in e-learning courses were asked to take an exam to measure the results of the training. The report went on to state that exams would be introduced in all relevant trade‑related TA activities. In this regard, he said that his delegation looked forward to learning more about efforts to measure the impact of courses.
&& The Representative of Cameroon believed that the breakdown of activities now had a better focus on the countries most in need. He noted that not all participants were able to reach and complete the advanced level of the PLS, and in this light called on the ITTC to do more to ensure a higher completion rate. He also suggested that efforts could be made to improve participants' overall performance. In addition, he noted that the francophone participants were performing less well than others, and suggested that this matter needed be addressed.    
&& The Representative of Nigeria highlighted the importance of the ITTC's work and noted with satisfaction that the LDCs continued to be given priority in TA activities. He welcomed the availability of online courses throughout the year. Finally, noting the delicate balance required between cost efficiency and effectiveness, he asked if the ITTC could elaborate on paragraph 4.3 of the report, particularly from the perspective of beneficiary countries.
&& The Representative of Uganda, on behalf of the LDC Group, noted with satisfaction the increased participation of LDCs in TA activities. He believed that the LDCs' participation in intermediate and advanced levels courses would help them to formulate better trade policies and participate effectively in WTO activities. The LDCs hoped that the WTO would continue to be flexible in the application of the PLS so as to facilitate their participation in various training programmes. He indicated that attention was required to the question of how long-term institutional capacity and knowledge in LDCs could be fostered. A possible avenue would be to consider an LDC as a venue for an RTPC, as this would increase human and institutional capacity in the LDC. It would also enhance collaboration between LDC academic institutions and the WTO. He requested Members to consider LDCs as venues for future RTPCs. He also emphasized the benefits to LDCs of the WTO internship programmes and in this light requested that these programmes fund at least one official from each LDC Member each year. Noting that LDCs' rate of utilization of their entitlement for national activities remained low, he said that this was due to various reasons, including the costs related to the organization of such events. He urged donors to give positive consideration to this problem and also asked the Secretariat to take note of the request. He recalled that there was recognition in paragraph 3 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration of the special structural difficulties faced by LDCs.
He went on to say that, in October 2014, a comprehensive evaluation had been undertaken of the Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF). The purpose of the evaluation was to determine, inter alia, whether the EIF could be extended beyond 2015. The evaluation report had reaffirmed the relevance of the EIF to the LDCs and called for its extension. However, it had also highlighted the difficulty in addressing a funding gap of approximately US$50 million. The LDCs' view was that this could be easily overcome with the requisite political will, and in this light they called for a timely decision to extend the EIF and for the necessary funds to be delivered. He expressed appreciation to the LDCs' development partners for their support.
&& The Representative of the Philippines indicated that the e-learning courses had proven particularly useful in her country. She also appreciated the initiative to introduce exams in the various courses.
&& The Representative of Guatemala said that her country had benefitted from the WTO's TA. She hoped that there could be an expansion of the courses being offered in Spanish and French. She also requested that more trainers be made available in the SPS and Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) areas.
&& The Representative of Bangladesh associated his delegation with the intervention by Uganda. He expressed appreciation for the WTO's TA, which was helping LDCs build capacity. He welcomed the gradual introduction of performance evaluation systems, and highlighted the importance of e‑learning. Noting that all LDCs were at a similar level of development, he called for all countries in this group to have equal opportunities in all the activities.
&& The Representative of Nepal associated his delegation with the intervention by Uganda. He highlighted the importance to LDCs of the WTO's TA activities, and expressed satisfaction that LDCs were being given priority in the activities. He noted the value that the LDCs attached to the internship programmes, and called for additional initiatives to ensure that the LDCs availed of their annual entitlement of national activities. He also suggested that a cost-effective way to address LDCs' needs would be for a number of experts from the Secretariat to visit these countries and provide training on a range of WTO issues.  
&& The Representative of Sri Lanka said that participants from his country were benefitting from several WTO TA activities. He expressed appreciation to the ITTC and to the donors. 
&& The Representative of Argentina expressed particular appreciation for the online courses. He also supported Guatemala in its request for a better language balance in the courses offered, particularly with regard to the courses held in Geneva.
&& The Representative of Nigeria said that, in light of budgetary constraints, many developing countries had not been able to benefit from the national TA activities that they were entitled to. He indicated that beneficiary countries would be appreciative if donors took this into account.
The Director of the ITTC said that the ITTC was in the process of consulting Members with regard to TA activities to be held in 2015. She hoped that these discussions could be used to address the points that had been raised at the present meeting. The ITTC remained open to suggestions and comments from delegations. She noted the request for more courses in French and Spanish, as well as the request for additional assistance for the organization of national activities. She also indicated that the implementation of the RBM online system would allow the ITTC to provide Members with more analysis in terms of achieving long term results. With regard to the query by Nigeria on paragraph 4.3 of the report, she said that, while RBM was a management tool for the ITTC, it was also a management tool for beneficiary countries. Although paragraph 4.3 was not explicit as to the role of beneficiaries, it was hoped that the information that would be made available through RBM would allow beneficiary countries to better identify the nature of the assistance that they required. 
&& The Committee took note of the report and of all interventions.
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. On the agenda for the present meeting were three submissions containing proposals for work under the MC8 mandate that had been previously discussed by the Committee. One submission - by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group - was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. Another submission - by Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho and Mauritius - was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/202. A third submission, by Ecuador, was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204. The three submissions were listed under the first sub-item. He said that, after the Committee concluded its discussion under the first sub-item, he would make a statement under the second sub-item concerning the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
(i)	Proposals by Members
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
-	A proposal that the Committee on Trade and Development reports to the General Council on development work in the WTO in compliance with Ministers' request issued at MC8 - proposal from Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho and Mauritius (WT/COMTD/W/202)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the 87th Session, the Committee had agreed to one of the proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192. The proposal was for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its document on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. The updated Secretariat paper was circulated in June 2013 in document WT/COMTD/W/196 and had appeared on the CTD's agenda for a number of meetings. With regard to the remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202, he recalled that he had previously informed the Committee that the proponents of the two submissions were exploring whether they could possibly combine their ideas for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO, so as to come up with a single proposal on this matter. With regard to the other remaining proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192, which was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to regional trade agreements (RTAs) to submit their notification and information requirements jointly, he said that he had encouraged the proponents of this proposal to continue their consultations with Members. He invited the proponents to brief the Committee on the status of the remaining proposals in the two submissions. 
&& The Representative of Egypt said that the proponents of WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202 would shortly circulate a joint proposal.
&& The Chairman welcomed the update by Egypt and indicated that the Committee would consider the new proposal after it was circulated.  
&& The Committee took note of the interventions.
-	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: review of the application of S&D provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members - proposal from Ecuador (WT/COMTD/W/204)
&& The Chairman recalled that the proposal from Ecuador, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/204, was for the Secretariat to periodically update its paper on the implementation of S&D provisions. He reminded Members that Ecuador had introduced the proposal at the 91st Session. Some questions were raised, and Ecuador had indicated that detailed responses would be provided in due course. Subsequently, at the informal, open-ended CTD meeting of 6 November 2014, Ecuador had provided responses. He hoped that these were useful to Members in their consideration of the proposal. He recalled that he had also encouraged Ecuador to continue consulting informally with Members.
&& The Representative of Ecuador said that, at the 6 November informal, open-ended meeting, he had explained that Ecuador's proposal was intended to facilitate a general discussion on the way in which S&D measures were being implemented. The purpose was not for Members to enter into in‑depth discussions on specific S&D provisions. In addition, he had pointed out that the regularly updated Secretariat paper could serve as an input to inform the discussions that would take place in the context of the Monitoring Mechanism (MM) on S&D. Finally, he had indicated that Ecuador was flexible in terms of the frequency of the proposed updates to the Secretariat paper. He recalled that, at the informal, open-ended meeting, a suggestion had been made for updates to be prepared every two years. His delegation believed that this suggestion was a step in the right direction, given that WTO Ministerial Conferences were held every two years, and decisions taken at these conferences could affect the development and implementation of S&D measures. A document that was updated every two years would give Members a clear picture of the implementation of S&D provisions, as well as any developments regarding these provisions.
He indicated that he wished to elaborate further on the distinction between the proposal and the discussion that would take place in the context of the MM. He explained that Ecuador's proposal called for regular updates to a Secretariat paper which contained information on the implementation of the full range of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. Since S&D was one of the key elements for achieving the WTO's development objectives, his delegation believed that the comprehensive information provided in the Secretariat document would assist Members in periodically discussing and assessing the general state of S&D implementation. The purpose of the MM, on the other hand, was to analyze only those provisions identified by Members through written submissions. 
&& The Representative of Nepal believed that regular updates to the Secretariat paper would be useful to Members. While stressing the importance of S&D for LDCs, he also noted that the utilization and implementation of S&D provisions was often weak with respect to LDCs, and therefore inadequate to address the real challenges faced by these countries. Many S&D provisions were non-binding. He expressed regret that, despite strong calls from Ministers at the Doha Ministerial Conference to address S&D issues, Members had not been able to conclude the negotiations mandated in paragraph 44 of the Doha Declaration. He informed the Committee that, for the last few months, the LDCs had been analyzing and reviewing the LDC-specific S&D provisions with a view to making them more precise, effective and operational, as per the Doha mandate. While the intention had been to complete the exercise before the end of 2014, the work was taking longer than had been initially envisaged, due to the complexity of the subject matter. He expressed his hope that a submission could be made in the Special Session of the CTD in early 2015, and that Members would give the submission positive consideration. The LDCs also looked forward to working closely with other groups within the WTO to advance negotiations in this area.
&& The Representative of Australia understood that the objectives of the proposal were for periodic discussions of a general nature on S&D to be held in the CTD, on the basis of factual analysis. While these were worthwhile objectives, his delegation's view was that they would normally be achieved through discussions in the context of the MM. He noted that, at the CTD's 2nd Dedicated Session on the MM, some Members had indicated that they working on written submissions for the MM. In this light, he suggested that the Committee postpone its consideration of Ecuador's proposal until Members had had the opportunity to have a discussion on the proposals made in the context of the MM. On this basis, Members could assess whether Ecuador's proposal added elements that might be missing from the discussions in the MM.  
&& The Representative of the United States believed that the suggestion by Australia was useful. While Ecuador had provided responses which attempted to differentiate between its proposal and the MM, his delegation continued to have concerns with regard to the relationship between the two. Furthermore, since no written submissions had yet been made to the MM, it was difficult at this stage to fully understand that relationship. He also noted that the recent update of the Secretariat paper circulated in 2013 had not generated much discussion. He said that the responses provided by Ecuador at the informal, open-ended meeting of 6 November were being reviewed in his capital, and also recalled that his delegation had raised an additional question on 6 November.
&& The Representative of Cameroon indicated that the MM could not cover all issues relating to S&D. In this light, he expressed support for the proposal. He believed that Members' discussions concerning S&D provisions could be complemented by regularly updated factual reports by the Secretariat on the implementation of these provisions.
&& The Representative of Ecuador said that his delegation had taken note of the comments made. He indicated that an example might help to clarify the need for periodic updates to the Secretariat paper. He recalled that, at MC9, a number of LDC-related decisions had been taken. These decisions were not reflected in the last update of the Secretariat paper, since the paper was circulated before MC9. However, they could be reflected in the next update. He explained that periodic updates would allow Members to be kept informed of developments in the area of S&D.    
&& The Representative of Egypt believed that the proposal had value and expressed his delegation's support for it. He hoped that Members would consider the proposal favourably.
&& The Representative of South Africa said that regular updates to the Secretariat document could serve as the basis for general discussions on the implementation of S&D provisions. The view of her delegation was that the proposal would add value to the regular work of the CTD. She noted that work in the MM context would proceed on a separate track.
&& The Representative of El Salvador said that the proposal was useful, and that the work envisaged was distinct from the work of the MM. She noted that her delegation had concerns relating to S&D implementation in some areas, and was considering submitting a proposal. She additionally emphasized that developing countries needed sufficient opportunities to engage in CTD meetings.
&& The Representative of Cuba said that the proposal was timely. He expressed his delegation's support for it. 
&& The Representative of Nigeria said that his delegation saw merit in the proposal and therefore supported it.
&& The Representative of Brazil said that his delegation was in favour of the proposal. He believed that Ecuador's indication of flexibility with regard to the frequency of updates to the Secretariat paper was significant.
&& The Representative of Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supported the proposal. She also indicated that developing countries needed sufficient opportunities to engage in CTD meetings.
&& The Representative of Nicaragua also expressed his support for the proposal. He additionally echoed other speakers in calling for sufficient opportunities for developing countries to engage in CTD meetings.
&& The Chairman encouraged Ecuador to continue consulting with delegations on the proposal. Discussion would also continue at the next CTD meeting.       
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
(ii)	Post-2015 Development Agenda - Statement by the Chairman
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the 91st Session, the Secretariat had provided a briefing on the discussions taking place at the UN on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. He had also subsequently raised this issue at the informal, open-ended CTD meeting held on 6 November 2014. The objective was to keep Members updated on the discussions, while also guiding the Secretariat - which was frequently invited to participate in these deliberations - on how Members wished to see trade reflected in the Post-2015 Development Agenda. He went on to say that a main focus at present was on the how the UN Secretary General's Synthesis Report, which was to be issued shortly, would capture progress made in the various inter-governmental processes feeding into the 2015 Summit. The Summit would coincide with the UN's 70th General Assembly, and would officially launch the Post-2015 Development Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). A draft resolution at the General Assembly had confirmed that the set of 17 SDGs would provide the main basis for the Post-2015 Development Agenda. Trade was reflected in Goal 17, which was to strengthen both the implementation of the goals and the global partnership for sustainable development. Goal 17 currently contained three targets that were directly trade-related. These targets called for the promotion of a universal, rules-based, open, non‑discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system; improved market access for exports of developing countries with a view to increasing their share of world trade; and the implementation of duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access on a lasting basis for all LDCs. 
In concluding, he said that it remained his hope that Members would be able to identify elements of the Post-2015 Development Agenda that could be incorporated into the CTD's work. In his view, the CTD's mandate from MC8 was an appropriate entry point for this purpose. He encouraged Members to continue to give some thought to this matter and to share their thoughts on how trade-led economic growth could be made an integral part of the Post-2015 Development Agenda, so that the Secretariat could reflect these views in its presentations to the UN. He believed that he spoke for all Members when emphasizing the importance of having a strong trade component incorporated into the Post-2015 Development Agenda, in light of the value Members attached to trade-led growth and development.
&& The Representative of Cameroon said that some developing Members were not drawing sufficient benefit from the multilateral trading system. He pointed as examples to the difficulties some countries faced in adhering to international standards for their products, as well as the lack of capacity to implement multilateral commitments. Some aspects of the system needed to be reviewed in order to better take into account these realities and to ensure that the system was contributing to development.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's statement and of the intervention by Cameroon.   
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs. With regard to the Agreement between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and India, he informed the Committee that the Secretariat had sent the draft factual presentation to the parties. Comments had been received from India, but the Secretariat was still waiting to receive comments from ASEAN. The draft factual presentation on the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the East African Community had also been sent to the parties, and the Secretariat was still waiting to receive comments.   
For a number of other RTAs - namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, India and Bhutan, and Cuba and El Salvador - the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties. He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible. He went on to say that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
He also indicated that he wished to say a few words regarding the implementation reports that were required under paragraph 15 of the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for RTAs, in follow-up to his intervention at the 91st Session. He said that, according to this paragraph, at the end of the implementation period of an RTA, the parties were to submit to the WTO a short written report on the realization of the liberalization commitments in the RTA as originally notified. He recalled that he had mentioned at the 91st Session that a discussion on the issue of implementation reports had been taking place in the CRTA, and that a list had been circulated in document WT/REG/W/82 of RTAs notified under GATT Article XXIV and GATS Article V that were subject to implementation reports. He had shared his belief that it was in Members' interests to continue to maintain similar procedures between the CRTA and the CTD when it came to implementing the RTAs TM, and in this light he had informed the Committee that the Secretariat would prepare an updated list of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were subject to implementation reports.
He went on to say that the updated list by the Secretariat had now been circulated in document WT/COMTD/RTA/W/1. Members were invited to consult the list and inform the Secretariat of any inaccuracies. He also called on Members to submit the required implementation reports. For some possible guidance on format, he referred Members to the report on the EU-Chile Agreement which had been circulated in the CRTA in document WT/REG/164/R/I. He also referred Members to documents JOB/REG/1 and JOB/REG/4 which had been circulated by the Secretariat. He noted, however, that since the purpose of these implementation reports was to increase transparency on each Agreement's implementation, form was less important than substance. Therefore, as would be the case in the CRTA, he called on Members to submit reports to the CTD in the format that they saw fit.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update.
Turning to the listed sub-items under the present agenda item, the Chairman said that he wished to say a few words on the first three sub-items. He noted that these sub-items had been appearing on the CTD's agenda for several years, and that divergent views had been expressed on the way forward. He informed the Committee that he had held some informal consultations with a number of delegations, including on an individual basis, on the issues surrounding the three sub‑items. While these consultations had helped him to better understand Members' positions, it was clear that further discussions - particularly among the concerned delegations - would be necessary before a solution could be found. In this light, he encouraged delegations to reach out to each other and discuss the matter with a view to finding a solution. He also indicated that he would continue his informal consultations with Members. 
&& -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The Representative of the United States indicated that his delegation's view on this matter was well-known. The present sub-item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. The US fully expected that the GCC Customs Union was in the pipeline to be reviewed in the CRTA.
He said that there was a divergence of views as to whether the GCC Customs Union was a case of a dual notification. His delegation believed that the GCC Customs Union issue was not an issue of dual notification, and was therefore different from the discussion relating to the ASEAN‑Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement. The US remained of the view that the GCC Customs Union had been incorrectly notified under the Enabling Clause. This was subsequently corrected, and the understanding of his delegation was that the GCC Customs Union was in the pipeline to be considered in the CRTA in line with the procedures of the RTAs TM. The US considered this issue closed and continued to request that the present sub‑item be removed from the CTD's agenda, as it had served its purpose. Turning to document WT/COMTD/W/175, he said that his delegation had not seen any specific issues relating to the GCC Customs Union. Rather, the paper appeared to be seeking a systemic discussion on RTAs, which was a discussion that was outside the scope of the CTD and belonged in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR). He indicated that the US was not open to a CTD process to discuss systemic issues concerning RTAs. The question of when the NGR would meet to discuss RTA issues was separate and distinct from the question of whether it had jurisdiction on this matter, which the US believed it did. He also indicated that the first three sub‑items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and these sub-items were distinct from the systemic discussion that some delegations wanted to have. The US did not believe that the CTD was the appropriate forum for a discussion on a systemic issue that cut across Committees.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that systemic concerns had been raised by some Members, including Egypt, over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. He noted that a number of delegations had previously expressed the view that the Enabling Clause did not provide the appropriate legal basis to justify the formation of a customs union involving the reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures (NTMs). However, others had argued that the non-prescription of criteria or conditions for the elimination of NTMs did not exclude customs unions among developing countries from the coverage of the Enabling Clause. The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification. This originated from the CTD's terms of reference, which stipulated that the CTD was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO. In addition, paragraph 4 of the terms of reference mandated the CTD to consider any questions with regard to either the application or the use of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, which included questions relating to the invocation of the Enabling Clause to notify customs unions among developing countries. He hoped that Members could have a substantive discussion on the systemic concerns that had been raised. The present sub-item needed to be maintained on the CTD's agenda until a solution was found.
He indicated that his delegation's position on this matter was well-known. The points raised by his delegation related to the first three sub-items under the present agenda item. He requested that the first three sub-items remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The Representative of the European Union said that she wished to reiterate the EU's view that the purpose of the present agenda item was to inform Members of new notifications under the Enabling Clause since the previous CTD meeting. While her delegation welcomed any ideas for a pragmatic solution to the present impasse, she indicated that a more substantive discussion on the legal issues arising from RTAs with a dual notification needed to take place in the NGR. She also made a distinction between the issues surrounding the GCC Customs Union on the one hand, and those surrounding the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement on the other.     
&& The Representative of India indicated that his intervention related to the first three sub-items under the present agenda item, since his delegation found similarities between the three RTAs on account of the way they had been notified. He expressed support for the intervention by Egypt. He also indicated his surprise that requests had been made for the present sub-item to be removed from the agenda. He explained that the systemic concerns that were raised by China, Egypt and India in document WT/COMTD/W/175 over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV remained pertinent and had not been addressed. Despite the existence of the TM for RTAs, Members had been unable to consider the GCC Customs Union, the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement, all three of which had been notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.	The first three sub-items under the present agenda item needed to remain on the CTD's agenda until the concerns that had been raised were addressed. He also requested the Chairman to hold consultations in this regard. 
&& The Chairman reiterated his intention to continue his informal consultations with Members on this matter. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement 	between India and Korea (Goods)
&& The Chairman said that the second sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement. The third sub-item concerned the notification of the India-Korea Agreement.
&& The Representative of the Republic of Korea said that her delegation continued to have concerns with the appearance on the CTD's agenda of the sub-items relating to the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement. The view of her delegation was that, even when developing countries notified their RTAs under GATT Article XXIV, the notification would not undermine the authority of the CTD or the Enabling Clause. She explained that Korea's RTAs were comprehensive agreements, which were more appropriately notified under GATT Article XXIV. She called for a solution to be found as soon as possible and indicated Korea's willingness to work with Members in this regard.
&& The Representative of the United States made a distinction between the first sub-item which concerned the GCC Customs Union, and the second and third sub-items relating to the ASEAN‑Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement. With regard to the second and third sub-items, he said that his delegation continued to have concerns with these sub-items being listed on the CTD's agenda. The sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. The issue of dual notifications was directly linked to the functioning of the RTAs TM and went beyond just the CTD.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that the points that were raised by his delegation under the first sub-item concerned the second and third sub-items as well.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Latin American Integration Association - Report to the WTO on instruments concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, for the period 1 January 2013 – 31 December 2013 (WT/COMTD/85)
&& The Chairman said that the report by the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA), circulated in document WT/COMTD/85, appeared on the CTD's agenda at the request of the delegation of Uruguay. He invited Uruguay to introduce the report.
&& The Representative of Uruguay said that the first section of the report analyzed trends in intraregional trade in 2013. The second section described the instruments that were concluded and registered under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo during the period considered, or that were concluded in preceding years but registered with the LAIA General Secretariat in 2013. He noted that the report included two new economic complementarity agreements, six additional protocols to economic complementarity agreements, and two agreements concluded under Article 25 of the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, under which the parties could conclude agreements with other Latin American countries.
&& The Representative of the European Union said that the view of her delegation was that the report did not exempt the concerned Members from their notification obligations in compliance with point B of the TM for RTAs. She urged them to submit the outstanding notifications as soon as possible.  
&& The Representative of the United States said that his delegation agreed with the EU. In particular, the submission of the report did not exempt the concerned Members from notifying new agreements - and modifications to existing agreements - in compliance with point B of the TM for RTAs.  
&& The Committee took note of the report and of the interventions.
-	Generalized System of Preferences notification by Canada (WT/COMTD/N/15/Add.3)
&& The Chairman said that Canada's notification concerning its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme was contained in document WT/COMTD/N/15/Add.3. He invited Canada to introduce the notification.
&& The Representative of Canada said that the notification informed Members that Canada’s General Preferential Tariff (GPT) and its LDC Tariff (LDCT) were renewed as of 26 June 2013 for an additional ten years, until 31 December 2024. Canada was making changes to its GPT to ensure that it was more appropriately aligned with the current global economic landscape. As of 1 January 2015, countries that were classified as high income or upper-middle income, or which were trade-competitive, would no longer receive the GPT. This would affect 72 countries. The changes would ensure that the benefits of Canada’s GSP scheme were targeted towards those in most need of assistance, particularly LDCs. With this in mind, consequential changes would come into effect for the rules of origin for the LDCT so that LDCs’ preferential access to the Canadian market was not impacted by the GPT changes. LDCs would continue to benefit from the same liberal access that they had enjoyed in the Canadian market since 2003, by being allowed to use the same sources of supply in the production of goods eligible for duty-free treatment. Beneficiary countries had welcomed this action by Canada.
&& The Committee took note of the notification by Canada.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on PTAs. With regard firstly to Chile's DFQF scheme for LDCs which was notified in April 2014, he said that the Secretariat had sent the draft factual presentation to Chile for comments by 1 December 2014. If all matters concerning the draft factual presentation were clarified in good time, the PTA could be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD in the early part of 2015. However, with regard to four other PTAs notified since the establishment of the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs - namely, PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation and Chinese Taipei - the Secretariat had still not received the full set of data required for the preparation of the factual presentations. He urged the notifying Members to provide the data as soon as possible.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update. 
REVIEW OF THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
-	Statement by the Chairman
&& The Chairman recalled that, in previous CTD meetings, he had brought to Members' attention paragraph 26 of the TM for PTAs, which indicated that the Mechanism would apply on a provisional basis until Members approved its permanent application. The paragraph also indicated that Members would review the Mechanism after three years, and if necessary modify the Mechanism in light of the experience gained from its provisional operation. He went on to say that more than three years had elapsed since the General Council Decision which established the PTAs TM. Members would, therefore, need to consider the question of the review of the Mechanism. He recalled that, at the informal, open-ended CTD meeting held on 6 November 2014, he had provided an overview of the status of implementation of the PTAs TM, so as to assist Members in considering this question. He indicated that he would repeat the elements of this overview at the present meeting, for the benefit of all Members. 
By way of introduction, he said that the implementation of the PTAs TM had taken place in the CTD on the basis of the General Council Decision of December 2010, complemented by the modalities to implement the Mechanism that the Committee agreed to at its 82nd Session on 5 July 2011. Turning to some specifics, he said that he would firstly address the notifications of PTAs under paragraph 1 of the Mechanism.  For PTAs notified under this paragraph since the establishment of the Mechanism - and in particular under one of the three sub-paragraphs of this paragraph - a factual presentation by the Secretariat was to be prepared, on the basis of data and information provided by the notifying Member implementing the PTA. The PTA was to be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD, on the basis of the factual presentation, as well as written questions from Members and replies from the notifying Member. While six PTAs had thus far been notified under paragraph 1 of the Mechanism, only one had been considered by the Committee. This was the EU's trade preferences for Pakistan, which was considered in April 2014 at the CTD's 1st Dedicated Session on PTAs. With regard to the five other PTAs, he recalled that he had already provided an update under the previous agenda item. Essentially, for four of them, the full set of data required for the preparation of the factual presentations had not been provided to the Secretariat. 
He went on to say that he also wished to say a few words on the requirements in paragraphs 15 and 16 of the PTAs TM, which concerned all notified PTAs - including those that were notified before the establishment of the Mechanism. Paragraph 15 indicated that changes affecting the implementation of a PTA during a calendar year were to be notified on an annual basis. Changes to be notified include legal changes and changes in the treatment of beneficiaries, including through graduation. According to the modalities to implement the PTAs TM that the CTD agreed to, notifications of this nature were to be circulated as CTD documents. He noted in this regard that there had not been many such notifications to the CTD since the PTAs TM was established. Paragraphs 15 and 16 of the PTAs TM also specified the data that Members implementing PTAs were to submit on an annual basis. These concerned firstly preferential tariffs per beneficiary partner applied under each PTA, at the tariff line level. Second, Members implementing PTAs were required to submit data concerning imports from each beneficiary partner, including imports entering under PTA benefits, at the tariff-line level. However, while some Members implementing PTAs had submitted up-to-date data, there remained several gaps - especially with regard to data on imports entering under PTA benefits.
He observed that, while progress had certainly been made in enhancing transparency in PTAs since the Mechanism was established, there was more that could be done to ensure that the Mechanism was being fully implemented as agreed by Members. He recalled that a Database on PTAs was established as an outcome of the Decision establishing the PTAs TM. This database - which was publicly available through the WTO website - contained various types of documentation relating to the PTAs being implemented by Members, as well as trade and tariff data concerning each PTA. However, the database could only remain up to date if Members submitted up-to-date information and data. In this light, he urged Members implementing PTAs to ensure that they were up to date with their notification and information requirements under the PTAs TM. He invited these Members to remain in touch with the Secretariat after the present meeting to verify the status of their submissions. Finally, with regard to the discussion on the question of the review of the PTAs TM that had taken place at the informal, open-ended meeting of 6 November, he indicated that he saw this as a preliminary discussion. Some ideas were shared on possible ways forward. He also recalled that some Members had raised the question of whether enough experience had yet been gained to conduct a full review of the Mechanism. In conclusion, he expressed his willingness to work with Members to facilitate any further discussions they might wish to have on the question of the review of the PTAs TM.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's statement. 
ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
-	Report by the Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/206)
&& The Chairman said that the Bali Ministerial Decision of 7 December 2013 contained in documents WT/MIN(13)/44 and WT/L/919 instructed the CTD to continue to annually review the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to the LDCs, and report to the General Council for appropriate action. To aid in its review, the Secretariat was to prepare a report, in close coordination with Members, on their DFQF market access for LDCs at the tariff line level, based on their notifications. He said that the Secretariat report was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/206. The preparation of the report had benefited from discussions with Members in a number of informal consultations.   
&& The Representative of Chinese Taipei said that Chinese Taipei was one of the developing Members that had notified its DFQF scheme to the WTO. She observed that LDCs still faced many challenges with respect to international trade. In this light, she urged other Members to grant DFQF market access to LDCs and to notify the WTO of their DFQF schemes, so as to help the LDCs integrate into the multilateral trading system.
The delegation of Bangladesh indicated that it was not clear from the Secretariat report what steps had been taken by Members since MC9 to provide DFQF market to LDCs. This was a matter that he had raised during the informal consultations. While a few Members were maintaining non‑reciprocal preferential schemes, many of these schemes were not specific to LDCs and did not provide benefit to all LDCs. His delegation also noted with disappointment that one Member’s GSP scheme had expired over a year ago. The legally non-binding nature of these schemes was a matter of economic and systemic concern to LDCs. He believed that the information in the Secretariat report was not sufficient to allow Members to effectively review the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. The value of the Secretariat report needed to lie in depicting the exclusive DFQF coverage to LDCs in their areas of export interest, at the tariff line level. Such information was necessary to engage in an informed discussion with the objective of recommending ways and means to improve the coverage and utility of DFQF schemes. In this light, he called upon the Secretariat to present the requested information and data at the next CTD meeting. Finally, he noted that DFQF treatment would not be useful to LDCs if the rules of origin in the DFQF schemes were burdensome. He believed that the Secretariat report would benefit from the inclusion of information on the rules of origin in the various DFQF schemes.  
&& The Representative of Japan welcomed the Secretariat report and particularly commended the Members that had recently submitted data to the WTO's Integrated Database. Such cooperation from Members enhanced transparency and further assisted the LDCs in gaining a clear picture of market access opportunities. He also noted with satisfaction that the preparation of the report was evidence of the implementation of one of the LDC-related decisions from MC9. Japan was committed to assisting LDCs in their development and stood ready for active discussions to integrate the LDCs into the multilateral trading system.
&& The Representative of Haiti expressed his delegation's appreciation for the Secretariat report and for the notifications made by Members.        
&& The Representative of the United States indicated that the consultations held by the Chairman had allowed the concerns expressed by his delegation on an earlier draft of the Secretariat report to be addressed. He believed that the report was responsive to the Bali DFQF Decision. In this light, he said that, if Bangladesh wished to request additional work from the Secretariat, a written proposal would need to be submitted for Members' consideration. He also suggested that future reports by the Secretariat show Members’ DFQF schemes in a more comprehensive way, in particular by providing information on the number of beneficiaries of each scheme. In the case of the US' schemes, he believed that about eight LDCs were granted DFQF access on 82.6% of tariff lines, while about 25 LDCs were granted DFQF access on 97.5% of tariff lines.  
&& The Representative of India recalled elements of the decision on DFQF market access for LDCs taken at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference in December 2005 and said that, pursuant to this decision, India had announced its Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for LDCs in 2008. The scheme - which was notified to the WTO in September 2011 - came into full operation in October 2012, with duty-free access to LDCs on about 85% of India’s total tariff lines, as well as preferential access on about 9% of tariff lines. Only 6% tariff lines were under the Exclusion List. He also informed the Committee that the DFTP Scheme had recently been expanded. In particular, with effect from 1 April 2014, the scheme now provided duty-free market access to LDCs on about 96% of India’s tariff lines at the 6-digit level of the Harmonized System (HS), as well as preferential access on 2.2% of the lines. Only 1.8% of the tariff lines had been retained in the Exclusion List. He noted that table 2 of the Secretariat report laid out India's DFQF coverage at the 8-digit HS level, which corresponded to duty-free product coverage on 94.1% of tariff lines and preferential access on an additional 3.2% of tariff lines. Only 2.7% of tariff lines at the 8-digit level were excluded from the scheme. An important aspect of the scheme was that it was open to all 48 LDCs. In order to benefit from the scheme, each LDC was required to submit a letter of intent to the Government of India. A total of 31 LDCs had thus far become beneficiaries of the scheme. He urged the remaining LDCs to finalize their internal processes in this regard. 
He went on to say that developed countries had a greater obligation than developing countries to provide DFQF market access to the LDCs. He noted in this regard that all developed Members, with the exception of the US, granted full - or almost full - DFQF market access to LDCs' products. Table 1 of the Secretariat report indicated that the DFQF coverage in the US' GSP scheme was 82.6%, which was almost 15 percentage points below the minimum for developed countries mentioned in the Hong Kong Decision. Furthermore, the US' GSP scheme had expired on 31 July 2013, and many imports from LDCs that would otherwise have received duty-free treatment were subject to most-favoured-nation (MFN) tariffs. He indicated that he wished to refer to information contained in Volume XXIX, Number 42, of the Washington Trade Report dated 11 November 2013. He noted in this regard that the LDCs, as a group, were subject to higher average tariffs than other US trading partners. The LDCs to which the US extended the closest approximation of DFQF treatment were either in the Americas or in Sub-Saharan Africa, while those located in Asia and the Pacific were granted only limited preferences. He referred next to a Congressional Research Service report titled “African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA): Background and Reauthorization”, dated 24 July 2014. This report indicated that LDCs throughout the world faced relatively high US import tariffs given the particular items they exported, such as apparel and agricultural products. For example, in 2013, US import duties on all imports from Cambodia were higher than those from France. In concluding, he said that India welcomed feedback from the LDCs that would help to iron out any difficulties they faced in taking advantage of the DFTP Scheme.
&& The Representative of the European Union welcomed the progress that had been achieved by developed and developing Members in granting DFQF market access to LDCs since the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference. She also noted that more could be done in this regard, both in terms of further enhancing market access opportunities for LDCs, as well as in the context of transparency in the provision of reliable data.  
&& The Representative of the United States said that the discussion under this agenda item indicated that his earlier suggestion - which was to include in future Secretariat reports the number of beneficiaries of each DFQF scheme - would provide useful clarification. He also recalled that the commitment in the Bali DFQF Decision was for Members to seek to improve their existing DFQF coverage by the Tenth Ministerial Conference. In this regard, he informed the Committee that the US was engaging with its stakeholders to determine how to be responsive to the Decision.  
&& The Committee took note of the Secretariat report and of all interventions.
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2014 (WT/COMTD/W/207)
&& The Chairman said that a fax was sent to Members on 19 November 2014 to inform them that the CTD's draft annual report had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/207. It was noted that the draft contained a number of square brackets relating to items under consideration at the 92nd Regular Session, as well as at the 28th Dedicated Session on Small Economies and the 2nd Dedicated Session on the MM on S&D. The square brackets would be removed as part of the process of adopting the annual report. Noting that Members were requested to submit in writing any comments on the draft annual report by 24 November, he informed the Committee that no substantive comments had been received on the report.
&& The Committee adopted its annual report for 2014.
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business". 
The meeting was adjourned.

__________


&& The discussion concerning documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202 is presented together in this Note, since the Chairman's intervention and the subsequent intervention by Egypt related to both submissions.  
&& The points in this paragraph, made by the US at the 90th Session and also reflected in the minutes of the 91st Session, are reflected once again in the minutes of this meeting at the request of the US delegation.
&& The points in this paragraph, made by Egypt at the 90th Session, are reflected in the minutes of this meeting at the request of the Egyptian delegation.
&& The discussion under the second and third sub-items is presented together in this Note, as the interventions made by delegations applied to both sub-items.    
 The report was issued in document WT/COMTD/86.









WT/COMTD/M/92

-  PAGE 2 -


WT/COMTD/M/92

-  PAGE 17 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/92

22 December 2014
(14-7403)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/17
Committee on Trade and Development
Ninety-Second Session
 






