WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/61
9 February 2007

(07-0546)


Committee on Trade and Development
Sixty-First Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 28 NOVEMBER 2006

Chairman:  Mr. Faizel Ismail (South Africa) 


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111153" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC158111153 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111154" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC158111154 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc158111155" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc158111155 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc158111156" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc158111156 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111157" C.	Notifications Under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC158111157 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111158" -	Communication from the European Communities on the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111158 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111159" -	Communication from the United States on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, the Protocol to Amend the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111159 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111160" -	Communication from Japan on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN And the People's Republic of China and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111160 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111161" -	Communication from Brazil on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD//57/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111161 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111162" -	Communication from China on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111162 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111163" -	Communication from India on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT//COMTD/57/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111163 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111164" -	Communication from Pakistan on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111164 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111165" -	Communication from the European Communities – Responses to Questions Submitted by Brazil, China, India and Pakistan on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111165 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111166" -	Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Customs Union (WT/COMTD/N/14/Add.1 and WT/COMTD/25/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111166 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111167" D.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC158111167 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111168" E.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in Order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC158111168 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111169" F.	Annual Review of the Implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on Duty-Free and Quota-Free Market Access for Least-Developed Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC158111169 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111170" G.	Electronic Commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC158111170 \H 18
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111171" H.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC158111171 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111172" -	Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/151 and WT/COMTD/W/151/Corr.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111172 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111173" I.	Draft Annual Report (WT/COMTD/W/155)	 PAGEREF _TOC158111173 \H 21
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC158111174" J.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC158111174 \H 22


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 61st Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/2929/Rev.1 issued on 22 November 2006.  He said that he wished to raise a matter under "Other Business" concerning a recommendation that had recently been made by the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) on a common format for the notification of regional trade agreements (RTAs).
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES ON THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.2)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM THE UNITED STATES ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, THE PROTOCOL TO AMEND THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.3)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM JAPAN ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman said that communications from the European Communities (EC), the United States (US) and Japan raising questions on the notifications made by ASEAN and China in 2005 had been circulated as documents WT/COMTD/51/Add.2, Add.3 and Add.4 respectively.  He recalled that he had informed the Committee at its 58th Session on 6 July 2006 that the responses from ASEAN and China had been submitted bilaterally to each of the three Members that had raised questions.  A number of delegations had then indicated that they wished to see all the responses, and were of the view that the responses should be circulated as a CTD document.  It had been agreed that he would consult with the concerned delegations, and would report back to the CTD at the present meeting.  He said that his consultations had not yielded any concrete results as yet, and suggested that he continue consulting with the concerned delegations with a view to reporting to the CTD at its next meeting in early 2007. 
It was so agreed. 
-&&	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD//57/ADD.1)
-&&	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
-&&	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT//COMTD/57/ADD.3)
-&&	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
-&&	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD on 11 May 2006.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4 respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  He said that that it had been agreed at the last meeting of the CTD that the item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation had for some time been raising questions and concerns regarding transparency in the EC's GSP scheme and on the scheme's compliance with the terms of the Enabling Clause.  Though his delegation had recently met with the EC delegation, concerns still remained.  More than a year and a half had passed since his delegation had first asked the EC in writing for data on preferential imports under its GSP scheme, but so far no data had been received.  He asked the representative of the EC to clarify to Members what was the correct procedure to obtain updated information on import data on a regular basis, and remarked that it would be most useful if a simplified procedure to obtain import data under the EC's GSP scheme was put in place.  He said that his delegation had been told that it could not be provided with preferential import data concerning countries other than Brazil, and asked what was the justification for treating such data as sensitive.  He added that, although GSP systems should be non-discriminatory, he was under the impression that the "objective criteria" of the EC's GSP scheme were in fact designed to fit a set of countries that had been chosen beforehand.  He requested that this item remain on the agenda for the next meeting of the CTD.
&& The representative of Pakistan thanked the EC for arranging an informal meeting with its Brussels GSP officials regarding questions posed by Brazil, China, India and Pakistan on the notification of its revised GSP scheme.  She said that the meeting had allowed a candid exchange of views, and that a number of points that had remained unclear in the written responses had been raised and answers had been received.  It was noted from the explanations that the EC had tailored the special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance ("GSP-plus") for certain specific countries.  It was also acknowledged by the EC officials that while the general scheme that applied to all eligible countries was non-reciprocal, the GSP-plus scheme was a special arrangement.  She said that EC officials had underscored that no country was obliged to seek access to the GSP‑plus, and that it was reciprocal to the extent that countries wanting to use it were obligated to ratify and implement certain core human and labour UN/ILO conventions, as well as some environment and governance principles.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that her delegation wanted to follow up with additional questions to further clarify its understanding of the scheme:  
"Question 1:  Could the EC explain the apparent coincidence between the large number of recipients under the former Drug Arrangement Scheme and the countries that also benefit from the special incentive arrangement?  
Question 2:  Pakistan notes the assertion of the EC that its scheme is 'non‑reciprocal'.  What is the significance of Article 9.2(b) of Regulation 980/2005?  Is Pakistan correct to read this provision as requiring countries to amend their constitutions if these are incompatible with any 'missing conventions'?
Question 3:  The EC has referred to the World Bank criteria of vulnerability.  However, the EC has also included the criterion of the percentage of GSP-covered exports.  Is the criterion based on any criteria developed outside the EC?  Do any other development agencies or GSP donors use GSP‑covered exports as a measure to assess development, financial or trade needs?
Question 4:  Is Pakistan correct to read Article 10 of Regulation 980/2005 as limiting requests for inclusion only to those countries that have ratified the stated conventions by 31 October 2005?  If this is so, how does the EC justify its statement that it did not adopt a 'closed list' approach?  In this regard, Pakistan notes that the EC published the Regulation in June 2005, four months before the deadline of 31 October 2005.
Question 5:  If the EC enacted Article 9.2 to assist countries that would otherwise benefit but face constitutional impediments that prevent them from ratifying 'missing' conventions, why did the EC not consider extending the deadline to allow other potential beneficiaries to ratify the necessary conventions?  
Question 6:  Would Pakistan be correct in reading Article 9.2 as a provision to accommodate those countries that the EC had pre-selected as beneficiaries, but that did not immediately qualify under Article 9.1?"
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation believed that the procedural elements of transparency in the WTO should be recognized by all Members.  The issues discussed in the CTD were issues of interest to all Members, and responses to questions circulated in a CTD document should, therefore, also be circulated as a CTD document.  This was an established institutional principle that should not be applied in an ad hoc or inconsistent manner.
&& The representative of China thanked the EC for organizing informal consultations prior to the present meeting, but noted that his delegation still had concerns relating to transparency in the EC's GSP scheme as well as the new special incentive arrangement.  He said that under the previous EC's GSP scheme, China had applied to benefit from the special incentive arrangement for tropical products.  An EC expert evaluation group had visited China three times and great efforts had been made by China's Ministries to comply with requests for information from the evaluation group.  He said that in 2002 the expert evaluation group issued a report where it was found that China's application complied with the conditions to benefit from the special incentive arrangement for tropical products, and recommended that the EC offer China such incentives.  However, China did not receive any feedback or further information from the EC on this issue.  He said that his delegation had now received information that the previous application under the former GSP scheme was no longer valid, and that China was not eligible to benefit from any special incentive arrangement.  He remarked that, although the EC scheme was non-reciprocal, in case of changes to the GSP scheme, due respect should be paid to past applications that were found to be in conformity with special incentive arrangements.  He said that this item should remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  
&& The representative of India said that even after the meeting that was convened by the EC with the participation of experts from Brussels, his delegation was still not satisfied with the responses that had been provided on the EC's GSP scheme and the GSP-plus.  Like Brazil, he said that his delegation was increasingly convinced that the EC had selected countries in advance of setting out the objective criteria for participation, and had developed the criteria to fit the selected countries.  In his understanding, this did not fit the principle contained in various dispute settlement panel reports that GSP schemes should be non-discriminatory.  He joined the delegate of Brazil in his request for an explanation on the sensitivities involved in sharing data on imports benefiting from the GSP scheme.  He also asked the US delegation whether the US published, or was required to publish, data on all countries that were receiving preferences under the GSP scheme. The representative of India also expressed concern that the position adopted by the EC delegation regarding transparency and circulation of answers to questions in the CTD with respect to the EC's GSP scheme was inconsistent with the position adopted in the context of the ASEAN-China notifications, which were also being considered by the Committee.  He said that this item should remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  
&& The representative of the European Communities recalled that the EC's revised GSP scheme had been notified in March 2006 and had been presented to the CTD at its meeting in May 2006.  The EC had responded to questions posed by four delegations, and the content of this exchange had been distributed in the documents mentioned on the agenda for the meeting.  The CTD continued discussions of the EC notification at the meetings of July and October 2006.  He said that, taking advantage of the presence of experts from Brussels, the EC delegation had also met informally with the four delegations concerned.  This was a useful exercise in that it allowed discussions to go into more detail than was feasible in the formal setting of the CTD.  The discussion also offered an opportunity for an open and frank exchange on the policy orientations that underpinned the GSP regime.  He noted that Pakistan had submitted additional questions, and said that his delegation would need time to study them before providing responses.
He said that the EC delegation had approached the notification exercise in a spirit of full transparency and accordingly had responded to the questions and issues that had been raised by other Members of the WTO.  He said that he was confident about the positive contribution that the EC's GSP scheme could make to the development of the developing countries and LDC partners of the EC.  Preferences under the GSP benefited around 180 countries and covered some 7,200 tariff lines where Most-Favoured-Nation (MFN) duties would otherwise apply.  He anticipated that for 2006 – the first year of operation of the current scheme – the EC's GSP scheme would continue to be the most widely used of all developed country GSP systems.  He noted that past reviews in the WTO of the LDC‑specific component of the regime – Everything But Arms (EBA), which had been carried over from the previous GSP arrangement – had served to demonstrate the extent of the preferential access that the EC made available to all least-developed countries (LDCs).  In 2005, 99.4 per cent of EC tariff lines were covered by EBA for products from LDCs.
Regarding the GSP-plus arrangement, the representative of the EC said the GSP-plus should not be allowed to obscure the substantial trade benefits for developing countries that flowed from the core GSP arrangement.  He said that the GSP-plus provided some additional tariff preferences to vulnerable developing countries as an incentive for them to accept and implement a number of important international conventions in the field of human and labour rights, the environment and good governance.  Taken together in an integral manner, these instruments contributed to the goal of sustainable development shared by all Members.  He said that the beneficiaries of GSP-plus had all applied to be covered by this element of the regime.  They were not obliged to do so.  Their requests had then been reviewed against the objective and transparent criteria set out in the GSP Regulation.  If the GSP-plus applicants proved unable to follow through on implementation, they would stand to lose the additional trade preferences, and would revert to the standard GSP. 
He said that the EC delegation was of the view that the review exercise in the CTD should not be prolonged indefinitely.  His delegation had worked to respond to the various requests for additional information and explanation that had been received from Members, and would continue to work on a number of factual points, including issues concerning trade data.  In this regard, his delegation had already informed Members of its readiness to provide information on a bilateral basis to individual beneficiary countries.  He explained that the GSP Regulation would apply for three years, and was already well into its first year of application.  The law of diminishing returns would soon start to limit the value of the transparency process in the CTD.  He said that if, at the end of this exhaustive questions and answers process, any individual Member remained unhappy with particular aspects of the regime, this would effectively indicate underlying differences in policy appreciation.  Such differences of view would not be resolved through a transparency exercise, or through more questions. 
&& The representative of the EC said that in the context of the informal meeting that had been held with certain delegations, these delegations had been informed about the new products of their interest that had been introduced in the GSP.  He noted that the EC was always open to meet with the GSP beneficiary countries and provide further statistics on their imports under the GSP scheme, but not on imports originating in other GSP beneficiary countries, as certain GSP beneficiaries had requested the EC not to disclose data on their imports under the GSP scheme to their competitors.  This, he said, would respect the principle of economic confidentiality.  He reminded Members that the EC's GSP scheme was completely unconditional, but in certain cases the EC had agreed to provide further preferences to those countries that had accepted to pay the price for sustainable development.  He said that sustainable development had a high cost for the small and vulnerable countries.  Thus, the EC had implemented the GSP-plus arrangement for countries that could prove that they practiced sustainable development by adopting certain objective international conventions in the area.  He recalled that in 2004 the EC's GSP scheme had been found not to be in conformity with the WTO's rules.  However, the panel also found that the EC could establish a GSP-plus scheme, as long as the conditions for benefiting from the scheme were objective and that the scheme was accorded to all developing country Members in similar conditions.  In reply to the comment made by the representative of China, he noted that the special scheme for which China had applied had been eliminated as a result of the panel's findings.  
&& The representative of the United States, in reply to the question from the representative of India, said that the US provided data on a multilateral basis.  The data could be found, on a monthly basis and for all countries, on the website of the United States International Trade Commission (USITC).  Also, since the GSP scheme of the US was currently under review, the Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR) had prepared several reports for the US Congress which were publicly available.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation had regularly sent letters to officials in the EC's Directorate General for Trade asking for certain GSP data, but had never obtained a reply.  He suggested that the EC submit a document to the CTD detailing the procedure to obtain GSP data.  He asked the US representative whether the United States had also received requests from GSP beneficiaries to treat their data as confidential.  He said that if GSP import data were treated confidentially under the principle of not revealing information to competitors, the same principle could be applied to MFN import data.  He noted that there was a fundamental problem of discrimination and transparency in the actions of the EC.  First, since data on the conditions and imports of other Members were not available, it was not possible for a Member to verify that the MFN principle was being respected.  Second, "transparency" for the EC meant that some data could be provided from time to time on a selective basis.  He said that there were important differences of perception with regard to the principles that must guide a GSP scheme and which had not been taken into consideration in the current GSP scheme of the EC. 
&& The representative of India noted that since the beneficiaries of the US' and the EC's GSP schemes were largely the same, it seemed inconsistent that the beneficiary countries that had requested confidential treatment for their GSP data to the EC did not have a problem with the US sharing similar data with other countries.  He said that these inconsistencies made it clear that it was necessary to adopt a transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements similar to that agreed in the Negotiating Group on Rules concerning RTAs.  Regarding the GSP plus scheme, he asked whether there was a list of countries that had applied to benefit from this scheme available in the public domain and, if not, why this information could not be shared with other Members. 
&& The representative of Guatemala said that in the May 2006 meeting of the CTD where the EC's GSP scheme was first reviewed, her delegation had noted three elements of the scheme that she thought were important to recall.  First, the notification by the EC on the GSP scheme, which was accompanied by the relevant legal instruments, contained sufficient and detailed information.  Second, as a beneficiary, Guatemala derived important economic and social contributions from the GSP-plus.  Third, her delegation hoped that the preferences obtained from the GSP-plus scheme and Guatemala's trade relations with the EC could be strengthened through an eventual partnership agreement.  She welcomed the initiative of the EC delegation to meet with the delegations that had posed questions on the EC's GSP scheme, and she hoped that these meetings would continue so that the review of the EC's GSP scheme in the CTD would not be prolonged indefinitely. 
&& The representative of Malaysia said that data should not only be looked at from the point of view of concerns about competition.  Data could also be very useful in helping developing countries identify ways to take full advantage of preferences and increase utilization rates, with the help of those developing countries that had benefited the most from the preferences.  Therefore, Members should consider the positive aspects that sharing information would entail from a development point of view.
&& The representative of the United States, in reply to the questions from India and Brazil, clarified that the United States had not received requests to give confidential treatment to certain GSP data.  In any case, the US would not be in a position to treat GSP data as confidential since it was legally bound to treat this data as public.  She suggested that delegations which wanted to see the extent of the data provided by the US on its GSP scheme visit the trade database at www.usitc.gov.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that one problem with GSP schemes was their low utilization rates.  His delegation had consulted with the EC on this issue and in the consultations it was found that large developing countries had utilization rates of 90 to 97 per cent while a small vulnerable country such as Sri Lanka had a utilization rate of only 40 per cent.  These contacts with the EC had led to the revision of the EC's GSP scheme and the creation of the GSP-plus scheme, where the concerns of countries like Sri Lanka had been taken into account.  Even with the creation of the GSP-plus scheme, however, utilization by Sri Lanka had not expanded dramatically, though it had expanded.  He said that only after the revision of the EC's GSP scheme had small developing countries started to really benefit from it, although there were still some problems like the issue of rules of origin.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that all countries should be fully utilizing their shares under GSP schemes.  However, this did not mean that other countries should be excluded.  She said that this was the issue that had prompted the questions and follow-up questions from Pakistan on the EC's GSP scheme.  She said that the predecessor of the GSP-plus arrangement had 11 beneficiaries while the current arrangement had 15 beneficiaries, including ten of the original beneficiaries.  She noted that only Pakistan had been left out due to the new vulnerability criteria that had been introduced.  She said that a significant number of poor people resided in countries like Pakistan which was considered to have a relatively large economy, but was also a low-income country.  In the current GSP-plus, only one beneficiary was a low-income country, ten were low-middle income countries and three were upper-middle income countries.  She hoped that the EC would look at this aspect when revising its GSP scheme.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the EC had indicated in the written answers to Brazil's questions that it would be willing to provide further data to beneficiaries of the GSP scheme on a bilateral basis.  This supplemented the data that was published by Eurostat, which was more general.  On the question of utilization, he said that it was surprising that this had been raised by Malaysia, a large developing country.  He said that usually the issue of utilization was a problem for LDCs and small developing countries, not large developing countries which were better able to integrate their economic processes.  He noted that part of the rationale for the graduation mechanism in the EC's GSP scheme was that some countries had advanced sufficiently so that the additional advantage provided by GSP was no longer needed.  He said that the EC was trying to focus its GSP scheme to fit the developmental needs of the smaller and most vulnerable developing countries.  In reply to some of the comments made by the Indian and Brazilian delegations, he said that he was open to a horizontal discussion on transparency and notifications of preferential trade arrangements, but that the review of the EC's notification of its revised GSP scheme was not the appropriate context for this discussion.
&& The representative of Malaysia said that countries providing GSP should regard data provision as a positive tool.  Data availability would allow developing countries to share their experiences, and would also allow an improvement in the utilization rates of those countries that had not been able benefit as much as others. 
&& The representative of India said that it was not his intention to discuss the issue of transparency in preferential arrangements under agenda item C.  This issue had been extensively discussed in other fora because of the experience of many developing countries on the lack of transparency exhibited in GSP schemes in the past, particularly that of the EC.  He hoped that the EC would understand the term "transparency" in the same manner as the majority of Members.  He said that his delegation did not object to any country having a unilateral preference scheme such as GSP to benefit developing countries, but that such schemes had to comply with WTO rules.  He said the current problems with the EC's GSP scheme arose because of lack of transparency, either in sharing data or in explaining the basis for the scheme.  He did not, however, question the right of the EC to establish a GSP scheme. 
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions, and that the item concerning the EC's revised GSP scheme remain on the CTD's agenda.  He also encouraged delegations that continued to have concerns with the EC's GSP scheme to consult bilaterally with the EC delegation. 
It was so agreed. 
-	PROTOCOL ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN CUSTOMS UNION (WT/COMTD/N/14/ADD.1 AND WT/COMTD/25/ADD.1)
&& The Chairman said that the notification relating to the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Customs Union (EACU) had been made by Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda.  The notification had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/14/Add.1, while the text of the Protocol had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/25/Add.1.  He said that he would first allow a representative of the notifying Members to make an intervention, after which the floor would be opened for questions and comments.
&& The representative of Uganda, on behalf of the member countries of the East African Community (EAC), said that he was pleased to notify WTO Members of the Protocol on the Establishment of the EACU.  He recalled that when the existence of the EAC was notified in 2000, it had been explained that the Treaty provided for a progressive process towards the conclusion of a Protocol establishing a customs union.  This process had now been successfully completed, and a Protocol establishing the EACU had been concluded and ratified by the Partner States of the EAC.
He said that the EAC was a regional economic organization whose current membership comprised the United Republic of Tanzania, the Republic of Kenya and the Republic of Uganda.  The Community was a corporate legal entity established by the Treaty for the Establishment of the EAC, which was signed on 30 November 1999 and which came into force on 7 July 2000.  He noted that the Republic of Burundi and the Republic of Rwanda had applied to join the EAC, and consideration of their applications was underway.  He said that the vision of the EAC was to have "a prosperous, competitive, secure, stable and politically united East Africa".  The Mission of the Community was  "to widen and deepen economic, political, social and cultural integration in order to improve the quality of life of the people of East Africa through increased competitiveness, value-added production, trade and investments".  Therefore, the Partner States of the EAC were determined to strengthen their economic, social, cultural, political, technological and other ties for their rapid, balanced and sustainable development, by the establishment of a customs union, common market, later a monetary union, and ultimately a political federation.  The establishment of a customs union had been accomplished as an entry point in this integration process.
He said that following four years of negotiations on aspects of trade liberalization and development, the Protocol on the Establishment of the EACU was concluded and signed on 2 March 2004.  The Protocol came into force on 1 January 2005, after ratification by the three Partner States.  The customs union was simultaneously launched in the three Partner States on 31 December 2004 and had been operational since 1 January 2005.  The Protocol provided, among other things, for the handling of the following aspects of trade, liberalization and development in the EAC:
Customs administration, including harmonized commodity description and coding system, harmonized trade information and documentation, and trade facilitation.
Trade liberalization, including the establishment of a common external tariff, elimination of internal tariffs, and elimination of non-tariff barriers.
Trade-related issues, including rules of origin, national treatment, anti-dumping measures, subsidies and countervailing measures, safeguard measures, competition, re-exportation of goods, and restrictions and prohibitions to trade.
Export promotion schemes, including duty drawback schemes, manufacturing under bond schemes, duty and value-added tax remission schemes, and export-processing zones.
Issues of special economic zones such as free ports, including the promotion and facilitation of trade goods imported into free ports, provision of storage, warehouses and simplified customs procedures, and the establishment of international trade supply chain centres.
Exemption regimes, including the harmonization of the partner states exemption regimes, and the adoption of a harmonized list of exemption regimes.
He said that the Protocol also provided for measures to address imbalances arising out of the establishment of the customs union, for mechanisms for handling trade arrangements with countries and organizations outside the customs union and for a common customs law of the Community.  He noted that for the complete realization of its key provisions, the Protocol had nine annexes which could be found on the EAC website.  These Annexes included provisions for the following:  Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System, Transitional provisions on Tariff Reduction; Rules of Origin, Anti-Dumping Measures Regulations, Subsidies and Countervailing Measures Regulations, Safeguard Measures Regulations, Import Operations Regulations, Freeport Operations Regulations and Dispute Settlement Mechanisms Regulations.  He said that, in addition to the provisions of the Protocol, an EAC Customs Management Act 2004, which provided for the management and administration of customs and related matters, had been enacted by the East African Legislative Assembly.  The three Partner States were determined to deepen their integration to form a common market, a monetary union and ultimately a political federation.  The EAC Partner States would keep WTO Members informed of every stage of the progress made.  
&& The Chairman said that he welcomed the notification by the EAC.  He said that he had recently had the pleasure of participating as a discussant in the Trade Policy Review (TPR) of the EAC. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation fully supported the formation of the EACU.  The Protocol was ambitious in its goal of creating a customs union among the parties within five years.  She said that her delegation found it particularly impressive that the vast majority of tariffs and non-tariff barriers were to be eliminated among the parties upon the entry into force of the agreement. It was also notable that the parties had agreed to certain trade facilitation measures, and her delegation in particular applauded the efforts to simplify and rationalize the documentation and procedures covering trade among the parties.  In addition, her delegation commended the EAC on its website, on which all relevant documents could be downloaded.  She said that her delegation believed it would be useful if the EACU were subjected to the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for RTAs, in particular as the Enabling Clause might not be the appropriate provision under which to notify the agreement.  Her delegation believed that the Enabling Clause was not meant to cover such ambitious agreements as the one under consideration, but was instead intended to address developing country preference systems which could otherwise not meet the standards of GATT Article XXIV.  She explained that her delegation considered that the information available on the EAC website and the comprehensiveness of the Protocol made it an excellent candidate for the TM for RTAs.  She inquired whether the parties to the EACU would consider submitting the Protocol to be considered under the Mechanism. 
She said that Article 12.1 of the Protocol provided that the maximum tariff on goods imported into the EAC was 25 per cent.  However, a review of the common external tariff revealed that a number of tariff lines were at 50 per cent, primarily on textile products.  She sought clarification on this from the parties, and also inquired whether these tariff rates would be reduced in the future. She said that her delegation also had a question relating to the anti-dumping and countervailing measures established in Articles 16 and 18 respectively.  In particular, she asked whether those provisions applied to imports from countries party to the agreement, or to countries outside the EAC.  She also inquired whether the EAC would be treated as a single customs area for the purposes of anti-dumping and countervailing investigations.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation had already expressed its support for the EAC process during the recent TPR of the EAC.  He said that his delegation had, however, not yet been able to fully consider the documentation that had been submitted for the present meeting.  He asked for some clarification from the parties on the relationship between the EAC and other regional integration initiatives to which the members of the EAC were also party.  He explained that his question was based on the provisions of Article 37 of the Protocol, titled "Trade Arrangements with Countries and Organizations Outside the Customs Union".  He inquired whether the parties could provide further information on how they would ensure the greatest possible coherence between regional initiatives, in particular when there was an overlapping membership.  He observed that it was hard to see how a customs union, implying a common trade policy, could co-exist with parties which were also members of other regional initiatives.  He said that his delegation would appreciate having more time to study the EACU notification and consider whether it would have more specific questions.
&& The representative of Uganda requested that the questions from the US and the EC be submitted to the notifying Members in written form.  They would subsequently be transmitted to the EAC Secretariat, and responses would be provided in due course.
&& The representative of Kenya said that he sought clarification on the comments made by the US on the TM for RTAs.  In particular, he wanted to know whether Members had formally approved the Mechanism, and whether it was yet operational.
&& The representative of the United States said that the TM for RTAs was not yet operational, but the point that had been made in the earlier intervention by her delegation was that the EACU was a good candidate to undergo the process laid out in the Mechanism because the parties had provided ample information on the agreement.
&& The Chairman proposed that the item concerning the Protocol remain on the CTD's agenda for the next meeting.
It was so agreed.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that the Committee had heard under this agenda item a presentation from one Member – Malaysia – and had also heard presentations from the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the International Coffee Organization (ICO), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the International Cocoa Organization (ICCO).  He recalled that at the 59th Session of the CTD on 4 October 2006, a preliminary discussion was held on the possibility of holding a panel discussion on commodity issues.  The idea was to invite to the CTD a number of international organizations working on commodity issues, and to allow a representative of each invited organization to make a brief presentation.  He had suggested that the presentations focus on policy options and solutions.  Such a panel discussion would include representatives from such organizations as the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), the International Monetary Fund (IMF), UNCTAD and the World Bank.  He further suggested that the other organizations that had already made presentations in the CTD – the CFC, the ICO, the FAO and the ICCO – could also be invited, not as part of the panel per se, but to participate in the discussion that followed the presentations.  He believed that the presence of these organizations would contribute to enriching the discussion.  He said that if his proposal regarding the panel discussion was acceptable to Members, the Secretariat could work towards holding the discussion at the first meeting of the CTD in 2007.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation, while not opposing the Chairman's proposal, was concerned that a panel discussion dealing with policy options and solutions to the commodities problem could take a substantial amount of time, given the amount of work that had already been undertaken in this area within the WTO, as well as by several other organizations.  His delegation believed that Members should consider more carefully what the theme of the panel discussion should be and what they wished to accomplish through the discussion.  He also inquired what the proposed timeframe for the panel discussion was.
&& The Chairman said that he envisaged a half-day panel discussion. He inquired whether any other Members wished to comment on his proposal. 
&& The representative of Kenya said that his delegation supported the Chairman's proposal.  In addition to the organizations suggested by the Chairman, he proposed that one or two farmers' organizations from Africa could be invited to share their experiences with the Committee.  He inquired whether the WTO would be able to fund the participation of such organizations.
&& The Chairman said that it would be useful if the representative of Kenya could provide the names of farmers' organizations that could potentially be invited to participate in the panel discussion. 
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that the LDCs appreciated the efforts of the CTD to engage a number of organizations under the present agenda item, and were pleased to note that the Committee had thus far heard presentations from Malaysia, the CFC, UNCTAD, the ICO, the FAO and the ICCO.  The presentations had enriched Members' knowledge and understanding of the issues involved in the trade of primary commodities.  The LDCs fully endorsed the idea of holding a panel discussion in the beginning of 2007 where the ITC, the IMF, UNCTAD and the World Bank would take part.  The LDC Group also agreed with the Chairman's  suggestion that the discussion would be further enriched by the participation of the other organizations that had made presentations in the previous meetings of the CTD.  The discussion would lead to appropriate recommendations so that the problem of the decline in the terms of trade of developing countries and LDCs was addressed.
&& The representative of Côte d'Ivoire said that his delegation would like the Cocoa Producers' Alliance (COPAL) to be one of the organizations invited to the panel discussion.
&& The representative of Tanzania said that his delegation supported the Chairman's proposal.  He recalled that Tanzania, along with Kenya, Uganda and others had for some time been sharing with Members the problems faced by commodity-dependent countries, not only for agricultural commodities, but also for commodities in other sectors, for example the mining sector.  He suggested that more thought could be given to the  organizations that would be invited to the panel discussion.
&& The representative of Uganda said that the Chairman's proposal was a good one.  He said that many commodity-dependent developing countries wanted an urgent solution to the problem of the declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and that some of these countries were dependent on very few commodities, in some cases only a single commodity.  He expressed his support for Kenya's proposal for one or more African farmers' organizations to participate in the discussion, and wanted to know whether the WTO could finance their participation.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that his delegation supported the Chairman's proposal.  He stressed the importance of the participation of one or more African farmers' organizations in the panel discussion, but highlighted that their participation would require financial support.
&& The representative of the United States said that she wished to reiterate that her delegation did not oppose the Chairman's proposal for a panel discussion.  The point was to make the event useful, and she doubted that a half-day event with several participating organizations would allow a clear and focused dialogue.  She suggested that more thought could be given to the structure of the panel discussion in order to make it more focused.
&& The Chairman said that his proposal for a panel discussion on commodities was an attempt to build on the process that had been ongoing for some time in the CTD.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the African Group, said that the Group supported the Chairman's proposal.  The Group also wished to see the participation of one or more African farmers' organizations in the panel discussion, and asked the WTO to give its support to ensure their participation. 
&& The Chairman said that he had noted a broad support from delegations for his proposal to hold a panel discussion on commodities, but that there had also been a call for the theme of the panel discussion to be more focused.  He remarked that it was not necessary for all organizations to be invited to a single event, and that it might be possible to hold more than one discussion with the participation of different organizations. 
&& The representative of Kenya said that his delegation did not have any problem with the possibility of the CTD having more than one panel discussion with different organizations invited to each, but wished to see the participation of at least one African farmers' organization in the first such discussion.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that the commodities problem was a question of survival in several developing countries and LDCs, and that the international community should take into consideration the situation of citizens in commodity-dependent countries.
&& The representative of Côte d'Ivoire said that the participation of a farmers' organization in the panel discussion should not be held up because of financial constraints.  His delegation would be ready to send a representative of a farmers' organization to the event.
&& The Chairman said he had noted that several African delegations had called for the participation of at least one farmers' organization from Africa.  He said that such an organization could possibly participate in the first panel discussion held in the CTD, and Members could subsequently consider holding similar events with the participation of different agencies.  He suggested that delegations provide their views after the meeting on how to focus the theme of the panel discussion and on which specific organizations to invite.
It was so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& The Chairman said that the Committee had since its 54th Session on 5 October 2005 been undertaking a review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations based on a periodically updated background paper prepared by the Secretariat.  Members had, however, agreed at the 59th Session on 4 October 2006 to temporarily suspend their discussion under this agenda item, in view of the fact that the negotiations were suspended at the time.  It was decided that the Committee would revert back to this item at the present meeting to consider how to proceed.  He said that the Director-General had informed the Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) at its informal meeting of 16 November 2006 that Members were now somewhere between the quiet diplomacy of the last months and the fully-fledged negotiations which would only come when they were ready to put numbers to the flexibilities they had already expressed in general terms on key issues, in particular on agricultural market access and domestic support.  The Director-General had suggested that Members prepare the ground for fully‑fledged negotiations to take place when the conditions were right.  Technical work at the level of experts was, therefore, to begin, but fully‑fledged negotiations – that is, negotiations at the Ministerial level – had not yet resumed.  
He said that he wanted the CTD to consider how to move forward with the present agenda item in light of these developments.  In particular, he wished to ask Members whether they felt that the time was right for the CTD to revert to its discussion on the developmental aspects of the negotiations – in which case it could be agreed at the present meeting to resume the discussion under this agenda item at the next meeting of the CTD – or whether they felt that it would be premature to do so at this time, and that it would be better to wait to see how the process developed over the coming weeks and consider the matter once again at the next CTD meeting. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that the Director-General's remarks had been made at an informal meeting of the TNC, and that it might be better to wait until Members had a clearer idea on the status of the negotiations before the CTD formally resumed its discussion. 
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that Ministers at Doha had directed the CTD to act as a forum to identify and debate the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  Based on this mandate, the Secretariat regularly provided an overview and update of the negotiations through its document on the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  Members discussed the contents of the document, as well as any other issues they considered relevant.  Given the current status of the negotiations, the LDC Group understood that there could not be an update of the information contained in document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.2 dated 27 June 2006.  It was hoped, however, that by the next meeting of the CTD there would have been sufficient progress in the negotiations to enable the Secretariat to update its document.  The LDC Group therefore urged the Secretariat to make preparations for the update with a view to providing to Members a revision to the document in time for the next CTD meeting.
&& The Chairman said that the CTD should ideally only resume its discussion under this agenda item when all Members felt they were in a position to comment on the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  He proposed that the CTD consider again at its next meeting when to resume the discussion.      
It was so agreed.  
ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE HONG KONG DECISION ON DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS FOR LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that Ministers agreed in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration that developed-country Members shall, and developing-country Members declaring themselves in a position to do so should, provide duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access on a lasting basis, for all products originating from all LDCs by 2008 or no later than the start of the implementation period in a manner that ensured stability, security and predictability.  Ministers further agreed that Members facing difficulties at the time to provide such market access would provide duty-free and quota-free market access for at least 97 per cent of products originating from LDCs, defined at the tariff line level, by 2008 or no later than the start of the implementation period.  In addition, these Members would take steps to progressively achieve compliance with these obligations, taking into account the impact on other developing countries at similar levels of development and, as appropriate, by incrementally building on the initial list of covered products.  Developing country Members would be permitted to phase in their commitments and would enjoy appropriate flexibility in coverage.  It was also agreed that Members would ensure that preferential rules of origin applicable to imports from LDCs were transparent and simple, and contributed to facilitating market access.  He recalled that Members were to notify the implementation of the schemes adopted under this Decision every year to the CTD, which would annually review the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to the LDCs and report to the General Council for appropriate action.  While the CTD agreed at the beginning of 2006 to include, for all remaining meetings of the year, an agenda item relating to the Decision, it was the discussion today, under this agenda item, that would constitute the annual review as mandated by the Hong Kong Declaration.  
He said that he wished to outline the nature of the information that had been provided to the CTD over the course of the year on the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  He recalled that the Committee had received two submissions – document WT/COMTD/W/149 from the US and document WT/COMTD/W/150 from Japan – outlining the procedural steps that these countries would need to take to implement the Decision in Annex F of the Hong Kong Declaration and expand DFQF market access to LDCs.  He said that the submissions emphasized the US' and Japan's commitment to the Decision, a commitment that had also been confirmed in oral interventions by these delegations in the CTD.  The Committee had also received oral reports from three Members – Switzerland, Norway and Korea – outlining the steps they were taking, or had taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  He opened the floor to allow the CTD to conduct its first annual review of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs.  
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that Ministers at Hong Kong, China had adopted a decision with regard to DFQF market access for the LDCs, which was contained in Annex F, under Decision 36.  He said that this subject had come up in the CTD as a consequence of that process.  He noted that the concerned WTO Members were to notify the implementation of the schemes adopted under this Decision every year to the CTD.  Thereafter, the Committee would annually review the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to the LDCs, and report to the General Council for appropriate action.  He also recalled that the Chairman of the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference had read out the Ministers' understanding on the text concerning the DFQF Decision.  In particular, the developed country Members, and those developing country Members declaring themselves in a position to do so, were to set out by the end of 2006 the means by which they would implement the Decision.
He thanked those developed country Members that had already granted DFQF market access to LDC products.  He noted that a number of developing country Members had also informed the LDCs that they were in the advanced stages of their respective internal decision-making processes.  The LDC Group hoped that they would complete their process at an early date to enable LDCs to benefit from their offer.  He also thanked the US and Japan for their submissions to the CTD, contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/149 and WT/COMTD/W/150 respectively.  He said that both these documents provided an overview of internal processes, but that there was also a fundamental difference between the two.  In document WT/COMTD/W/150, the Japanese authorities were not only informing Members of their internal processes, but were also setting out a timetable for implementation.  He recalled that when the Japanese Minister was in Geneva, he had given the LDCs public assurances, which were very comforting.  The LDCs hoped that Japan would complete its internal processes soon. 
He said that upon examination of the US position, as outlined in document WT/COMTD/W/149, the LDCs found cause for alarm.  He said that not only had the US not followed the letter and spirit of the Chair's concluding remarks in Hong Kong, China, there also seemed to be a reversal from the Decision contained in Annex F.  He noted that the US had set out in its submission the various problems it faced and the processes it had to complete, and that the LDCs sympathized with the US.  However, there was no indication of the manner in which the US would implement the Decision in Annex F, nor was there any indication of an explicit timeframe.  He also noted that in paragraph 2 of its submission, the US stated that successful completion of the DDA was a prerequisite for its implementation of the DFQF initiative.
He drew Members' attention to Annex F, Decision 36 (a)(i) of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, where it was stated:  "Provide duty-free and quota-free market access on a lasting basis, for all products originating from all LDCs by 2008 or no later than the start of the implementation period in a manner that ensures stability, security and predictability".  He said that it appeared from the US submission that the US wanted to overlook the Decision Members had agreed to in Hong Kong, China, and that this was not acceptable to the LDCs.  As Members had resumed the negotiations, the LDCs believed that these were issues that would have to be taken up in the respective negotiating bodies.  In the meantime, he said that the LDCs wanted Members to note that the requirements of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration had not been met in regard to the DFQF Decision.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the African Group, expressed support for the statement made by Bangladesh on behalf of the LDC Group.  He stressed that the question of market access for LDCs was extremely important, as it would facilitate the integration of LDCs into the international trading system.  It was, therefore, urgent for all developed-country Members, and those developing country Members in a position to do so, to adopt the necessary measures to ensure that the DFQF Decision was implemented rapidly.  
&& The representative of the United States said that the DFQF Decision was an important part of the Doha Round.  She said that the US would implement its commitment regarding the Decision in a manner consistent with all commitments made at Hong Kong, China.  The US domestic process was moving forward, and an internal report by the US International Trade Commission had just been completed and was under review.  She expected that a Federal Register notice for public request for information would be published in late December or early January.  She invited the LDCs to participate in this process.  She explained that the implementation of the DFQF Decision was also tied to a Congressional process so it was difficult to provide a timetable on when the implementation process would be completed.  
&& The representative of Djibouti said that the situation of the LDCs was very specific and should be considered separately from other issues in the negotiations, in particular as it was difficult to predict when there would be results in the negotiations.  He also said that it was difficult for LDCs to take advantage of the market access opportunities offered to them and, therefore, inquired whether the Secretariat could prepare a summary of the procedures for LDCs to follow in order to allow them to benefit from preferential market access in different countries.   
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the EC already provided DFQF market access to LDCs for more than 99 per cent of tariff lines.  He said that the progressive implementation of market liberalization for rice, sugar and bananas from LDCs continued as foreseen in the EC's GSP Regulation.  In particular, full liberalization for bananas was completed in 2006, and further progressive steps had been taken to achieve the same target for rice and sugar in 2009.  He also informed the Committee that the EC was currently reviewing its preferential rules of origin requirements with a view to making them more simple, transparent and easy to use.
&& The representative of Canada said that the his Government's Least‑Developed Countries Tariff (LDCT) programme had been in place since 1983 and formed part of Canada's commitment to encourage economic growth in the developing world, and to help raise the standard of living of those in need.  The LDCT programme provided preferential market access to 49 of the world's LDCs, as defined by the United Nations.  He said that at the June 2002 G-8 summit in Kananaskis, Alberta, Canada announced steps to liberalize the LDCT to help reduce poverty in the world's poorest countries.  Specifically, Canada committed to eliminating tariffs and quotas on LDCs' exports to Canada.  An important change was the inclusion of textile and apparel products within the ambit of the LDCT.  These changes came into effect on 1 January 2003, and products from LDCs under this scheme could be imported into Canada duty and quota free, provided they met the rules of origin criteria.
He continued by saying that, in order to encourage growth and prosperity in LDCs, Canada also introduced new rules of origin at the same time the changes came into effect, which were considered amongst the most liberal in the world.  For example, under Canada's LDCT Programme, apparel products produced in an LDC could use textile inputs from any developing country and still be accorded duty-free access to Canada.  He said that these rules of origin made it easier for products from LDCs to access the Canadian market.  It also encouraged trade between these countries in inputs used to make valued-added products.  This had the effect of not only stimulating market access in Canada, but also to encourage and build important linkages in South-South trade for LDCs. 
He said that in order for LDC governments to claim the benefits of this programme, Canada had asked that they sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Government of Canada.  So far, 21 governments had signed MOUs under this initiative.  He believed that Canada's initiative was among the most far-reaching in the world in terms of eligible countries, product coverage, rules of origin and overall ease of administration.  As a result, Canada had seen tangible results in its import statistics.  For example, since the 2003 enlargement, merchandise imports into Canada from LDCs had more than tripled.  For African LDCs, Canada's import volumes, while smaller than others, had also tripled since the programme had been expanded at the beginning of 2003.  In terms of product coverage, almost half the imports from LDCs were comprised of mineral fuels and oils, with the next largest category being apparel, followed by precious stones and minerals.  He noted Canada's commitment to its LDCT scheme, as the programme had recently been renewed for a ten-year period (through 2014), and encouraged LDCs to take advantage of its benefits.
&& The representative of Japan made reference to the communication that had been submitted to the CTD by her delegation in document WT/COMTD/W/150, and confirmed Japan's commitment to the Hong Kong Decision.  She said that internal consultations were ongoing in Japan with a view to allowing the cabinet to submit a draft proposal to amend the customs tariff law and other relevant regulations to implement the Decision.  Her delegation would continue to provide updates to Members on the process. 
&& The representative of Norway said that DFQF market access for all products from LDCs had been provided from 1 July 2002 through Norway's GSP scheme.  He said that Norway's GSP scheme was currently under revision with a view to simplifying its procedures, and that his delegation would notify the CTD in due course when the process was finished.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
&& The Chairman proposed that the report of the CTD's first annual review of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs be transmitted to the General Council as part of the CTD's annual report to the General Council.  
It was so agreed. 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been decided at the 59th Session that the Committee would revert to this agenda item at the present meeting, and that Members would consider whether to once again treat the issue of electronic commerce (e-commerce) in the CTD.  He said that the CTD was one of four subsidiary bodies designated to carry out work on e-commerce under the WTO's Work Programme on e-commerce.  However, the CTD had agreed at its 53rd Session in May 2005 that it would only revert to the agenda item concerning e-commerce if requested to do so by Members.  He recalled that Members agreed in paragraph 46 of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration to reinvigorate the Work Programme on e-commerce, including the development-related issues under the Work Programme.  In light of paragraph 46 of the Hong Kong Declaration, he asked Members whether they wished to treat the issue of e-commerce once again in the CTD. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had been considering what would be an appropriate course of action to recommend for the CTD, but did not as yet have anything specific to propose.  Her delegation would require a little more time for internal consultation as well as to consult with other delegations.  
&& The Chairman proposed that the CTD consider the matter again at its next meeting.  
It was so agreed. 
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING PLAN 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/151 AND WT/COMTD/W/151/CORR.1)
&& The Chairman said that the Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan) for 2007 had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/151.  A corrigendum, in English only, had been issued in document WT/COMTD/W/151/Corr.1.  He recalled that the CTD at its last meeting had adopted the 2007 TA Plan on a provisional basis, as some delegations were still awaiting feedback from capitals.  It had been agreed that the item concerning the TA Plan would be on the agenda for the present meeting, so as to allow the CTD to formally adopt the Plan.  He asked Members whether the CTD could, therefore, formally adopt the 2007 TA Plan.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the African Group, highlighted the importance of the WTO's efforts concerning technical assistance and trade capacity building for the African Group and the LDCs.  He said that the African Group had had the time to acquaint itself with the contents of the 2007 TA Plan, and to assess the approach adopted in its preparation.  He remarked that the Plan placed emphasis, inter alia, on a number of key points and criteria including the full integration of training and technical cooperation and the optimization of the synergies arising from these two lines of action.  Other points concerned needs assessment, strategic cooperation with other organizations on the basis of comparative advantage, the outsourcing of some activities and the follow-up and evaluation of the activities carried out.
He said that the African Group welcomed the fact that the Plan reiterated the importance of continuing and strengthening coordination and consultations with partners, including training institutions and regional banks.  The Group shared the view that the long-term planning of trade‑related technical assistance activities was a useful approach to be explored since it would effectively lead to sustainable and cumulative capacity building, as emphasized in paragraph 16 of the Plan.  He also remarked on the usefulness of establishing a database of the beneficiaries by country and by region, with an indication of the areas of activity in which such persons had participated.  The availability of such information, to be shared with the relevant national bodies, the regions and the Missions in Geneva, would help to advance the work of following up and planning the management of human resources and skills.  With regard specifically to the measures proposed, he said that the African Group welcomed their diversity and wished to emphasize the usefulness of such activities, which complemented each other and helped to satisfy the existing needs in the field of trade-related technical assistance.  In this context, he said that the African Group wished to make a number of recommendations.  First, the Group requested that the East African Community be included in the regional programmes.  Second, in order to deal with the difficulty encountered by some LDCs in requesting and organizing national activities as noted in paragraph 80 of the Plan, the Group suggested that the lack of capacities to host a national event should be examined more seriously with a view to studying the nature of the problems encountered and envisaging ways of solving them effectively (for example, problems of logistics, human resources and/or finance, etc.).  Finally, with regard to assisting beneficiaries in undertaking their own needs assessments and with a view to sharing information with the Permanent Missions in Geneva and ensuring the daily follow-up which they were required to do, it was important that the results of the needs assessment be communicated to both national bodies and to the Permanent Missions in Geneva.
He said that the African Group, as the principal beneficiary of trade-related technical assistance activities, endorsed the concerns expressed in the Plan by the Secretariat regarding the difficulties that the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) could encounter if proper and timely funding was not available in time for the implementation of the activities for 2007.  The African Group confirmed the support which it expressed at the 60th Session of the CTD on 3 November 2006 for the adoption of the 2007 TA Plan.  
&& The representative of Djibouti expressed support for the statement made by Benin on behalf of the African Group.  He also thanked all donors, in particular those developing country donors which had contributed according to their possibilities to the technical assistance activities of the WTO.  He highlighted the usefulness of long-term activities such as the three-month trade policy courses held in Geneva and the regional trade policy courses (RTPCs), as well as the Netherlands, Denmark and Ireland internship programmes.  He continued by saying that, in order to integrate into the multilateral trading system, it was essential to know how the system worked, and technical‑assistance activities allowed developing countries to gain this knowledge.  He urged developed country and developing country Members to contribute more to technical assistance, as the need for it continued to increase.  He noted that without technical assistance it would be extremely difficult for African countries to implement the WTO Agreements and to follow the technical discussions at the WTO.  
&& The representative of Kenya said that he wished to expand on the request that had been put forward by the representative of Benin concerning the East African Community.  He explained that a new team of East African parliamentarians had been sworn in, and it would be useful for these parliamentarians to follow a course on WTO issues to help them see the implications of the WTO in their work of deepening the integration of East Africa.  He believed that this activity could fit within the outreach activities that were listed in the 2007 TA Plan.
&& The representative of Mali said that the relevant authorities in his country had put in place a new training plan that took into account the training and institution capacity-building needs of the government, the private sector and civil society.  The new approach stemmed from the commitment of the Government of Mali to make trade a real engine for social and economic development.  Trade was, therefore, a central element of Mali's 2007 strategic framework for the fight against poverty.  He said that Mali had benefited from the technical cooperation activities provided in 2006, and required continued trade-related technical assistance.  He remarked that in the 2007 TA Plan the majority of activities listed were in English, which was a difficulty for the francophone African countries.  With respect to the last column of Annex 2 on page 48 of the Plan, he asked for some clarification on the formula used.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that, although the technical-assistance needs of developing countries were not homogeneous, there were, nevertheless, some similar concerns that were shared by most, particularly in Africa.  On a sub-regional level, he suggested that the needs of the various institutions that were located within each sub-region also be taken into account when organizing technical‑assistance activities.
&& The Director of the ITTC, in reply to the suggestion made to take into account the situation at the sub-regional level, said that this could be done in the framework of the 2007 TA Plan.  He also noted that several TA activities in the past had been delivered on a sub-regional basis.  He said that he understood the comment made concerning the language balance between French and English activities, but he believed that on the whole the 2007 TA Plan reflected a reasonable balance.  Regarding the question on Annex 2 and the last column, he recalled that the ITTC had come up with the notion of participant days to measure the volume of activities.  This measurement was based on a multiplication of the number of days for an activity by the number of participants.  These numbers were then added to obtain a yearly total of planned participant days which would later be compared with the number of participant days actually delivered.  He mentioned that for the last two years approximately 33,000 participant days were planned, while 30,000 to 31,000 had been delivered. 
&& The Chairman asked Members whether the 2007 TA Plan could be adopted.
&& The Committee  adopted the 2007 TA Plan.
&& The Director of the ITTC said that, with the approval of the 2007 TA Plan, the Secretariat could now proceed with its implementation.  As had been done on behalf of the Director-General at the 22 November 2006 meeting of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration, he said that he wished to bring to the attention of Members the critical financial situation of the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF).  He noted that the implementation of the 2007 TA Plan relied on the availability of funds, and that the Secretariat could undertake financial commitments only to the extent of the funds made available.  At two instances in the course of 2006, the Secretariat had been on the verge of suspending the planned activities due to the lack of funds.  Given the tight deadlines attached to the organization of the technical-assistance activities, the implementation of several activities were thus put at risk.  He informed Members that at the present time, there was less than CHF 100,000 available, as opposed to some CHF 3.3 million at the same time in the previous year.  In terms of up-coming activities for which commitments would have to be made in the next weeks, there was the preparatory workshop for the Singapore RTPC scheduled for the end of January 2007, the RTPC in Jamaica scheduled to commence on 9 February 2007, and the Singapore RTPC scheduled for March 2007.  Commitments for these activities, which needed to be made six to 12 weeks prior to their commencement, totalled some CHF 2.3 million.  He recalled that the WTO's financial rules and regulations required cash in-hand before entering into commitments.  The activities mentioned would, therefore, be in serious jeopardy unless funds became available in the very near future.  He requested delegations to bring this critical situation to the attention of their respective authorities and urged them to provide the necessary financing.   
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT (WT/COMTD/W/155)
&& The Chairman said that the CTD's draft annual report for 2006 was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/155.  He noted that the document contained the annual reports of the CTD in Regular Session, the CTD in Dedicated Session and the Sub-Committee on LDCs. He also noted that the draft report contained a number of square brackets relating to items under consideration at the present meeting.  As part of the process of adopting the report, the square brackets would be removed, and the discussion that had taken place at the present meeting would be appropriately reflected in the report.  He invited the CTD to consider the report with a view to adopting it, and informed the Committee that the report, once adopted, would be issued as document WT/COMTD/58 and would be forwarded to the General Council for review at its meeting of 14 and 15 December 2006.
&& The representative of Egypt suggested that text be included in paragraph 13 of the draft report to appropriately reflect the discussion that had taken place at the present meeting under the agenda item concerning paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration.
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that he wished to draw attention to paragraph 14 of the draft report in the section concerning the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs.  He said that the LDC Group had made two submissions in relation to the Decision, one concerning market access and the other on rules of origin.  The submissions had been made in the CTD in Special Session, the Negotiating Group on Market Access and the Committee on Agriculture in Special Session.  He requested that paragraph 14 of the draft report be modified to reflect the LDCs' submissions in various WTO bodies.  He also requested that the LDCs' concerns regarding the implementation of the Decision be appropriately reflected in the report.
&& The representative of the United States said that the final report should provide a balanced reflection of Members' views on the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs.
&& The Chairman said that the points raised by Members would be incorporated by the Secretariat into the final report.  He proposed to allow Members a period of seven days after the circulation of document WT/COMTD/58 to provide any comments, after which the report would be forwarded to the General Council.      
&& The Committee adopted its annual report for 2006. 
OTHER BUSINESS 
&& The Chairman raised a matter under "Other Business" concerning a recommendation that had recently been made by the CRTA for a common format for the notification of RTAs.  He said that the CRTA agreed, on 13 October 2006, to recommend to the Council for Trade in Goods, the Council for Trade in Services and the CTD the adoption of the common format, which could be found in document WT/REG/16 of 23 November 2006.  In the context of the CTD, the  common format would apply to RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  He proposed that the Committee consider the matter at its next formal meeting.	
It was so agreed.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________




 In English only.
 No comments were received from Members before the expiry of the seven-day deadline. 

WT/COMTD/M/61 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/61 	Page  PAGE 21



 

 

 

 



