WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/36
14 January 2002

(02-0160)


Committee on Trade and Development
Thirty-Sixth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 26 NOVEMBER 2001

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Nathan Irumba (Uganda)

Subjects discussed:

 TOC \o "1-5" A.	ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA	 PAGEREF _TOC535380315 \H 2
B.	OBSERVERS	 PAGEREF _TOC535380316 \H 2
(i)	Request for attendance for ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc535380317 \h 2
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), The Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, and the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie	 PAGEREF _Toc535380318 \h 2
(iii)	New request for observer status from the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC)	 PAGEREF _Toc535380319 \h 2
C.	INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT	 PAGEREF _TOC535380320 \H 3
D.	SPECIAL AND DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT	 PAGEREF _TOC535380321 \H 8
(i)	Work Programme Resulting from the 4th Ministerial Conference	 PAGEREF _Toc535380322 \h 8
(ii)	Note by the Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/77/Rev.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc535380323 \h 8
E.	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES	 PAGEREF _TOC535380324 \H 10
F.	ELECTRONIC COMMERCE	 PAGEREF _TOC535380325 \H 11
(i)	Presentation of a Country Experience (Panama)	 PAGEREF _Toc535380326 \h 11
(ii)	Presentation by UNCTAD:  E-Commerce and Development Report 2001	 PAGEREF _Toc535380327 \h 12
(iii)	Work Programme on E-commerce	 PAGEREF _Toc535380328 \h 16
G.	WORK PROGRAMME FOR 2002	 PAGEREF _TOC535380329 \H 17
H.	OTHER BUSINESS	 PAGEREF _TOC535380330 \H 18


&& The Chairman, welcoming delegations, said that this was a particularly important meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) since it was the first meeting of the Committee after the successful Ministerial Meeting in Doha, which had set up a Work Programme on Special and Differential Treatment.  Under the Ministerial Decision on Implementation-related Issues and Concerns, paragraph 12, that work was the responsibility of the CTD.  Paragraph 51 of the Ministerial Declaration also created a particular role for the CTD in assessing development-related elements of future negotiations.  The CTD therefore had a new start to make.

ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA
&& The Chairman introduced the draft Agenda for the meeting, contained in airgram WTO/AIR/1661/Rev.1 of 23 November 2001.  He said that it was his intention to only have one discussion on special and differential treatment under agenda item D.  He therefore suggested that the two sub-items under agenda item D be merged and that the Secretariat document be used as a starting-point for the discussions on the work programme on special and differential treatment contained in the decision on implementation related issues and concerns adopted by Ministers in Doha.  He recalled that Ministers had instructed the CTD to take fully into consideration previous work undertaken as noted in WT/COMTD/W/77/Rev.1.
The agenda was adopted as amended.

OBSERVERS
Request for attendance for ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD it had been agreed to invite the following intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  Those organizations were: the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the Organisation of African Unity (OAU);  Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the South Pacific Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP); the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).  He proposed that those organisations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), The Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, and the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie
&& The Chairman said that at the last few meetings the Committee had had before it four outstanding requests for observer status from the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting and the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie.  He recalled that, pending the outcome of the General Council process, those would be on an ad hoc basis.  The positions of delegations were well-known and on the record.  Unless there had been any recent change of position, he proposed that the Committee revert to those requests at its next formal meeting.
&& The representative of the United States said that with respect to the Arab League, her delegation was interested in entertaining requests for observer status from economic affiliates of the Arab League such as such as the Arab Authority for Agricultural Investment and Development (AAAID) and the Arab Monetary Fund (AMF).
&& The representative of Israel said that she was awaiting instructions from her capital.  Her delegation meanwhile reserved its position on the issue.
New request for observer status from the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC)
&& The Chairman said that the Committee had received a request for observer status from the Common Fund for Commodities.  The request had been faxed to Members and copies were available at the back of the room.  Additional information-material was available with the Secretariat.  It was understood that the request would be for ad hoc observer status until the general question of observer status had been resolved in the General Council.
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation welcomed the request by the Common Fund for Commodities for ad hoc observer status.  His delegation acknowledged the contribution the CFC made to the development of the commodity sector in developing countries and wished to grant it observer status.  Consistent with the past practice of the CTD, the request of the CFC should be considered along with the pending requests for observer status in agenda item B(II).  He reiterated that his delegation supported the granting of observer status to all the organizations requesting such status together as a package.
&& The representative of Jordan supported the statement made by Egypt.
&& The Chairman said that there did not yet appear to be any consensus to grant ad-hoc observer status to the Common Fund for Commodities.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made and decided to revert to the request at its next formal meeting.

INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT
(i)	Background Note by the Secretariat
	&& The Chairman recalled that the CTD was the WTO focal point relating to the International Conference on Financing for Development (FFD).  At this meeting, the Committee had the honour of the company of Ambassador Ruth Jacoby, who was Ambassador at the Permanent Mission of Sweden to the UN, and one of the Co-Chairs of the Bureau to the Preparatory Committee (PrepCom) for the Conference.  She had come to the CTD to discuss preparations for the Conference under sub-item (ii).  However, he first informed the Committee, that since its last meeting in October, the PrepCom had held a meeting in New York at which the WTO had been represented by the Deputy Director-General, Mr. Ablassé Ouedraogo and Mr. Alain Frank, Director, External Relations.  The Secretariat was invited to inform the Committee of the latest developments in the UN process from a WTO perspective, and to introduce the new background note by the Secretariat contained in document WT/COMTD/W/94 of 21 November 2001.  The Chairman further proposed that following the Secretariat's presentation, the meeting would be moved into informal mode, to allow a free exchange of views with Ambassador Jacoby, and subsequently the meeting would revert to formal mode. 
	&& The Director of the Development Division stated that the WTO had been involved through the Membership and at Secretariat-level in the various stages of the preparatory process for the FFD Conference.  The WTO was recognised as a major institutional stakeholder in the preparatory process for the Conference, which was to be held in Monterrey, Mexico in March 2002.  He reiterated that Deputy Director-General Mr. Ablassé Ouedraogo and Mr. Alain Frank had attended the most recent PrepCom held in mid-October 2001.  He went on to note that the October 2001 PrepCom meeting had been held before the Doha Ministerial.  Doha was a watershed that made a difference in the WTO's approach to the FFD Conference, since WTO Members had now agreed to a Ministerial Declaration.  At the October 2001 PrepCom meeting, the main item on the agenda had been the draft Outcome of the Facilitator, which had been distributed at the last CTD session.  According to reports he had received, there had been substantive and lively discussion on the draft Outcome, which was to be revised and reissued at the end of November 2001.
&& The Director then drew the meeting's attention to the Secretariat background note WT/COMTD/W/94.  He apologised for the paper not being translated into the three languages but indicated that translation would soon be available.  The paper aimed to give an accurate description of the process, the PrepCom and WTO's involvement in the process.  The key issues raised in the note were contained in paragraph 30 on Page 5, and governed the interrelationship between what would happen in Geneva following Doha, and the ongoing process in New York in the lead up to the Monterrey Conference.  Four questions were raised in this regard:  (1) How can the FFD process contribute to the furthering of the results of the Doha declaration?  (2) How can elements of the Doha declaration be incorporated into the discussions on  FFD?  (3) How should the two institutions of the WTO and UN best cooperate in the future, especially in this regard?  and (4) How can individual members ensure that trade and development issues are treated in a consistent manner within the two processes?  The Secretariat thought that it was important to maintain consistency in the flow of information between New York and Geneva in the process leading to the Conference in Monterrey in 2002.  He hoped that some of the questions would be used as a background to the informal discussions to be held with Ambassador Jacoby later on. 
(ii)	Discussion with the Co-Chair of the Preparatory Committee

&& H. E. Ms. Ruth Jacoby, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Sweden to the UN, congratulated the WTO membership on the results of Doha and indicated that she was impressed and encouraged by the results that had been achieved.  Members of the WTO should have been proud.  The last PrepCom had been held in October 2001 and had brought about many discussions and negotiations.  She felt encouraged by a number of things that had happened since that PrepCom meeting.  One was the Ministerial Conference in Doha, and another was the meetings of the Development Committee and the International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) recently held in Ottawa (17‑18 November 2001), where Ministers of Finance and Ministers of Development Cooperation had agreed on two Communiqués, one of which she felt was particularly forward looking and represented the latest, most authoritative view on the trends of world development and the direction to be taken.  Those two important Ministerial meetings had set the parameters and framework for substantially moving forward the common agenda of development and improvements in standards of living in the developing countries, in the coming months.  That was encouraging. 
Ambassador Jacoby went on to indicate that the next meeting of the PrepCom of the FFD process would take place in mid-January 2002 for two weeks, and it was presumed to be the last PrepCom meeting, before the actual Conference.  It would definitely be the last formal PrepCom, but it was possible that there would be some intersessional last minute drafting exercises before March 2002, and a lot of work was on-going.  The Facilitator, who had prepared a first draft of an Outcome document which was circulated to the CTD at its last meeting, was working on a revised draft after having received comments from members during the last PrepCom meeting.  This revised document would be discussed again at the January 2002 meeting. 
&& The representative of the European Communities agreed that the Conference was an important event which should be seen in the perspective of the important work that the WTO was trying to commence after Doha.  He said he wished to ensure that the WTO had some messages for the Ambassador to take to New York in order to achieve an optimum result of the Conference.  He acknowledged that the Members had channels in New York to do so, but was of the view that it was appropriate to have discussions at the WTO, given the past involvement of the WTO and also the future approach which the CTD had been informed about.  The WTO had played an important role in the process.  The questions outlined in the background note were pertinent, and outlined how his delegation saw the follow-up to Doha developing.  The most important point was that the Conference was a platform to consolidate, reinvigorate and make known to a broader constituency outside the trade world, the results – namely, the development dimension of the Doha Declaration - which was innovative, new, and much more development-oriented than before.  
The Conference would also be expected to be complementary in areas where the WTO could not deliver all the promises in the Doha Declaration on its own.  This was especially with respect to technical assistance and capacity-building, where many of the commitments in the Doha declaration could only be delivered with the help of Members development agencies or Ministries and Ministries of Foreign Affairs.  Policy consistency and follow-up were necessary, in addition to strong political commitment, to ensure that what had been agreed to at Doha came into effect.  This was not only true for technical assistance and capacity building, but for the substantive contributions which were mentioned in the Facilitator's first draft outcome document and other reports from the preparatory process.
He drew attention to the trade part - and to a lesser extent to the development, debt and other issues parts - of the existing facilitator's draft outcome document and indicated that there were many points that were already made and could be reinforced and made more concrete after Doha.  For example, the draft outcome document started with the general message that trade liberalisation was a useful tool.  This however, needed to be re-modelled, as it was not just any type of trade liberalisation but was very specific.  The draft outcome document went on to consider anti-dumping, and the strengthening of rules and disciplines – things that the WTO had decided to do in the Ministerial declaration.  The document also mentioned further liberalisation of trade in agricultural products – the WTO had a firm, new mandate for the agricultural negotiations.  The reduction of tariff peaks which affect developing countries exports was also mentioned in the document – the WTO had concrete non-agricultural market access negotiations coming up, including some analytical work on exactly what it meant for developing countries.  In addition, the draft outcome document referred to textiles and trade and health – again, the WTO had a declaration on these issues coming out of Doha.  The document also discussed regional trade integration, on which there was a negotiating mandate within the WTO for better rules.  The document also addressed market access (the Everything But Arms initiative) and the issue of coherence, among many others.  In the area of investment, the draft outcome document looked at how to ensure that developing countries have a capacity, and that the international system should be responsive to the fostering private investment flows.  The Fourth Ministerial Declaration again gave the WTO a mandate to look at rules in this area. 
His delegation was of the view that developments emerging from Doha should be reflected and followed-up in the FFD Ministerial Declaration with concrete pointers saying, "we note and take note again of these commitments, and we will do our part these commitments are followed-up, that the money is there, that the political commitment is shared by our governments in this Conference, as well as those who went to Doha."  In the area of technical assistance, which was an important area with respect to the financing question, the delegate went on to state that the facilitator's draft outcome document called for multilateral and bilateral donors to work on the issue.  The WTO Ministerial declaration also called for coherence in this field.
&& The representative of the European Communities proposed that, to get the "good news of Doha" into the UN process, in addition to meetings held in Geneva and New York, the WTO Secretariat could be asked to briefly look in a factual way, at what had been decided that was relevant to the themes of the International Conference.  Such a factual paper would indicate for each item in the FFD, how it was concretely addressed in the Doha Declaration, what the commitment was, and what the WTO Membership had agreed to do.  This would ensure that the decisions and ideas from Doha were included in the process and that the WTO had something to say on the elements of the FFD process, be it reinforcing or complementary to the political objectives which all WTO members shared.  His delegation would therefore propose going beyond the recommendation in the WTO Secretariat's background note provided in paragraph 29, and not only make an intervention on the results of Doha, but provide a factual analysis, aimed at putting together the elements which were already in the Facilitator's draft outcome document and other papers which had come out from the FFD process, and point out how the developments that have come out of Doha were relevant.  The idea was to give the persons who had to decide on concrete action and concrete commitments in the FFD process a solid basis to do so, without having to read the whole WTO Declaration in order to find the all the sections/paragraphs on one issue.  The WTO Secretariat, possibly under its own responsibility, could be tasked to sum up and provide such a paper to the Conference.
(iii)	Further Involvement by the Membership

&& The Chairman recalled that earlier in 2001, the CTD had sent a contribution to the Preparatory Committee, contained in document WT/COMTD/30, and that at that time, the WTO had been working towards the Doha Ministerial Conference.  The WTO was currently in a new situation: the Ministerial Declaration and Decisions had been adopted; the decision on the extension of transition periods for subsidies had been taken; and the waiver of GATT 1994 for the EU/ACP Cotonou Convention had been adopted..  The WTO had a clear work programme of negotiations and other work which would take it through to 2005.  In addition, the WTO had admitted China and Chinese Taipei as Members.
He therefore proposed that, as a first step, the CTD as the official point of contact for the FFD process, should send copies of the Ministerial Declaration, the Decision on Implementation-Related Issues and Concerns, the Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health, the Decision on extensions under Article 27.4 of the Subsidies Agreement, and the Decision on the EU/ACP Waiver, to the Co-Chairs of the FFD Preparatory Committee for the information of the Preparatory Committee at its next meeting in January 2002.  He further proposed that at the January 2002 meeting of the PrepCom, the WTO Secretariat and himself could update the PrepCom on developments in Geneva since 26 November 2001, in particular on steps towards the creation of a Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC).  At the January 2002 Preparatory Committee meeting, it would be open to any Member to state their views concerning the Work Programme of the WTO and the contribution that it might make towards FFD.  He reminded the Members of the EU's proposal, which had been endorsed by Switzerland, for the Secretariat to undertake work on areas in which cooperation should continue, and enquired whether Members would be agreeable to that  process.
&& The representative from the United States asked exactly what the representative of the EC had suggested.  References had been made to anti-dumping and other elements, when the development of the trade section of the paper on FFD was being described.  The proposal needed to be discussed more, informally, for all to get a better idea what they would be agreeing to with respect to the illustrative list proposed. 
&& The representative of the European Communities indicated that the idea was to ask the WTO Secretariat to draw up a more succinct report of what had happened in Doha, rather than just sending the Fourth Ministerial Declaration.  The proposed report would make  clear where the elements that had been identified so far in the FFD discussion were addressed in the Declaration.  The major part would be on technical assistance and capacity building because there were so many firm commitments to be followed-up.  It was also worth noting that many of the other substantive points which the Facilitator and others had raised which would be the elements which would really be conclusive to financing development by using trade means, such as better market access.  For example, it could be stated that the question of market access had been addressed and that the WTO had a commitment to negotiate further.  What the specific commitments were in the Least-Developed Countries (LDC) section of the Declaration, could also be pointed out.  That would enable a reader to have a succinct and comprehensive overview of what the relevant commitments  undertaken in the Declaration were and that would assist the New York based FFD process.  The aim would not be to push anyone into a negotiating position.  It was a fact that the WTO had agreed to strengthen the rules for example, and the language that was in the WTO Ministerial declaration paragraph on rules, did make reference to certain disciplines.
&& The representative of Canada indicated that the proposal did not cause them any problem.  It was a good proposal, although some concerns might need to be worked out.  It was a good idea to indicate succinctly what could be done within the confines of the WTO and what went beyond that.  It should be indicated, where linkages were necessary, and where the coherence agenda would have to come into play, to make it clear that the World Bank, IMF and other organisations would be drawn into certain of the supply-side considerations in particular.
&& The representative of Argentina, indicated that there might be certain costs for developing countries from the Doha Declaration, and the proposed factual report should not lose sight of them it was to give a balanced picture of the situation.  That had to be further considered, so they were not in a position to come up with an analysis at that time.
The respresentative of the United States said that her delegation would welcome an informal discussion on what the list may entail, since her delegation might  not necessarily share the views of certain other delegations, although it would probably share some of the indications coming from the representative of Canada, especially with respect to the supply-side requirements and the  linkages that would be found in the International Conference.  She also found some of the comments by the representative of Argentina interesting.  She did not wish to re-draft the WTO Declaration and Decisions, which had been negotiated intensively in Doha.
&& The representative of Japan indicated there seemed to be a lot of capacity building and similar supporting activities included in the Declaration, and the WTO had to work with the other international, regional and bilateral donors to implement those activities.  He therefore wished to see the proposed paper, if such a paper was prepared, include the good collaboration and cooperation in a coherent manner to work toward the common target of development.  He supported the advantage expressed by previous speakers that supply-side capacity constraints, including infrastructure hardware with regard to trade, had to be tackled in a coordinated manner.  The WTO was not accustomed to doing that all alone.  Wording with respect to further cooperation and collaboration therefore had to be included.
&& The representative of Paraguay found that the proposal risked interpreting the Doha Declaration.  That was why such a proposal had to be taken with caution and judiciousness.  He agreed with the representative of Canada that it should be much more a question of looking at ways to supplement the Doha Declaration, but the Committee should not look for ways of interpreting what had actually been stated in the Doha Declaration, as that would be dangerous. 
At this point in the discussion, the Chairman reminded the meeting that there were two proposals: the proposal of the representative of the European Communities and a proposal to send the factual documents which were previously indicated - the Ministerial Declaration, the Decision on Implementation-Related Issues and Concerns, the Declaration on TRIPS and Public Health, the Decision on Extensions under Article 27.4 of the Subsidies Agreement, and the Decision on the EU/ACP Waiver - without any comment, duly notifying them of the decisions taken.  The latter proposal did not seem to raise any problems.  There was also a proposal to update the PrepCom on progress in the preparation of the setting up of the WTO TNC.  He hoped that that this could be agreed.  With respect to the proposal made by the representative of the  EC, he noted that although there had not been opposition, it has been agreed that further discussion was necessary.  The Committee could  consult later on how to proceed on that issue.  No decision could be taken at that moment.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that with respect to what the representative of Paraguay had said, it was not a question of an interpretation of the WTO declaration.  The idea was to give persons who prepare for FFD, a tool, showing them what had been done at Doha on the issues in the FFD process.  For example, the Facilitator and others had raised the issue of Market access.  The market access sections of the Doha Declaration could then be quoted.  He understood that some delegations were uneasy about what the proposal actually meant and how it could be done, so he agreed to the Chair's suggestion to continue the discussion informally.  However, the Committee should not wait too long since the PrepCom meeting was in January 2002.
&& The representative of the United States stated that even if a factual document was prepared, it could be of concern, as a factual presentation could contain an indication of an interpretation by the mere fact of what was placed in it.  More time was needed to get a better sense of what the exercise was about.  The CTD should consider what the next steps were as far as a WTO contribution was concerned.  Even if it was to be a factual listing, Members would need to say what that factual listing would be.
&& The representative of Argentina said that he did not entirely agree with what the representative of the US had said.  He agreed that an informal meeting be held, before the CTD went any further on the matter. 
At this stage, the Chairman just wanted to verify.  He imagined that there was no problem with the decision to transmit the documents adopted in Doha.  He enquired whether the US objected to this.
&& The representative of the United States indicated that she did not understand, and enquired whether the CTD was going to transmit documents approved by the Ministers in Doha.  The representative indicated that she did not understand why the CTD was transmitting the documents, since she was not sure of the competence issue.  In addition, the delegate wanted to know where the CTD was going to transmit the documents.
&& The Chairman proposed that the CTD, as the focal point designated for the FFD, transmit the documents that had been adopted at Doha, to the PrepCom, without any comment. 
&& The representative of the United States reiterated that an informal meeting was necessary before arrangement could be reached on the issue. 
&& The representative of Argentina indicated that his delegation agreed with what was said by the representative of the US.
&& The representative of Barbados also agreed to the need for an informal meeting.
&& The Chairman said he would speak to the WTO Secretariat to see if a time for informal consultations on this issue, could be arranged.

SPECIAL AND DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT
Work Programme Resulting from the 4th Ministerial Conference
Note by the Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/77/Rev.1)
&& The Chairman said that the issue of Special and Differential Treatment (S&D) had been given a new departure in the Doha Ministerial Declaration, to which the CTD had to respond urgently.  As reflected in paragraph 44 of the Ministerial Declaration (WT/MIN(01)DEC/1), Ministers had agreed that that all S&D provisions should be reviewed with a view to strengthening them and making them more precise, effective and operational.  In that connection, they had endorsed the work programme contained in Paragraph 12 of the Decision on Implementation-Related Issues and Concerns (WT/MIN(01)/17), also adopted at Doha.  Copies of the text of the work programme on S&D were available at the back of the room.  As delegations would have noted, two aspects of the work programme had firm deadlines instructing the CTD to report to the General Council with clear recommendations for a decision by July 2002.  It was therefore critically important to commence the work immediately and that Members considered how they wished to organize the work.  Only three formal Committee meetings had been scheduled before the end of July 2002.  It would therefore be necessary to schedule a number of informal meetings, in addition to the formal meetings, if the CTD wished to make good progress.  In principle, he proposed to call one informal meeting a month in order to ensure progress on S&D.  However, that programme might have to be varied according to the progress made.
He went on to recall that the work the CTD carried out was without prejudice to that carried out in respect of implementation by other WTO bodies.  In that connection he drew delegations' attention to the fact that other WTO bodies would be carrying out work on specific S&D provisions, either under the mandate handed to them by the Decision on Implementation-Related Issues and Concerns, or as part of their treatment of outstanding implementation issues under paragraph 12 of the Ministerial Declaration.  He would be seeking the guidance of Members, as the work progressed, on how to coordinate the work done in the CTD with that done elsewhere, in order to meet the CTD mandate, and to avoid duplication of efforts.  Regarding how the CTD approached the substance of its work, he suggested that the meeting focussed in particular on that part of the mandate contained in paragraph (i), of the work programme, which instructed the CTD to do the following three things, and then to report to the General Council with clear recommendations for a decision by July 2002.  Those three things were:
to identify those special and differential treatment provisions that were already mandatory in nature and those that were non-binding in character; to consider the legal and practical implications for developed and developing Members of converting special and differential treatment measures into mandatory provisions;  and to identify those that Members consider should be made mandatory.

As a starting-point for the discussions, he suggested that the Committee used the information provided in Document WT/COMTD/W//77/Rev.1.  That document contained, amongst other things, a discussion of the operation of S&D, an illustrative list of questions, and also the nucleus of a distinction between provisions that were mandatory and those that were not.  He also recalled that Ministers had instructed the CTD to take fully into consideration previous work undertaken as noted in WT/COMTD/W/77/Rev.1.  Members had had that document in their possession for some time, and he was convinced that it had prompted many thoughts.  He therefore urged Members to direct their comments towards taking forward the work the Committee had been mandated by Ministers to carry out.  Document WT/COMTD/W/77/Rev.1 was not an exclusive basis for work.  For a start, he believed that it would be useful to ask the Secretariat to assist the Committee by identifying in more depth the mandatory S&D provisions.  Of course, Members were free to make their own proposals, and he recalled that Ministers had taken note of a proposal for a Framework Agreement on S&D made by a group of Members.  He suggested that the Committee proceeded by holding its first discussion in informal mode.  However, if any delegation wished to make a statement for the record, an opportunity to do so would be provided after the informal discussion.
After the informal discussion, the Committee decided to hold further informal consultations on the issue in the near future.

GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES
	-	Note by the Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/93)

&& The Chairman said that at the last meeting of the Committee, Members had had before them a Note by the Secretariat entitled "The Generalised System of Preferences:  A preliminary analysis of the GSP schemes in the Quad" contained in document WT/COMTD/W/93.  That study had been prepared in response to requests from delegations for further information on the benefits of the Generalized System of Preferences.  However, as the document had only been issued shortly before the last meeting, it had been decided to give Members more time to study it and another chance to revert to it.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that her delegation found the document a useful source of reference, particularly for developing country users of the GSP schemes.  It described the schemes of the Quad countries, reviled shortcomings and suggested solutions as to how those shortcomings could be overcome.  Delegations should be given more time to elaborate on the text.  Her delegation therefore suggested that the item be retained on the agenda for the next formal meeting of the Committee.  One conclusion that could be drawn was that the share of trade covered by the GSP compared to the share of trade covered by MFN was fairly small.  Another was that few beneficiaries were using the GSP scheme effectively.  One reason for that was the supply-constraints of developing countries which had led to the question of graduation and counter-graduation.  In addition, when comparing the agricultural and the non-agricultural sectors, the report reviled that the utilization was higher in the industrial, non-agricultural product sector.  In order to enhance the utilization of the GSP there was a need to focus on those product sectors.  From the statistical part of the part of the paper showing the utilization rates, it was clear that the situation had not changed during the last couple of years.  Sri Lanka's utilization rate of the United States GSP scheme was fairly high as most of the items entered duty-free.  However, the actual coverage of the United States' GSP scheme had to be analyzed as certain important sectors had been excluded.  Whereas the European Communities' scheme had a broader coverage, the utilization rate was lower.  The reason for that was known.  It was the rigid rules of origin requirements and quota restrictions.  The report could be a guide of how to improve the GSP schemes.  She had cited the reasons for her country's low utilization rate, however, other Members would have other explanations for their low utilization rates.
&& The representative of Canada said that she wished to bring a factual error to the attention of the Committee.  The last sentence of paragraph 23 on page 7 of the English version stated, with respect to the Canadian GPS scheme that "Agricultural products included in the scheme are covered by a positive list, while excluded industrial goods are given in a negative list."  However, there were no positive, nor negative lists in the Canadian GSP scheme so that phrased had to be removed.
&& The representative of the United States said that the Note, in the future, could include more information on how beneficiary countries were taking advantage of the GSP.  That was an evolving subject and more information on utilization could be provided as it became available, as could information about how to assist beneficiaries on the supply-side for them to take additional advantage of the GSP schemes.
&& The representative of the European Communities praised the study for its analytical qualities.  The points made in part V were the most important ones.  The questions of utilization and utility addressed in the tables were interesting.  The two should not be confused and utility is what really counts in the end.  His delegation concurred with the questions put forward in part V.  One of the conclusions was that preferences could be useful but that they were not always used and that one of the reasons for that was the supply-side constraints.  Another reason was the one the European Communities had tried to address in its reform and that was simplicity: simple rules of origin and easy access.  His delegation was willing to work on the issues put forward as his delegation believed that these schemes still were useful.  The Note and the conclusions that could be drawn from it were useful for the negotiations which were to begin in agriculture, industrial tariffs and regional trading agreements.  All of them could benefit from a background showing how certain preferences work.  In addition, the Note was also relevant for the identification of technical assistance needs and constraints of developing countries.  The Note was a reminder to his delegation, as a granter of preferences, that it could still do better.  The instrument which constituted the GSP would not be abandoned in the near future, it would be improved.  Long discussions on preferences had also been held in other parts of the WTO and they demonstrated that preferences, if applied correctly, did work.  The discussions should be led by those who used the preferences to get access to developed country markets.  More comments from beneficiaries would therefore be welcome.  It would be useful, if the resources of the Secretariat permitted, not only to look at the Quad countries, but also the ambitious schemes of some other countries which could be a source of future innovation and future reflection on how the GSP instrument could be used and improved.
&& The representative of Japan said that certain improvements to the purpose of the GSP schemes had been proposed and they constituted a good ground for his government to study the GSP.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made and requested the Secretariat to look into the possibility of extending the study to additional preferential schemes. 

ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
Presentation of a Country Experience (Panama)
&& The Chairman introduced Mrs. Cristina Thayer, acting head of the Trade Negotiations Unit, Legal Department of the Ministry of Trade and Industry in Panama who currently attended the WTO trade-policy course.  Mrs. Thayer should have participated in the seminar on Government Facilitation of E-Commerce for Development in June 2001 but had been unable to attend at the last minute.
For the presentation by Mrs. Cristina Thayer, please see Annex.
&& The representative of the United States said that her Government applauded the efforts made by the Government of Panama to become e-ready and to take certain action from the government perspective which would facilitate e-commerce.  She hoped that those efforts would continue and that the CTD would be able to hear further reports from the Government of Panama on the benefits that its enterprises were gaining from the outstanding work that the Government was engaged in to facilitate e-commerce in Panama.
&& The representative of Costa Rica said that such an exchange of experiences was valuable and that her delegation hoped to share its country's experience at the next meeting of the Committee.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that her delegation would be grateful if it would be possible to make the presentation available in writing.  The presentation had highlighted the importance of a coordinated approach.  The Government of Panama seemed to have covered many areas because of the interlinkages.  The Government of Panama had not only been looking at telecommunications but also the underlying legislation which is required to support that and to encourage involvement.  Her delegation looked forward to further reports on process in Panama.
&& The Chairman said that he had been informed that the representative of Panama would circulate her statement in writing after she had made some corrections to it.  He further said that he considered the sharing of country experiences important and hoped that the Committee would be able to continue to invite different delegations to make presentations on an ad-hoc basis.  In that regard he welcomed the offer made by the delegation of Costa Rica to share its experience at a later date.
Presentation by UNCTAD:  E-Commerce and Development Report 2001
&& The Chairman introduced Dr. Susanne Teltscher, Economic Affairs Officer in the Electronic Commerce Branch of UNCTAD.
&& Dr. Teltscher said that that the UNCTAD "E-commerce and Development Report 2001" had been published the previous week.  It was available on the UNCTAD Website for free download and delegations should have received copies through the official UN distribution system to the Geneva‑based missions.  If delegates still required hard copies, the UNCTAD Secretariat would be happy to provide extra copies.  The overview of the report was available outside the meeting room in the three WTO languages while the main report was in English only.  It was the first time that UNCTAD had considered the issue of e-commerce and development in such a comprehensive way even though UNCTAD had worked on e-commerce and Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)‑related issues, particularly in the area of trade facilitation for a long time.  It was a new publication which UNCTAD planned to release on an annual basis in the future.  The goal with UNCTAD's work in this area, and with the report, was to assist developing countries benefit from the new technologies and that way contribute to the narrowing of the digital divide.  The report should also be considered as an input into the UN Secretary General's new task force on ICTs which had held its first meeting the previous week in New York, US.
She said that she would give an overview of the topics covered by the report and then give more detail on a few of those.  The introduction discussed the lessons learned from the previous year's "dot com"‑crisis.  The first chapter treated the subject of measuring electronic commerce.  The second related to e-commerce and economic growth.  The following chapters were about e-tourism, e‑marketplaces, e-government, legal and regulatory issues, electronic payments and logistics in the e‑commerce age.  Finally, there were two empirical chapters; one on e-commerce in ten LDCs and one on China.
She said that she wished to share a few of the results of the UNCTAD "E-commerce and Development Report 2001" in various areas.  There was a discussion on what had happened in the past year as far as the Internet market was concerned and the rise and fall of the "dot com" companies.  One of the lessons drawn from those developments were that the economic and business implications of ICT and the Internet had to be properly understood by all players: companies, investors and consumers.  The same business rules applied to the "new economy"-companies as applied to the "old economy"-companies.  Developing countries had largely remained unaffected by those events, mainly because they had not had access to the same amount of venture capital as companies in the developed countries, especially companies in the U.S.  It was an opportunity for companies in developing countries to learn from the mistakes and misconceptions that had prevailed in the past years on the Internet market.  One of the conclusions drawn in the introductory chapter was that the changes brought about by ICT and e-commerce would be fundamental and lasting and that the actual benefits and the potential that the new technologies would bring were only beginning to become obvious.  A main challenge ahead was related to the business culture.  That was true for both developed and developing countries.  Many other challenges were also discussed in the report but unless businesses changed as far as their flexibility and openness was concerned towards adopting e-commerce strategies it would be difficult to participate in the new developments.
The second chapter of the UNCTAD "E-commerce and Development Report 2001" looked at measuring electronic commerce.  Even if many were interested in how much e-commerce there really was, most data provided by the private sector companies only provided rough estimates.  Those estimates of the value of e-commerce in a given future year varied substantially depending on which source it came from.  The lack of information about the value of e-commerce was a real problem.  The fact that the numbers varied and the data was incomparable as they were based on different definitions and methodologies had been giving rise to an international effort towards providing guidelines which could be used for measuring e-commerce.  As a result of that effort a working definition of e‑commerce was available as were statistical indicators which could be used by national statistical offices.  Some national offices had begun to collect e-commerce statistics.  That had proven to be useful for policy makers as well as for businesses when taking decisions on investment and other policies.  There was an urgent need for coordination and cooperation in the area of e-commerce statistics, in particular between those statistical offices which already had experience in measuring e‑commerce with statistical offices in developing countries who wished to begin but who did not yet have experience.
The macro-economic impact of e-commerce was dealt with in a separate chapter of the UNCTAD "E-commerce and Development Report 2001".  An economic model had been used to calculate some of the implications of ICT.  It was assumed that ICT would raise the productivity in the services sector.  Based on that assumption, the UNCTAD Secretariat had worked with two scenarios: one in which developing countries fell behind the developed countries as far as their productivity growth in the services sector was concerned, and a second in which the developing countries caught up with the developed countries.  In the second case, a productivity growth had been simulated in selected developing countries only.  A number of results for different variables had been achieved.  In the first scenario in which a 1 per cent productivity growth had been simulated in developed countries only, the result was that there would be negative changes in economic welfare in all developing country regions apart from Asia.  Whereas in the second scenario where a 1 per cent productivity increase were simulated in selected developing countries only, positive welfare gains were noted in those regions.  The 1 per cent productivity change was an arbitrary number and the figures should not be taken as absolute numbers, but rather underline the importance that new technologies can play for countries' productivity growth and its possible implications for their macro‑economic indicators.
The UNCTAD "E-commerce and Development Report 2001" also included a chapter on legal and regulatory issues.  She would only mention two issues: taxation and customs duties.  As far as taxation was concerned, there had been a large discussion on sales taxes and which jurisdiction should be applied for e-commerce, the one for the consumer or the one of the supplier.  The current tendency seemed to be to apply the jurisdiction of the consumer, although it was not yet clear how the sales taxes would be collected from foreign suppliers in those cases.  For example, there had been a debate in the European Communities regarding taxation and foreign suppliers supplying European Community consumers with goods delivered electronically were currently exempted from sales tax.  With respect income tax collection from businesses, there had been discussions about how the concept of permanent establishment would apply in cyberspace with respect to e-commerce.  The OECD countries had agreed that a web-server could constitute a fix place of business or permanent establishment of a company, if that company owned the server, and if the company carried on its main business activities through the server.  The company would then have to pay taxes in the country of location of the server.  As far as customs duties were concerned, WTO Members had extended the Moratorium on customs duties on electronically transmissions for two more years.  There had been questions about the potential fiscal implications of that decision.  The UNCTAD Secretariat had carried out extensive calculations at the country level.  Import revenues had been calculated on digitised products (software, music, printed matters, video-products) based on 1999 imports.  The value of the tariff revenue that potentially could be foregone was about 1 billion US dollars.  The developing countries would have the larger share of that.  If other duties were added, surcharges and import duties such as consumption taxes on imports the value added up to a potential loss of 8 billion US dollars.  In that case, developed countries would take the larger share of the loss, given their large trade volumes and high consumption taxes on the products concerned.
E-tourism was the topic of Chapter Three.  It was an area that was important in e-commerce and it mainly referred to on-line bookings and reservations of flights and hotels.  It was a leading sector in business-to-consumer e-commerce, because at the point of sale, the tourism product was largely an information product and was therefore ideally suited for marketing and selling over the Internet.  It had been an important sector for developing countries.  The UNCTAD Secretariat estimated that currently about 50 per cent of all e-commerce took place in the area of tourism and that there was good potential for increases in that sector.  Developing countries only had about a 3 per cent market share in e-tourism but it was estimated that it could be increased to about 30 per cent.  The chapter discussed the type of action that could be taken to increase the share of developing countries in the sector.
In the chapter on LDCs there were some interesting examples of servicing the Diaspora market.  Family members who lived abroad would order goods and services from home through the Internet.  Teleservices such as remote processing (data processing, software development) and on-line call centers.  A number of interesting examples of call centers were spelt out in the report.  In Togo, Internet telephony had been used to get around some of the Internet access costs.  A number of sectors where developing countries companies made successful use of the Internet were discussed.  Some of the solutions had been to use secure servers and on-line payment facilities in other countries to allow customers to buy and make electronic payments through the Internet.  That would progressively create consumer trust which was a key goal for a company to become successful on the Internet.
The UNCTAD "E-commerce and Development Report 2001" contained a chapter on developments in China.  China had impressive growth-rates of the number of Internet users: the rate had doubled every six months between 1997 and 2000.  The mobile-phone market was also increasing rapidly.  Almost 100 per cent in 2000 and China currently had the largest market in the world of mobile phone subscriptions.  It had even surpassed the U.S. with 120 million subscribers.  The UNCTAD report estimated that the current figure of 27 million Internet users would increase to 68 million by 2005 which was still only 5 per cent of the population.  However, the growth curve would begin to flatten, while still showing growth, as had already happened in the US and in some EU countries.  The IT industry already contributed 12 per cent to China's GDP growth but it was still in its infancy and there were a number of barriers that had to be tackled such as trust, business culture, Internet access costs.  The lack of credit card use made on-line payment almost impossible.  Language and content restrictions added additional burdens for Internet service providers in China.  The gradual opening of the telecommunications and the financial sector, which both were important for the development o e-commerce, could be expected to improve the environment for e-commerce in China.  It was therefore likely that further development and improvement of e-commerce in China would take place within the short to medium term.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had taken note of the effects and impacts on developed and developing countries.  She had found the calculations of the fiscal losses, as mentioned in the executive summary distributed, to be particularly interesting.  In that connection, she noted that the draft work programme for the CTD included a seminar on the issue of fiscal implications.  The CTD work programme had been initiated in 1998 and an overall WTO work programme on e-commerce had been launched under the supervision of the General Council.  The mandate for the overall work had recently been renewed.  Her delegation asked whether the UNCTAD calculations regarding fiscal losses were similar to the World Bank analysis on the same issue carried out two or three years back.  It would be particularly interesting to see what kind of product coverage UNCTAD had used as far as including certain digital products in the calculations were concerned.  She asked if any comparison had been made as to the scope of the analysis.  It was interesting to note that developed countries took the larger burden due to consumption taxes and their volume of trade, as was the concern that absolute losses of tariff revenues and potential tariff revenues foregone in developing countries owed to higher tariffs applied to the digital products traded.  It would be interesting to consider the possible effects of imports of digitised products over time.  Developed countries were willing to recognize the gains in comparison to the losses even though there might be a concern of the level of the revenue loss.
&& The representative of Brazil said that the issue of fiscal implications and forgone revenue was one of the issues of the report which was of interest to his delegation as well.  On page 125 of the report, the study seemed to indicate that there was a consensus in the WTO regarding the Moratorium on customs duties and on any implications of that Moratorium on internal taxes.  The consensus was that the Moratorium only covered tariffs, not internal taxes.  Both the Geneva and the Doha Ministerial Declarations reflected that understanding.  In light of that, he asked why, in the calculations of foregone revenue, the UNCTAD Secretariat had taken foregone tax revenue, in particular consumer taxes such as VAT and sales taxes into account.  The Study made reference to a group of products used as the basis for the calculation of the tariff losses.  It was said on page 126 that "…a number of commodities have been selected, which traditionally have been shipped physically and been subject to border tariffs, but which today can be transformed into a digitized format and sent through the Internet".  The study made reference to a footnote, but the footnote in turn referred the reader to another study.  Although some examples of the type of products were given, such as (i) printed matter;  (ii) software;  (iii) music and other media products;  (iv) film;  and (v) video games, he sought clarification as to which the products included were, with specific examples.  He suggested that it would be more accurate to say that that revenue might be foregone in a context where tariffs were being levied on electronic deliveries as opposed to saying that that revenue was actually being lost.
&& The representative of UNCTAD said, in response to the question posed by the representative of the United States, that there were some similarities and some differences between the World Bank and the UNCTAD studies.  More of less the same limited number of product categories had been used in both.  However, the UNCTAD Secretariat had used a slightly different classification code for its calculations which had allowed it to separate software products from other products.  The UNCTAD Secretariat calculations also included a larger number of countries, in particular more developing countries, than had been included in the World Bank study.  Furthermore, apart from the tariff calculations, the UNCTAD Secretariat had added another database to calculate other customs surcharges and import taxes on those products.  The UNCTAD Secretariat had not only calculated the potential tariff revenue losses but also those that could occur if additional surcharges levied on imports were taken into account as well.  Regarding the question from the delegation of Brazil, she said that the UNCTAD Secretariat had wished to include not only the tariffs, but also the other duties.  That was why the Study included both an analysis of information on tariffs only and an extended analysis including other duties that could be foregone, as those other duties would not be collected either if the products were imported digitally.  It had been unclear what kind of duties the WTO Moratorium included; if it was limited to tariffs or if it had a broader reach.  That would probably have to be looked into in the future.  As far as the products were concerned, the UNCTAD Secretariat was happy to provide delegations with the other, more detailed study and would provide further information on the different calculations and more country and commodity details.  The representative of Brazil was correct in that the calculations represented upper-level potential losses and did not claim to represent actual losses today.  In addition, the figures were based on 1999 actual imports.
&& The Chairman said that he hoped that the WTO would continue to cooperate with UNCTAD on the matter.
&& The Committee took note of the UNCTAD report "E-Commerce and Development Report 2001" and the statements made.
Work Programme on E-commerce
&& The Chairman said that a draft programme of work on e-commerce for the CTD had been discussed at an informal meeting of 17 July 2001.  A revised version, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/92, had been before the Committee at its last meeting.  While there had not been any objections to the content, some delegations had believed that the CTD should wait for the 4th Ministerial Conference before moving ahead with the work programme.  He therefore hoped that delegations were in a position to consider the draft work programme in the CTD.  The work programme was of course without prejudice to any decision the General Council might take with respect to the overall WTO Work Programme on Electronic Commerce.  The draft work programme for the CTD outlined work the Committee could pursue in respect of the development implications of e-commerce and it also suggested the format such work could take.  As he had said before, he believed that the work programme should be flexible enough to take account of requests from the General Council and individual Members as well as opportunities to invite speakers who happened to be in Geneva.
&& The representative of the United States said that there was a footnote reference to the overall WTO Work Programme approved in September 1998.  She suggested that there also be a reference to the CTD continuing its work consistent with the mandate approved by the Ministers.  Her delegation recognized that the issues presented in the draft CTD Work Programme were issues raised by different Members in the interest of seeing them taken up in the course of seminars.  If there was an agenda for a particular seminar, her delegation wished to see it in advance in order to adequately prepare its participation in the seminar.
&& The representative of Brazil said that there did not seem to be any major changes to the proposed Work Programme from the version delegations had considered in July.  He reminded Members that, at that occasion, his delegation's understanding had been that the list of issues to be considered under the Work Programme at the regular meetings of the CTD would be open-ended and that any delegation therefore could bring up any issue of interest to them.  He noted, with respect to seminars, that revenue implications was one of the horizontal issues taken up in the General Council.  He reiterated that Members should participate in the drawing up of the agenda for the seminars so that the process be as Member-driven as possible.  He had some concerns with the wording of paragraph 4 of the Work Programme which stated that the results of the seminars be "fed back into the regular work of the WTO.  It would therefore be natural to report to the CTD from the various seminars held under its auspices."  His delegation's understanding was that that did not mean that any conclusions drawn at the seminars would be formally incorporated into the minutes or a formal discussion of the CTD regarding e-commerce.
&& The representative of Canada said that the discussions, the presentation by the delegation of Panama, by UNCTAD and the promise by the delegation of Costa Rica already implemented some of the elements of the Work Programme and demonstrated that the activities of the CTD prove to be helpful and would continue to be so.
&& The representative of the United States sought clarification from the representative of Brazil concerning reports of seminars.  Although she recalled that the delegation of Brazil had made similar comments earlier, Members had also said that if a particular delegation wished to make reference to something that had been learned from an expert at a seminar, that delegation could bring up that topic for discussion at its own responsibility into the regular discussions of the CTD.  Delegations would not be barred from taking advantage of export information provided during seminars.  There would otherwise not be any use of holding seminars.
&& The Chairman said that if he reported on his own responsibility, it would not mean that delegations approved or disapproved it.  It would be a factual report of what had happened at the seminar for the information of the entire Membership.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made and the Committee approved going ahead with the Work Programme on Electronic Commerce.

WORK PROGRAMME FOR 2002
&& The Chairman said that all delegations had received a fax containing a draft CTD Work Programme for 2002 and additional copies were available at the back of the room.  That draft Work Programme was based on the existing work of the Committee.  At the same time, it was clear that as a result of the 4th Ministerial Conference the WTO had a great deal of additional development-related work to do.  Not all that work would be carried out in the Committee on Trade and Development.  Some areas were mentioned as falling under the aegis of other WTO bodies such as work on small economies, trade, debt and finance and trade and transfer of technology which would be carried out under the General Council.  Paragraph 51 of the Ministerial Declaration dealt with developmental aspects of the negotiations.  It was clear that the Committee on Trade and Development was named as the forum where development-related aspects of the negotiations should be identified and debated.  In addition, he recalled that both the CTD and the Committee on Trade and Environment had been asked to do work in relation to sustainable development.  It was clear that that work covered elements of sustainability and development and that the CTD next year would have to look at what those concerns were.  That work might require cooperative efforts among Members and the Secretariat on both development and environment issues.  In addition to the identified areas, the CTD might be involved in reviewing and assessing the overall WTO Work Programme and a particular role might be envisaged for the CTD in relation to the expanded programme for technical assistance and capacity building.  The Work Progamme therefore necessarily had to be flexible.
&& The representative of the United States asked whether it had been assured that the dates for the meetings of the CTD meetings did not clash with the dates of the General Council or other major WTO bodies.
&& The Secretariat said that the schedule of meetings of other WTO bodies had been checked before scheduling the CTD meetings.  However, it could not be guaranteed that, in the future, other WTO bodies did not schedule additional meetings on the same day the CTD had planned to hold a meeting.  The Secretariat had even checked that the CTD meetings did not clash with other major meetings outside the WTO, such as major UNCTAD meetings, as far as such meeting dates were known.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that it might be useful for delegations to pay attention to the footnote of the Work Programme which stated that the Work Programme was "without prejudice to any additional work that may result from the work programme established by the Fourth Ministerial Conference".  A structure for the negotiations was being developed and it was unclear how it all would fit together and where individual pieces of work would be undertaken.  Examples of that were issues such as small economies and special and differential treatment.  A disclaimer was therefore necessary and  issues such as the two examples given might have to be looked at when it was clear how the CTD should address those issues.  In addition, the CTD might wish to make some input into the Rio Plus Ten Conference which so far only had been discussed under the Committee on Trade and Environment.  It should be kept in mind that that conference treated the issue of development as well and might entail some future work for the CTD for coherence and policy consistency reasons.  There was a footnote with respect to seminars in the Work Programme and it should be clear that the Committee could come back to that if necessary.
&& The Committee adopted its draft CTD 2002 Work Programme with the understanding that it was without prejudice to any additional work that may result from the work programme to be established following the Fourth Ministerial Conference and that additional seminars on development topics could be considered during the course of 2002.

OTHER BUSINESS
No item was raised under Agenda Item H on "Other Business".
ANNEX 

National Experience of Panama in the field of Electronic Commerce

&& Presentation by Cristina Elena Thayer

Greetings, ladies and gentlemen.  It is a pleasure to be with you at last, having cancelled my participation in the seminar on electronic commerce last summer for health reasons.  I must confess to you that when I received the invitation to address you a few days ago, I had some misgivings as to whether I should accept:  having come to Geneva to attend the current Trade Policy Course, I did not bring with me the materials and information required to make a high-quality presentation.
However, I thought about if for a while and concluded that sharing national experiences is possibly one of the most efficient ways of gathering valuable information on what we are doing well, and of course, on what we could improve.
It is in that spirit that Panama would like to contribute its two cents' worth by rapidly outlining before this assembly the progress it has made, for what it is worth, in the hope that it will also receive ideas and comments from the experts in the audience.
I shall begin my paper, then, by stating that my country's experience in coordinated work towards the use of new technologies as a development tool is limited.
There have been many highly commendable efforts in the different sectors and considerable work has been done on various fronts;  but until very recently, there has been little interdisciplinary and interinstitutional coordination, with the result that efforts have sometimes been duplicated and progress hindered.
Thus, I shall be referring, perhaps in a somewhat disorderly but hopefully comprehensive manner, to the different efforts on the part of both the Government and private enterprise that have had some impact on the development of electronic commerce.
On the subject of human infrastructure, I would like to mention the work of the National Secretariat of Science and Technology (SENACYT), attached to the Office of the President of the Republic, whose programmes have played a leading role in the development and integration of new technologies in the country.  SENACYT (www.senacyt.gob.pa), an institution set up at the beginning of the 1990s to introduce and coordinate technological development in the Isthmus, created, with the support of the Inter-American Development Bank, the Infoplazas programme through the Infoplazas Foundation.
Infoplazas consist of centres for community access to the Internet and education and training in the use of computers.  The basic computer courses offered by the Infoplazas are free, while the specialized courses are provided at relatively low cost according to the geographical area in which each centre is located within the country.
Admission to the Infoplazas programme requires the participation of a community or a community association and an organization capable of administering it for a period of 24 months.  During those 24 months, equipment installation costs, Internet service costs and the costs of starting up the centre itself are covered by the Infoplazas Foundation.  The remaining costs, for example maintenance, staff, electricity, water and waste disposal, are covered by the Infoplaza administrative partner.  By the end of this period, each centre must be self-sufficient, and no longer receives support from the Infoplazas Foundation.  This self-sufficiency must be achieved through the income earned from the services provided to the communities.

To date, there are 28 Infoplazas in rural and suburban areas in the nine provinces of Panama.  In absolute terms, this number may appear low, but it must be borne in mind that Panama is a small country with an area of about 77,000 square kilometres and, according to the latest census, a population of less than three million. 
Meanwhile, a number of very similar initiatives have gradually emerged in the private sector.  Certain non-profit organizations as well as large business groups have understood the importance of "training with a view to hiring".  Every year, new organizations emerge as "technological sponsors", providing public schools in strategic low-income areas with computer laboratories and Internet access.  This is what has been done, for example, by the Gabriel Lewis Galindo Foundation as well as other leading local financial institutions and international institutions with their headquarters in Panama.
But, not only are the educational programmes directed at education in new technologies:  new technologies are increasingly being used for education.  Thus, a number of private and State universities have begun using virtual Internet courses and/or distance education through teleconferencing, with international-level teachers who would otherwise have been inaccessible to the Panamanian student.
Panama also has a front-line pilot project known as "City of Knowledge", made up of four basic components:  educational programmes, technological innovation, research and cultural exchange.  The City of Knowledge is an international complex of some 120 hectares, located in Clayton, a former US military base, where it is able to avail itself and make use of the existing infrastructure.
The technological innovation component of this complex takes the form of a Technopark which offers facilities to attract local and foreign investment at a relatively high technological level and involving high-value added.  Through the Technopark, Panama is seeking to promote technology transfer and competition among existing enterprises while fostering the creation of new enterprises.
Some 25 enterprises, local and international, have been given the authority to operate in the Technopark, including such international companies as Citibank, OMNES Schlumberger and XEROX as well as local companies such as Arango Software and Panama Virtual.
These companies are involved in a wide range of activities relating to electronic commerce, such as development of applications or software, call centres and web hosting, with the clear advantage of the telecommunications infrastructure and fibre optics capacity that Panama has to offer owing to its strategic geographical position.  Panama currently has access to five fibre optic submarine cables (Global Crossing, Arcos, Maya, Cable Panamericana and the Cable and Wireless ring), a fact which considerably boosts its potential as a centre for electronic commerce and makes the Panamanian Isthmus an ideal location for setting up data centres.
In this technological development cluster, an important role is also played by the transport infrastructure projects, with the creation of Pacific and the Atlantic multi-modal transport centres.  These initiatives aim at taking full advantage of Panama's geographical position by concentrating land, maritime and air transport services in a single area, significantly contributing to the logistical infrastructure needed for further development of trade in goods by electronic means.  These major centres have already been developed to varying degrees, and the remaining work to be done before they can be put into operation should be completed soon.  
In the area of support to SMEs and their real access to new technologies, the National Authority for Small and Medium Enterprises (ANPYME) created, this year, a credit guarantee programme for computer-related activities.  This programme provides for the guaranteeing of loans up to 50 per cent of the amount required for such activities granted to SMEs by accredited financial institutions.  The amount to be guaranteed must not exceed $25,000.  For educational activities, the loan guarantee can be increased up to 65 per cent.  While this credit guarantee programme is not specifically aimed at stimulating electronic commerce among SMEs, nothing prevents the companies from taking advantage of the progamme to introduce or improve their technological capacity.  Since ANPYME is currently in the process of selecting the financial institutions that will be admitted to the programme, it is too early to comment on any specific results that might give an idea of the programme's utility. 
At the same time, certain local private financial institutions periodically launch soft credit programmes and portfolios for the purchase of computer equipment.  If I am not mistaken, Citibank and the Banco General, a locally owned banking institution, maintain portfolios of this kind.
In the area of funding, the Ministry of Labour also offers companies a co-financing programme (up to 50 per cent) for the training of their workforce.  As in the case of the SME support programme, the co-financing offered by the Ministry of Labour is not exclusively for education in new technologies, but since each enterprise determines its own staff training needs, it is perfectly possible to give preference to that aspect in implementing the programme.  
As regards the legal framework, a law was adopted in the middle of this year which gives legal validity to contracts signed through the internet and makes them enforceable against third parties.  This law, which was developed on the basis of the Model Law on Electronic Commerce drafted by UNCITRAL, is the fruit of a joint effort by the Government and the private sector.  It also envisages a regulatory framework for enterprises offering electronic signature authentication services based on technological neutrality. 
In the area of intellectual property legislation, Panama is a signatory to the so-called WIPO Internet Treaties –  the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT) –  which have formed part of our domestic legislation since 2000.
As regards the telecommunications sector, starting in 1997 Panama launched a programme of corporatization and semi-privatization of the former state telephony monopoly.  As a result of this process, 49 per cent of shares in the said corporation are in the hands of Cable and Wireless, which maintains the rights of administration of the telephone company resulting from the process, and has obtained temporary exclusive rights – until 1 January 2003 – on the supply of local, national long‑distance, and international long-distance basic telephone services, public and semi-public terminals and the leasing of dedicated voice circuits.
As a result of privatization, the flat monthly telephone rate increased with the gradual elimination of cross subsidies (from approximately $12 to $30).  However, in comparison to other countries in the region, the prices of dial-up connection services have remained reasonable.  For example, medium-income users have rapid and efficient access (average connection speed of 56K) through digital exchanges set up at certain locations in the country.  Moreover, since 1997 the range of different internet access technologies has been diversified via ADSL, cable modem, cable data or frame relay.
As regards internet services providers, Panama opted for a legal regime oriented towards the maintenance of a market open to competition.  During my market research in connection with this paper, I identified at least five local and international providers.  Thus, the costs of unlimited internet access service providers remain reasonable, depending on the user (residential or business) and the technology used (dial-up, cable modem, cable data etc.).  For example, the monthly rate for unlimited residential use with a minimum 56K dial-up ranges from $13-$20.
Although their high cost tends to make them prohibitive, mobile telephone internet services have recently been introduced.  These services are clearly aimed at a limited segment of the population.  Perhaps once the numerical restriction enjoyed by the two service suppliers, C&W and Bell South, comes to an end in 2007, mobile telephone internet access will become more attractive to the population in general.
Regarding the legal framework, a number of issues have yet to be properly addressed, such as on-line consumer protection, privacy, computer crimes and tax treatment of internet transactions.
Concerning the different modes of on-line commerce, business to business (B2B) has not undergone much growth in Panama, except in the financial sector, where it has been in use for some time.  In the private sector, certain supermarket chains have recently been exploring the possibility of introducing B2B commerce and bringing their suppliers into the digital world.  However, as far as I know, this has not been put into practice.
Where there has been growth in on-line business transactions in Panama is in business to consumer (B2C) commerce aimed largely at such services suppliers as financial companies, law firms, and maritime transport and educational services enterprises.  While some enterprises have set up websites for the sale of local handicrafts and for local market sales, the impact and volume of these transactions are not very significant.
As regards government to consumer transactions (G2C), the Government of Panama is also seeking to fulfil its role as a model user.  Various State entities offer a number of online services and facilitate their work through electronic media, the most significant of which are the Panama Canal Authority, whose website offers detailed information on procurement of goods and services for the Panama Canal, and the Ministry of the Economy and Finance, whose website not only provides information, but also enables taxpayers to send their tax returns by magnetic media (although physical payment is still required).  It is also worth mentioning that March of this year, saw the introduction of an Internet-based system called SICE (Integrated Foreign Trade System), which replaced SIDUNEA.  SICE connects institutions involved in foreign trade, offering the possibility of preparing customs declarations and obtaining, online, most of the documentation relating to import customs transactions (including licences) which previously had to be obtained from different institutions.  This system was created only recently, so that it is still not possible to complete the entire process online.  For example, the payment of import duties still requires physical presence at the bank.
While on this subject, I would also like to mention the recent introduction of a project coordinated by the Vice-President of the Republic, H.E. Dominador Kaiser Bazán, to link the rest of the Government, as the Panama Canal Authority already is in part, to an electronic government procurement system.
Finally, as I stated at the beginning of this paper, while considerable progress has been made in Panama in isolated cases, coordinated efforts have not shown the same progress.  Perhaps the only exception is the work done towards developing the legal framework governing electronic signature, which has involved the creation of a drafting committee in which the public and private sectors are broadly represented.  Although the Committee completed its task with the recent adoption of the law, this is only a foundation on which it is hoped to build a more coherent and coordinated national policy for the use of electronic commerce as a tool for development.
	
__________

 See WT/COMTD/W/93/Corr.1.
 http://www.unctad.org/ecommerce/docs/edr01_en.htm

WT/COMTD/M/36 Page  PAGE 22



	WT/COMTD/M/36 	Page  PAGE 13













