 
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 8 JULY 2016
Chairman: H.E. Mr. Christopher Onyanga Aparr (Uganda)

 TOC \O "1-3" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378862" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC466378862 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378863" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC466378863 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378864" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc466378864 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378865" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc466378865 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378866" C.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC466378866 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378867" -	Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training 2015 (WT/COMTD/W/216)	 PAGEREF _Toc466378867 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378868" -	Update on the external evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance – statement by Norway on behalf of the Steering Committee of the Evaluation	 PAGEREF _Toc466378868 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378869" D.	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC466378869 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378870" -	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO – proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)	 PAGEREF _Toc466378870 \h 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378871" -	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate – proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc466378871 \h 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378872" E.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC466378872 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378873" -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc466378873 \h 10
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378874" -	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc466378874 \h 11
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378875" -	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc466378875 \h 11
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378876" -	Generalized System of Preferences – Notification by Norway (WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.5/Corr.1 and WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.6)	 PAGEREF _Toc466378876 \h 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378877" F.	communication from Uruguay on behalf of the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) (WT/COMTD/W/217 – WT/REG/W/105)	 PAGEREF _TOC466378877 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378878" G.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC466378878 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378879" H.	improvements to the database on preferential trade arrangements – presentation by the secretariat	 PAGEREF _TOC466378879 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378880" I.	Review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access to least developed countries (LDCs)	 PAGEREF _TOC466378880 \H 16
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378881" -	Update by the Secretariat on Members' DFQF market access for LDCs	 PAGEREF _Toc466378881 \h 16
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc466378882" -	Draft terms of reference for the clinical examination of implementation of the Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs (WT/COMTD/W/218) – submission by Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group	 PAGEREF _Toc466378882 \h 18
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378883" J.	outcome document from the fifth meeting of trade ministers of landlocked developing countries, held in geneva on 23 and 24 June 2016 (WT/L/986) – statement by Paraguay on behalf of the group of landlocked developing countries	 PAGEREF _TOC466378883 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC466378884" K.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC466378884 \H 20


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that he had met bilaterally with several delegations in the previous weeks to discuss the work of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD). These meetings had been useful in allowing him to better understand Members' perspectives on a number of CTD‑related issues, and in particular some of the issues on the CTD's agenda on which Members had yet to agree on a way forward. He expressed his willingness to work with Members to try to find solutions. He also indicated that, during these meetings, he had been interested to hear any thoughts from Members on what types of additional work the CTD could engage in. He explained that he was looking to reinvigorate the CTD's work in the context of paragraph 29 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration. He remained open to continue to meet bilaterally with delegations to discuss the CTD's work, and in this regard invited interested Members to contact him. He also noted that he would consider convening informal meetings in small groups or in other configurations in order to explore ways to make progress on specific items on the CTD's agenda. Turning to the draft agenda for the CTD's 99th Session – which was contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/7 circulated on 28 June 2016 – he inquired whether there were any requests to add a matter under "Other Business".
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation wished to inform Members under "Other Business" of a proposal concerning e-commerce which would shortly be circulated to the General Council. 
&& The Chairman said that he would provide information under "Other Business" on a commemorative event he wished to organize to mark the 100th Session of the CTD, which would be held in November 2016. 
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record. He indicated that, if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING 
-	Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training 2015 (WT/COMTD/W/216)
&& The Chairman said that the Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2015 was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/216. He invited the Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) to introduce the report. 
The Director of the ITTC said that the annual report contained three principal sections. There was firstly a section on the main evolutions in 2015 as compared to 2014. Another section looked at the implementation of the Technical Assistance (TA) Plan and main features of the TA provided in 2015, while a third section was concerned with the evaluation of performance in 2015. She also noted that the structure of the annual report had changed significantly relative to previous years, in response to requests from Members to align the report to the TA Plan. Turning to the main developments in 2015, she said that funding had not been an obstacle to the implementation of activities. An amount of CHF 12.5 million had been received in new contributions, while a substantial carry forward from the previous year had also facilitated implementation. The overall volume of TA activities had remained stable, although the number of national activities had fallen by 10% as a result of a reduction in the number of requests received from Members. On the other hand, the number of regional and global activities had increased by 5% as compared to 2014. A total of 269 activities were delivered, and the Secretariat was also involved in 49 other activities. With regard to the implementation of results-based management (RBM), some progress had been recorded, in spite of a lack of sufficient resources dedicated to RBM. && && The Secretariat was pursuing further work on measuring results using objective performance indicators. Improvements were also being made in the course content and offer, based on Members' needs and priorities. 
With regard to the main features of the TA delivered in 2015, she said that a total of 15,000 participants were trained, which represented an increase of 2% over 2014. About 43% of the participants were women. As in previous years, priority continued to be given to Africa and to least developed countries (LDCs). Of the 269 activities, 39% were global activities organized in Geneva, and 19% of activities were organized in partnership with other organizations. Technical assistance was predominately delivered through national activities. In terms of subject coverage, 115 of the activities had a general scope. The most popular subjects were market access for goods, sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures, and services. About 70% of the activities were delivered in English, 18% in French and 12% in Spanish. In the context of the Progressive Learning Strategy (PLS), the highest number of activities were organized at the intermediate level. The Secretariat had been able to assign a PLS level to 91% of the activities. 
On the evaluation of performance in 2015, she noted that the analysis was based on the indicators and targets identified in the TA Plan. At the output level, the target was fully met for 62% of the indicators chosen. This included a number of cases where the target was significantly exceeded. There were 14% of cases where the target was partially met, and 14% where the target was not met. In 10% of the cases, data were not available to draw an informed conclusion. She noted that corrective measures had been introduced to address the data issue. In directing Members to the summary of results on pages 56 to 58 of the report, she cautioned that not all the results could be attributed to the WTO's TA, particularly at the outcome level. Furthermore, given that this was the first attempt to compile such information, a certain amount of trial and error was to be expected. She explained that the indicators initially chosen in the TA Plan had not always proven relevant to measure results, and the targets identified in the Plan were sometimes unrealistic. She encouraged Members to read the full description of the evaluation of performance, which was found on pages 28 to 51 of the report. 
&& The representative of Sri Lanka expressed appreciation for the WTO's TA activities and highlighted in particular the benefits to his country of the regional trade policy courses (RTPCs), the e-learning activities and the internship programmes. He also noted the importance of assisting small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) enhance their participation in international trade. 
&& The representative of Nigeria emphasized the importance of the WTO’s assistance to developing countries. He highlighted some elements from the executive summary of the report and emphasized the need to improve the situation with regard to the availability of data for performance evaluation. He also referred to paragraph 5.1 of the report, and indicated that there was scope for improvement with regard to the implementation of the new monitoring and evaluation system. Noting from paragraph 5.8 that several improvements had been recorded with respect to the involvement of developing countries in the regular work of WTO bodies, he highlighted the references to Nigeria in that paragraph, as well as in paragraph 5.12. Finally, he noted that a compilation of feedback from beneficiaries would also be useful to include in the report.
&& The representative of Japan said that his Ambassador was a patron of the 8th Advanced Trade Policy Course (ATPC), which was a comprehensive and intensive training course. The Ambassador had delivered a welcoming statement on the first day of the course – in which he had stressed the importance of the multilateral trading system by sharing Japan's own experience – and had hosted a reception for the participants at the Japanese mission. The Japanese delegation would also participate in the closing ceremony of the course.
&& The representative of the United States referred to the section of the report which dealt with improvements in the face-to-face offer and noted that, according to paragraph 3.41, participants had to report periodically on the implementation of their action plans, and would then be invited to a follow-up course. In this regard, he asked for information on the current status, including on how many participants had been invited back for additional training. He also noted that the success rate in e-learning had dropped substantially in recent years, and asked what was being done to address the issue.
&& The representative of Cameroon expressed appreciation for the content of the WTO's TA activities, as well as for the balanced way in which the training was delivered. In this context, he highlighted in particular the importance of courses delivered in French. He also drew attention to some indicators that were dropping as compared to previous years, and urged that efforts be made to rectify the situation.
&& The representative of Chinese Taipei highlighted the importance of e-commerce and trade facilitation, and suggested that more training activities could be organized in these areas. Drawing from the experience of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), he elaborated on the APEC Digital Opportunity Center, which had trained 630,000 people and had thereby increased abilities to use e-commerce to promote trade in the APEC region. 
&& The representative of Guatemala said that there were improvements in the way the WTO's TA was being delivered, and the manner in which the annual report was being drafted. She noted in particular the improvements in the online courses, and additionally highlighted the need for advanced courses to be delivered in Spanish. Finally, she emphasized the importance of the external evaluation of the WTO's TA activities.
&& The representative of Norway expressed appreciation for the new format of the annual report, and noted that a results-based presentation enabled Members to get a better picture of the TA provided. She said that her delegation was still assessing the information in the report and might revert with comments at a later stage.
&& The representative of China indicated his delegation's appreciation for the annual report and the WTO's TA activities. He noted that China had experienced good cooperation with the Secretariat in the implementation of the China Programme, and that it would continue to support TA within its capacity in the context of the South-South cooperation framework.
&& The representative of the European Union highlighted the importance of trade-related TA and recalled that her delegation was a proponent of multilingual training. As an example of this commitment, she mentioned that the Ambassador of France to the WTO had been a mentor for the advanced courses in French.
&& The representative of Uganda appreciated the priority given to LDCs in the WTO's TA activities, and noted that his country had benefitted from several of these activities. He believed that capacity building was one of the paths towards integration into the multilateral trading system. 
The Director of the ITTC said that the report under consideration had a section that outlined the progress in implementing recommendations made over a number of years. The ITTC would continue to keep Members informed in this regard. She also noted the success of training in the area of sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures, and indicated that a similar approach would be used with respect to technical barriers to trade (TBT). She agreed with the comment by Nigeria on the need for involvement of beneficiaries in the evaluation process, and in this regard hoped that the external evaluation would be able to bring out views from the beneficiaries. She noted that some of the detailed questions from delegations would be responded to after the meeting.
&& The Committee took note of the Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2015, and of all interventions.
-	Update on the external evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance – statement by Norway on behalf of the Steering Committee of the Evaluation
&& The Chairman recalled that the delegation of Norway had been providing information at recent CTD meetings on the external evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance. The information had been provided on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation. He understood that Norway wished to once again provide Members with an update on the status of the evaluation.
&& The representative of Norway recalled that, at the last CTD meeting, Members were informed that Saana Consulting had been selected to perform the evaluation. Subsequently, Saana Consulting had prepared a draft inception report for comments by the Steering Committee and the WTO Secretariat. The final inception report, the purpose of which was to provide a detailed mandate for the implementation of the evaluation, was approved by the Steering Committee in May 2016. She went on to say that the evaluation was on track. The evaluators had already visited Benin, and would be visiting Lao People's Democratic Republic, Paraguay, Morocco, Iran, Botswana and Jamaica in the coming weeks. Surveys were being sent out to partner countries. It was expected that the draft evaluation report would be delivered to the Steering Committee for comments by the end of August, and that the final evaluation report would be approved by the Steering Committee by the end of October. The final evaluation report, together with the WTO management response, would then be presented to the CTD. She also noted that delegations had received an invitation to participate in a meeting with the evaluators on 14 July. 
&& The representative of Nigeria asked for clarification on the format of the meeting scheduled for 14 July, and the type of feedback that was expected. He also wished to know whether countries that would not be visited would have any other opportunities to provide feedback. 
&& The representative of Benin noted that his country had been visited in the context of the external evaluation, and that the experience had been positive. With regard to the date of 14 July, he noted that it would create conflicts with meetings of other international organizations, and notably the UNCTAD XIV Conference that would be held in Nairobi.
&& The representative of Norway believed that the details of what was expected in terms of feedback at the 14 July meeting had been included in the invitation to delegations. She asked if the Secretariat could elaborate on the preparations for the meeting. She also noted that the inception report described how the evaluators would proceed in order to collect as much information as possible. 
The Director of the ITTC explained that the date of 14 July for the meeting had been selected on the basis of consultations with the consultancy firm. However, the issues raised regarding the potential difficulties of this date would be conveyed to the firm. It was also indicated that the ITTC would revert to delegations with further information on preparations for the meeting. 
&& The representative of Nigeria reiterated his delegation's interest in receiving clarifications to the points raised by delegations.
&& The Committee took note of the update by Norway, and of all interventions. 
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT – WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. He recalled that, at the 97th Session, the Committee had agreed to the proposal from Ecuador contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1, which had been submitted in the context of the CTD's mandate from MC8. The proposal was for the Secretariat to periodically update its paper on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. Since the updated Secretariat document would be circulated soon, he said that he wished to remind Members of some elements of the proposal from Ecuador that had been agreed to. He noted firstly that the purpose of the Secretariat report was to serve as a reference document for Members, for use as they deemed necessary. In addition, if a Member wished to propose that any particular element in the report be used as the basis for the inclusion of an agenda item at a CTD meeting, that Member would need to explain in its request the scope and purpose of the proposed discussion. 
Turning to the two proposals for work under the MC8 mandate that were to be considered at the present meeting, he observed that the submissions containing these proposals had been appearing on the CTD’s agenda for quite some time. Previous CTD Chairpersons had held informal consultations to try to make progress on the proposals, but the situation remained unchanged. The proponents had been called upon to initiate informal discussions with other delegations in order to move the process forward. He hoped that some progress could be reported at the present meeting. 
-	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO – proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)
&& The Chairman said that the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 had the aim for the CTD to report on development-related work taking place in the WTO. He recalled that there were originally two proposals which broadly had this aim, and that the proponents of the two proposals had decided to work together. Document WT/COMTD/W/208 was the outcome of this collaboration.
&& The representative of India recalled the mandate from MC8 and noted that the CTD had been reporting annually to the General Council even before MC8, as had other subsidiary bodies of the General Council. Therefore, in giving their instructions at MC8, Ministers had wanted more from the CTD than its annual report. The CTD was a special body in the WTO. It was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of development-related work, and therefore had an overarching mandate. His delegation believed that it was appropriate for the CTD to report regularly on the development-related work that was taking place in other WTO bodies and provide the necessary recommendations to the General Council on achieving better coordination within the WTO on development issues. He noted that there was not much progress to report on this matter since the last meeting, and requested the Chairman to continue to hold informal consultations. 
&& The representative of Morocco, on behalf of the African Group, said that his intervention related to both sub-items under the present agenda item. He believed that part of the reason why the two sub-items remained on the CTD's agenda was because of the challenges that existed in terms of reporting and coordination on development in the WTO. The relationship between trade and development was one of the central pillars of the GATT, as well as the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the WTO, and the CTD had been established as the focal point for development work in the WTO. However, relevant decisions taken by other WTO bodies had not been regularly reported to the CTD, nor had the CTD been consulted on a range of development-related issues that had been taken up by these bodies. In this context, he recalled the mandate from MC8, and indicated his disappointment that Ministers' instructions were not being followed. He expressed concern with the precedent that was being set. Turning to the two remaining proposals under consideration, he explained that the objective was to reorient and refocus the work of the CTD. It was important to improve intra-reporting procedures and operationalize the CTD’s terms of reference by periodically reviewing the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies, including negotiating bodies. The CTD would, in turn, provide guidance and appropriate recommendations to the General Council and to other WTO bodies on any development-related work. This would better link development to trade in a manner that would contribute to the economic development of the WTO’s developing, least developed, and small and vulnerable constituencies. 
&& The representative of Barbados said that the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 would effectively operationalize the CTD as a focal point for development work. He supported the interventions by India and Morocco, and the idea of holding informal consultations in order to achieve progress on the matter.  
&& The representative of China said that his intervention related to both the remaining proposals in documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192. Expressing support for the interventions by India, Morocco and Barbados, he said that the CTD's functions needed to be strengthened in order to facilitate the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals. He suggested that the Chairman could hold informal consultations in order to make progress on the proposals. With regard specifically to the issue of "dually notified" regional trade agreements (RTAs), he said that the role of the CTD in reviewing RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause needed be respected. He suggested that the CTD Chairman could organize and chair a joint meeting of the CTD and the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) in order to review the "dually notified" RTAs. He also encouraged Members to jointly notify their RTAs in the future. Finally, he called on Members to take concrete action to fulfil the mandate in Paragraph 28 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration. 
&& The representative of the United States indicated his delegation's satisfaction that the Committee had agreed at its 97th Session to the proposal by Ecuador, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1. With regard to the remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192, he said that these proposals had been on the table for several years, and Members were no closer to achieving consensus than when they were first addressed in the Committee. The proponents had acknowledged this, and his delegation was not aware of any outreach efforts to address the concerns that had been raised. In this light, he questioned the value of maintaining the two proposals on the agenda. While inviting the proponents to submit revised proposals if they wished, he noted that a repetition of the same discussion at each CTD meeting stood in opposition to the Chairman's desire to reinvigorate the work of the Committee. 
&& The representative of Nigeria expressed support for the intervention by Morocco. He drew Members' attention to paragraphs 7 and 29 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration, which he believed were relevant for the present discussion. He also noted that discussions in other WTO bodies of particular interest to developing countries were not regularly reported to the CTD, and in this light emphasized the need to strengthen the role of the CTD as a focal point for development work in the WTO.
&& The representative of South Africa supported the intervention by Morocco, and indicated that it would be useful for the Chairman to hold informal consultations on how to make progress on the remaining proposals. She requested that the two sub-items under the present agenda item remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of the European Union recalled her delegation's view that the CTD should further explore the positive link between trade and development in order to implement the MC8 mandate. This needed to be based on constructive discussions on clearly identified topics, in line with the instructions from MC8 to carry out focused work. While the proposals that had been agreed to so far were in line with this requirement, the remaining proposals were not. She was also not aware of any efforts on the part of the proponents to take into consideration other Members' comments and concerns. The proposal for the CTD to report on development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies would give the CTD an oversight function for development issues in all aspects of the WTO's work. This went against the CTD's mandate to act as a focal point on development issues and carry out focused work. Members needed to debate what this focused work should be, and not re-open the CTD's mandate. As for the remaining proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192, she observed that the issue of RTAs with a dual notification should be part of the wider discussion on the implementation of paragraph 28 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration. While the Chairman of the CRTA had acknowledged at the CRTA meeting of 27 June that it was unclear where such a negotiation should take place, the CRTA Chairman had also stated that it would be helpful for the CRTA and the CTD to work together in a more structured way – both in terms of the systemic discussion on RTAs, and with respect to the regular work of examining RTAs. In closing, she said that her delegation was ready to have constructive discussions with a view to clarifying issues relating to notifications, and in this context could support joint meetings of the CRTA and CTD.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, emphasized the Group's commitment to the centrality of development issues in the WTO. He indicated that the LDC Group supported the proposal under consideration, as it would allow the CTD to perform its functions as the focal point for development work in the WTO. Expressing concern that Ministers' instructions from MC8 were not being respected, he invited the proponents and the Members that had raised concerns to engage in constructive discussions, and also suggested that the Chairman could hold informal consultations to try to make progress on the matter. Finally, he requested that the two sub-items under the present agenda item remain on the CTD's agenda until the matter was resolved.
&& The representative of Ecuador expressed satisfaction that the Committee had agreed to the proposal by her delegation for the Secretariat to update its document on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. Her delegation believed that it was a useful document for Members. She also expressed support for the two remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192, and indicated her delegation's willingness to continue to work with Members to find a way forward. She requested that the two sub-items under the present agenda item be maintained on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation, along with some others, had participated in small-group consultations called by previous CTD Chairpersons. He noted that the proponents had been invited to these consultations, but many had not attended.
&& The representative of Cuba said that her delegation supported both the remaining proposals.
&& The Chairman invited the proponents of the remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/208 to initiate informal discussions with other Members – in particular those that had raised questions or concerns – and to keep him informed. He also indicated that he would look into holding informal consultations. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate – proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
&& The Chairman said that, while there were three proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192, the first two proposals had already been addressed by the Committee. The first proposal, which was for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, had been agreed to by the Committee at its 87th Session. The updated Secretariat paper was circulated in June 2013 and had appeared on the CTD's agenda for a number of meetings. As for the second proposal, which was for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO, this idea was now being dealt with in the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 which had been addressed under the previous sub-item. The remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly.
&& The representative of India expressed support for the intervention by China under the previous sub-item. With respect to the proposal under consideration, he said that the parties to RTAs had several requirements to fulfil under the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. In order to help ensure a timely consideration of RTAs and the smooth operation of the Transparency Mechanism, it was important for the parties to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. He requested that the submission remain on the CTD's agenda for the next meeting, and that the Chairman hold informal consultations.
&& The representative of Ecuador expressed her delegation's support for the proposal under consideration.
The representatives of Benin, the European Union and the United States indicated that their interventions under the previous sub-item applied to the present sub-item as well.
&& The Chairman invited the proponents of the remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 to initiate informal discussions with other Members – in particular those that had raised questions and concerns – and to keep him informed. He also indicated that he would look into holding informal consultations.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs. He firstly informed the Committee that the Secretariat was in the process of finalizing the factual presentation on the Agreement between Mauritius and Pakistan. It was envisaged that a Dedicated Session of the CTD could be held later in the year to consider this Agreement. He also noted that there had been one new notification of an RTA under the Enabling Clause since the last update provided to the CTD. In particular, the Agreement between the Dominican Republic and Panama was notified on 18 March 2016 in document WT/COMTD/N/49. The parties had been requested to provide the necessary data to the Secretariat for the preparation of the factual presentation by 9 August 2016. Turning to the Agadir Agreement between Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia, he said that data had been received from Egypt and Jordan. The Secretariat was seeking some clarification on this data, and was also waiting to receive data from the other parties, which had been requested by 15 July 2016. With regard to the Agreement between Singapore and the Gulf Cooperation Council, data had been received from Singapore. The Secretariat was still waiting to receive data from the GCC parties, which had been requested by 23 November 2015. 
He turned next to the agreement between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and India, and said that while comments had been received from India on the draft factual presentation which was sent to the parties in 2013, the Secretariat was still waiting to receive comments from ASEAN. The Secretariat was also still waiting to receive comments on the draft factual presentation relating to the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the East African Community, which was sent to the parties in 2014. For a number of other RTAs - namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, India and Bhutan, and Cuba and El Salvador - the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties. He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible. He went on to say that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the CRTA, a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the Agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete. 
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update.
-	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The representative of India indicated that his intervention related to the first three sub-items under the present agenda item, since the three RTAs referenced in these sub-items had been "dually notified" under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. His delegation presumed that, in a rules-based multilateral trading system, there would be uniformity in dealing with the three RTAs. The Transparency Mechanism for RTAs did not differentiate between customs unions and other forms of RTAs, and the three RTAs in question were therefore similarly situated. It would serve no purpose for Members to find distinctions between the three RTAs. He noted that the systemic concerns that were raised by China, Egypt and India over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV were pertinent even now, but they remained unaddressed. The systemic concerns related to the Enabling Clause, the mandate and terms of reference of the CTD, and the RTA Transparency Mechanism. Specific concerns related to the procedures for consideration of the GCC Customs Union. Some Members had expressed the view that the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 were outside the scope of the CTD, and needed to be discussed in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR). The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification.
Pointing to the terms of reference of the CTD contained in document WT/L/46, he noted that the CTD was designated to serve as a focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO and its relationship to development-related activities in other multilateral agencies. He added that the Committee could consult with other WTO bodies in addressing the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175. This was in keeping with paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference which entrusted the Committee to review periodically, in consultation as appropriate with the relevant bodies of the WTO, the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and in particular LDC Members, and report to the General Council for appropriate action. In concluding, he indicated that the three sub-items under the present agenda item needed to remain on the CTD's agenda until the systemic and specific concerns arising from "dually notified" RTAs were addressed. He also requested the Chairman to hold consultations in this regard.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation continued to have concerns with the present sub-item being listed on the agenda. This sub-item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. He regretted that this issue had taken so much of the Committee’s time over the past few years. These were the types of issues that took time, resources, and attention away from other useful work that the CTD could be doing, and posed a hindrance to the Chairman's efforts to reinvigorate the work of the Committee. The United States (US) had stated its position on this issue clearly and there was no need to rehash those points at the present meeting. He expressed hope that Members could move forward constructively, recognizing that the GCC Customs Union was not an issue of dual notification, but rather something to be addressed in the CRTA under the RTA Transparency Mechanism. He also urged the GCC parties to provide the Secretariat with their comments on the draft factual presentation that had been sent to them, so that Members could benefit from some level of transparency on the GCC Customs Union.  
He went on to say that the GCC Customs Union had been incorrectly notified as an Enabling Clause Agreement. This was subsequently corrected, and the agreement was in the pipeline to be reviewed in the CRTA, in line with the procedures of the RTA Transparency Mechanism. The US considered this issue closed, and continued to request that it be removed from the CTD's agenda. His delegation wished to be very clear that it had no quarrel with any developing country notifying a qualifying agreement under the Enabling Clause. This was not what GCC Customs Union notification issue was about. As this agreement was a customs union, the notification was different from non-customs union RTA notifications. The US had explained its arguments on this agreement in detail over the past few years, and found it of little utility to continue to rehash these points. He hoped that the CTD could move beyond this issue and focus on other work.
&& The representative of the European Union said that her delegation considered it important to clarify the legal and procedural questions arising from an RTA being notified by each party under a different legal provision. She emphasized the need to find a pragmatic solution for the notifications in question, and indicated that any substantive discussion had to take place in the framework of the implementation of paragraph 28 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration. However, she noted that a clear distinction needed to be drawn between the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea Agreements on the one hand, and the GCC Customs Union on the other. With regard to the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea Agreements, she regretted that the parties had been unable to find a solution. The European Union (EU) agreed with Korea's position that, even when developing countries notified their RTAs under GATT Article XXIV, this did not undermine the Enabling Clause or the CTD. In this light, the EU invited the parties to these agreements to make an additional effort to find an acceptable solution. She went on to say that the GCC Customs Union notification was a different case. As had been stated at previous meetings, the EU's position was that a custom union could not be notified under the Enabling Clause, and that GATT Article XXIV was the only legal basis for the notification of custom unions. The fact that the GCC parties had not as yet withdrawn their notification under the Enabling Clause created doubts regarding the possibility of maintaining notifications under two different legal provisions. Her delegation urged the GCC parties to withdraw their notification under the Enabling Clause. In closing, she reiterated her delegation’s availability to discuss a pragmatic solution.
&& The representative of China expressed support for the intervention by India. He encouraged the Chairman to hold informal consultations on this matter.
&& The representative of Korea said that his delegation’s position remained unchanged on the notification issue. He believed that Members needed to focus on finding a solution to the inefficiency under the current system arising from separate review processes for the same RTAs.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea 
&& The Chairman said that the second sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement. 
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation continued to have concerns with the second and third sub-items being listed on the CTD's agenda. The sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. With respect to the issue of "dual notifications", he indicated that this was directly linked to the functioning of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, and went beyond the mandate of the CTD. The US was willing to discuss the functioning of the RTA Transparency Mechanism in the CRTA. Finally, he expressed disappointment that the transparency requirements for the two RTAs in question had not been fulfilled.
&& The Committee took note of the interventions.
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)
&& The Chairman said that the third sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the India-Korea Agreement.
&& The representative of the United States said that his comments under the previous sub-item applied to this sub-item as well.
&& The representative of India said that his statement under the first sub-item applied to the first three sub-items.  
&& The Committee took note of the interventions. 
-	Generalized System of Preferences – Notification by Norway (WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.5/Corr.1 and WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.6)
&& The Chairman said that the fourth sub-item under the present agenda item concerned two communications by Norway relating to its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme. First, in document WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.6, Norway had notified some updated information on its GSP scheme. Second, in document WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.5/Corr.1, Members were informed of some corrections to a previous notification by Norway, circulated in June 2013. He invited Norway to introduce the communications.
&& The representative of Norway said that there were no changes to the underlying principles and structure of Norway's GSP scheme. As had been described in previous notifications, countries entering into a free trade agreement with Norway were no longer eligible for GSP preferences. In document WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.6, Members were informed that Norway, as part of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), had entered into free trade agreements with Bosnia Herzegovina, Colombia, Costa Rica and Panama. The notification also contained an updated list of countries that had fulfilled the procedural requirements to make use of the Norwegian GSP scheme, as well as a list of countries that had yet to submit the necessary information to make use of the Norwegian GSP scheme. Turning to document WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.5/Corr.1, she said that this document contained some corrections to Norway's notification from June 2013.
&& The Committee took note of the notification by Norway.
COMMUNICATION FROM URUGUAY ON BEHALF OF THE LATIN AMERICAN INTEGRATION ASSOCIATION (LAIA) (WT/COMTD/W/217 – WT/REG/W/105)
&& The Chairman said that a communication had been received from Uruguay, on behalf of the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA). As was requested, the communication was circulated to Members in the CTD, as well as in the CRTA. The document references were WT/COMTD/W/217 and WT/REG/W/105. He noted that a discussion on the communication had taken place at the CRTA meeting of 27 June 2016. He invited Uruguay to introduce the communication to the CTD.
&& The representative of Uruguay indicated that the communication would be introduced by Bolivia, on behalf of the LAIA. 
&& The representative of Bolivia, on behalf of the LAIA, referred to the documents from the LAIA which were circulated annually to the CTD with the title "Report to the WTO on instruments concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo". He said that these reports could be used by LAIA member countries to meet their notification obligations in respect of instruments concluded under paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause, in accordance with sections D to G of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, and without prejudice to notifications submitted individually by LAIA member countries. He added that, in the annual reports to the WTO, each of the LAIA member countries acted in an individual capacity regarding the agreements they concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo (TM80), as was clear from the introduction to these reports and the individual notification datasheets which were included. 
He went on to say that that the TM80 was notified to the GATT as an RTA under the Enabling Clause on 1 July 1982 in document L/5342. Since that time, LAIA member countries – without prejudice to the individual notifications submitted to the CTD or to CRTA – had notified the GATT or WTO in a consistent and uniform manner of any agreements concluded under the TM80. This had been done in the biennial reports submitted between 1980 and 2011, and in the annual reports from 2012 onwards, so as to comply with the RTA Transparency Mechanism. The regional scope and partial scope agreements concluded between LAIA member countries were included in the mechanisms provided for in Article 4 of the TM80, which sought to make viable the achievement of the countries' long-term objectives. These mechanisms were therefore legal instruments that affected the implementation of an RTA or the operation of an RTA already implemented, as laid out in section D of the RTA Transparency Mechanism, which concerned subsequent notification and reporting. Consequently, the WTO Secretariat was not required to prepare factual presentations, as was the case with agreements notified under section B of the Transparency Mechanism. However, if any WTO Member required further information on any particular aspect of agreements concluded under the TM80, he noted that paragraph 16 of the Transparency Mechanism provided the opportunity to exchange views in a dedicated session of the CTD. 
In light of the information provided, and with a view to contributing to the transparency of the notification process with respect to agreements concluded under the TM80, the CTD Chairman was requested to forward the communication to the WTO Secretariat, and to Members in the CTD and the CRTA. Furthermore, the LAIA countries believed that the WTO Secretariat should circulate the documents with the title "Report to the WTO on instruments concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo" with the document symbol "WT/COMTD/N/--", like notifications made within the framework of the CTD. He next referred to the CRTA document WT/REG/W/100/Rev.1, which contained a list of RTAs that had appeared in factual presentations and had not yet been notified to the WTO. He indicated that the WTO Secretariat should remove from this list – as well as subsequent revisions of this list – all the agreements between LAIA member countries that were duly notified under the paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause, in accordance with sections D to G of the RTA Transparency Mechanism. The RTAs in question were listed in the communication under consideration.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation had previously made statements in the CTD and the CRTA with the purpose of seeking to resolve the matter of the large number of non-notified LAIA agreements. The non-notification of RTAs was a significant and growing concern. While the issue was not limited to the LAIA agreements, these agreements represented the majority of the RTAs listed in the Secretariat’s compilation of non-notified agreements. He also referred to a room document circulated by the Secretariat in the CRTA which showed that there were 97 separate LAIA agreements in force. Some of these had been notified to the WTO as required, but most had not. The notification of the TM80 was not sufficient, especially since the treaty itself made clear that the arrangements entered under it were not modifications to the umbrella agreement, but were separate agreements. The TM80 specifically provided for regional and partial scope agreements, and did not appear to say anything about the specific treatment to be given to any product or class of products by any signatory. The reports submitted by the LAIA countries to the CTD were also not sufficient in terms of a notification. The LAIA reports had no standing in the WTO, nor could they replace Members' individual obligations. He highlighted the importance of Latin America as a regional market, and in this light emphasized the need for greater transparency, so as to allow a better understanding of the progress toward regional integration that had been achieved.
He went on to say that the notification requirements and the obligations found in the RTA Transparency Mechanism – including the provision of data to support the Secretariat’s work in preparing the factual presentations – fell squarely on individual WTO Members, and could not be shifted to a non-WTO Member. While drafting assistance by the Secretariat might be helpful, the notifications would need to be issued by the individual WTO Members that were parties to the agreements, since notifications were the obligation of Members. If the LAIA parties were concerned about the administrative burden of facing a large number of factual presentations all at once after the notifications were made, his delegation had previously indicated that it would be supportive of a discussion on how the notifications might be treated, including through the preparation of factual abstracts for some agreements. He noted that the LAIA parties had not properly notified the mass of agreements that fell under the TM80, and they therefore had not been able to take advantage of flexibilities when the RTA Transparency Mechanism was first established. If notifications were made, the US was open to revisiting whether some kind of flexibility could be introduced to streamline the work. He noted that the LAIA parties had as yet not responded or reacted to these suggestions, and his delegation welcomed reactions at the present meeting. 
He added that WTO Members should be able to pose questions regarding notifications, or regarding agreements that they believed should be notified. Consistent with the RTA Transparency Mechanism, these Members should receive responses from the parties to such RTAs. The US had a long and consistent record of posing notification questions to other Members. In the case of many Latin American agreements, the responses received referred to LAIA practice, or a LAIA position, which indicated that some Members believed they could sidestep notification obligations by claiming that the decision and responsibility for notification fell to a regional organization that was not a WTO Member. He noted that this did not support transparency. He also recalled that individual Members were required to submit data to the Secretariat and were subsequently provided an opportunity to review and comment on draft factual presentations before they were circulated. In this regard, he asked how Committee work could be carried out if the Members that attended Committee meetings deferred these responsibilities to a non-WTO Member. Additionally, in cases where other Members had questions about the content of the LAIA reports, he queried how individual LAIA countries would be in a position to respond, if they did not participate in the drafting of the reports.  
&& The representative of Argentina expressed support for the intervention by Bolivia and registered her delegation's surprise that the RTAs between LAIA member countries were still included in the list of RTAs which had appeared in factual presentations and had not yet been notified. 
&& The representative of the European Union indicated that, while the communication from LAIA was a first step, her delegation still had a number of questions with respect to the LAIA agreements. She firstly asked the LAIA parties to clarify the exact coverage of the listed agreements. She explained in this regard that it was important to understand which of the agreements, if any, could be considered as a mere implementation of the TM80, and which of them needed to be considered as additional agreements which would merit a separate treatment. She also emphasized that any RTA that contained a form of preferential treatment, as set out in section B.3 of the RTA Transparency Mechanism, was subject to the full examination process. Accessions occurring at a later stage fell under the provisions of section B of the RTA Transparency Mechanism, which meant that factual presentations needed to be prepared. As her second question, she asked the LAIA parties to clarify whether all the listed agreements in the LAIA communication, in all three columns, covered only trade in goods. She noted that agreements that covered trade in services would need to be considered in the CRTA, since they did not fall under the Enabling Clause. Finally, she requested clarification on the differences between what were termed in the communication as "regional agreements", "economic complementarity agreements", and "other agreements". She also indicated that her delegation would be submitting written questions shortly.
&& The representative of Australia said that his delegation placed a high value on RTA-related information provided to the WTO. It was Members' individual and collective responsibility to ensure that there was a high degree of visibility in the trade commitments that were made outside of the multilateral trading system. His delegation believed that every Member deserved to be fully informed of any new and significant trade commitments that were made by other Members in any context. The preparation of factual presentations and their examination was the preferred format for such an exercise. He emphasized that the notification of RTA-related information needed to be taken just as seriously as any other notification and transparency obligations in the WTO system. Despite this, his delegation recognized that there were clear differences of views between Members on the nature and the extent of the notification obligations relating to their RTAs. He expressed hope that Members with strong positions on these issues would engage in more targeted and constructive discussions. He suggested that discussions should focus on how Members could work to bridge any notification gaps. The discussions would need to guide Members on where assistance might be required to support compliance with the RTA Transparency Mechanism or any other relevant notification obligations.
&& The representative of Canada noted that, at the CRTA meeting of 27 June, as well as at the present meeting, Members had posed some substantive questions on the information contained in the LAIA communication. He registered his delegation's interest in the responses to these questions, which had not yet been provided.
&& The representative of Brazil supported the interventions by other LAIA parties. He said that regional and partial scope agreements concluded between LAIA member countries were part of a mechanism foreseen under Article 4 of the TM80. As such, they constituted legal instruments that affected the application or functioning of an RTA. There was therefore no requirement for the preparation of factual presentations. He reaffirmed that the LAIA member countries had notified in a constant and uniform manner the progress in the implementation of the TM80 – initially in the biennial reports, and since 2012 in annual reports. The agreements under the TM80 could not be classified as RTAs that had not yet been notified.
The representatives of Cuba and Ecuador expressed their support for the content of the document under consideration. 
&& The representative of Bolivia indicated that the document under consideration also reflected his country's position. He said that the comments made at the present meeting would be transmitted back to capitals, and to the LAIA. He emphasized that the LAIA member countries were complying with transparency requirements.
&& The Chairman encouraged Members to continue to discuss this matter amongst themselves, and to explore possible ways forward with a view to finding a solution.
&& The Committee took note of the communication, and of all interventions. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on PTAs. He informed && The Committee that the situation remained unchanged since the last report to the CTD. In particular, there were five PTAs notified since the establishment of the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs – PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation, Chinese Taipei and Thailand – for which the Secretariat had not received the full set of data required for the preparation of the factual presentations. He urged the notifying Members to provide the data as soon as possible. 
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update. 
&& IMPROVEMENTS TO THE DATABASE ON PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS – PRESENTATION BY THE SECRETARIAT
&& The Chairman said that the WTO's Database on PTAs ( HYPERLINK "http://ptadb.wto.org" http://ptadb.wto.org) was set up as an outcome of the General Council Decision of 14 December 2010 – contained in document WT/L/806 – which established the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs. He believed that the database was useful in what it set out to do, namely to provide information – including trade and tariff data – on the PTAs being implemented by Members. He said that he was encouraged when he heard that the Secretariat had made further improvements to the database, particularly with respect to the presentation of the trade data. He had therefore invited the Secretariat to the present meeting to show these improvements to the Committee. Before giving the floor to the Secretariat, he noted that, while the Database on PTAs was certainly useful, it could only achieve its full potential if Members implementing PTAs provided all the necessary updated information and data to the Secretariat. He therefore encouraged all Members implementing PTAs to check what information concerning their PTAs was already in the database, and what information was missing, and to contact the Secretariat if any clarification was required in this regard. With these words, he invited a representative of the Economic Research and Statistics Division to make a presentation.
&& The representative of the Economic Research and Statistics Division began his presentation by providing a broad overview of the Database on PTAs. He noted, inter alia, that the database had been set up with the intention of providing comprehensive information on each PTA being implemented by Members – including information relating to legal texts, the beneficiaries, relevant WTO documents, and trade and tariff data. After demonstrating how the various types of information could be accessed from the database, he proceeded to outline the improvements that had recently been made by the Secretariat. He recalled firstly that the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs required Members implementing PTAs to provide data to the Secretariat on imports entering under each preferential scheme. The Database on PTAs had, since its establishment, reported this import data on an aggregate basis, where available. With the improvements, it was now possible to access data on imports entering under each preferential scheme at a more disaggregated level. In particular, the database now provided statistics separately on imports of agricultural products and non-agricultural products, as well as imports under each of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations categories. It was also possible to access information on imports from each individual beneficiary of a preferential scheme. He noted that the improvements allowed a more in-depth exploration of how the preferences granted under each PTA were being utilized. In closing, he noted that information on PTAs, including the improvements he had just outlined, could only be reflected in the database if Members implementing PTAs provided the Secretariat with the necessary information and data. He invited these Members to contact him if any clarifications were required in this regard.  
&& The representative of Australia believed that the Database on PTAs was a useful tool. He wondered whether it was possible to assess, on the basis of existing data, what might be the potential export gains to LDCs from including one or more products in a duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) scheme.  
&& The representative of Bangladesh expressed appreciation for the improvements to the Database on PTAs, which he believed would also be useful for discussions taking place in the Committee on Rules of Origin.  
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, welcomed the improvements to the Database on PTAs. He expressed appreciation to Members implementing PTAs for the information reflected in the database, and also called on them to ensure that this information was kept up to date. He observed that, for some Members implementing PTAs in favour of LDC products, a large proportion of tariffs were already duty-free on a most-favoured-nation (MFN) basis. This caused difficulties for LDCs trying to compete in these markets. In addition, he wondered why beneficiaries of PTAs sometimes exported under the MFN regime rather than under the preferential regime.  
&& The representative of India noted that his country had yet to provide data on imports entering under its Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for LDCs. However, he believed that the Database on PTAs was misleading in this respect, as it showed that there were currently no imports taking place under the DFTP Scheme. He suggested that the Secretariat could add a footnote to clarify that the data in question had not yet been provided. 
&& The representative of the Economic Research and Statistics Division explained that the Database on PTAs did not in itself provide assessments on the trade impact of tariff reductions, or on the challenges faced by beneficiaries of some PTAs. It was also difficult to explain why beneficiaries did not always utilize the preferences granted under the PTA, as there were potentially many reasons. With regard to the comment from India, he indicated that a footnote would be added along the lines suggested.  
&& The Committee took note of the presentation by the Secretariat, and of the interventions.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE (DFQF) MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES (LDCS)
&& The Chairman noted that there were two listed sub-items under the present agenda item. With regard to the first sub-item, he recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that the Secretariat would provide a brief update at the present meeting on Members' DFQF market access for LDCs. As for the second sub-item, he recalled that, at the last CTD meeting, the delegation of Benin – the LDC Coordinator – had indicated that the LDC Group would submit a proposal on the terms of reference of a Secretariat study on DFQF implementation. This proposal had now been submitted in document WT/COMTD/W/218. Before turning to the two sub-items, he said that he wished to take the opportunity to remind Members that, as per the Bali Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs, the Secretariat would need to prepare an updated report on Members' DFQF market access for the CTD's annual DFQF review. This review would take place at the next CTD meeting. He referred the Committee to the previous Secretariat report from 2015 – contained in document WT/COMTD/W/214 – and invited Members that had DFQF schemes in place to consult this report and ensure that they had provided updated data to the Secretariat. 
&&	Update by the Secretariat on Members' DFQF market access for LDCs
&& The Chairman invited a representative of the Economic Research and Statistics Division to provide an update on Members' DFQF market access for LDCs.
&& The representative of the Economic Research and Statistics Division said that, as per the Bali DFQF Decision, the Secretariat prepared a report annually on Members' DFQF market access for LDCs. In this context, he indicated that he would update the information found in the previous Secretariat report from 2015 – contained in document WT/COMTD/W/214 – and in particular the information found in the two tables in the report. He recalled that the first table contained information on developed Members' DFQF schemes, while the second contained information on developing Members' DFQF schemes. With regard to the developed Members, he informed the Committee that the Secretariat had received all 2016 tariff data except with respect to Iceland and Japan. The data indicated that the situation remained similar to what was described in the 2015 Secretariat report, with most developed Members providing full or significant DFQF market access. Similar to what was reported in the 2015 report, the number of dutiable lines was somewhat higher for Iceland – although the figure of 91.8% DFQF coverage was from 2014 – and the US, with a DFQF coverage of 82.6%. The Russian Federation's GSP sub-scheme for LDCs allowed duty‑free access to 37.1% of tariff lines in 2016. Turning to the developing Members, he said that data for the year 2016 had not yet been provided by China, India, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand and Turkey. With respect to the developing Members that had provided 2016 data, he said that the situation remained unchanged relative to what was described in the 2015 Secretariat report. In particular, Chile's DFQF coverage remained at 99.5%, Korea's coverage remained at 90.3%, and Chinese Taipei's coverage remained at 31%. 
&& The representative of the United States said that the results of the Annual Product Review of the US' GSP had been recently announced. In this context, he informed the Committee that, as of 1 July 2016, new duty-free status had been added for a range of travel goods – including luggage, backpacks, handbags, and wallets – for Least Developed Beneficiary Developing Countries (LDBDCs) of the US' GSP scheme, as well as for African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) countries. The products which had been added to the scope of the two programmes included leather or textile-covered briefcases, handbags, wallets and travel bags, which had been excluded from GSP benefits since the 1970s. The MFN tariffs on these products ranged from 4.5% to 20%. Providing duty-free treatment for these products to LDC beneficiaries and AGOA countries was an important decision from a development perspective, as travel goods were important products to encourage further development of LDC textile industries. The US had approached this decision with the goal of maximum impact for development and poverty alleviation, pursuant to the aim of the GSP scheme. It was believed that duty-free treatment for these products to LDBDCs and AGOA countries would provide a significant boost to these countries’ efforts to increase and diversify their exports. The US Trade Representative (USTR) had noted that trade preference programmes such as GSP and AGOA could make a powerful contribution to lifting people out of poverty and supporting growth in some of the poorest countries in the world. The USTR had also indicated that the US had used these programmes to give beneficiary countries vital assistance vis-à-vis more advanced competitors. Overall, LDBDC exports of these products to the US had risen from US$6.7 million in 2013 to US$51.4 million in 2015. This improvement was yet another demonstration of the US' commitment to faithfully implement the Bali Decision to improve existing DFQF coverage for products originating from LDCs, so as to provide increasingly greater market access to LDCs.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation was currently in the internal process of finalizing a notification concerning an update to China's DFQF scheme. Efforts were being made to complete the process at the earliest possible time.  
&& The representative of Bangladesh sought clarification as to whether the new duty-free status granted by the US to a range of travel goods had been extended to all LDC beneficiaries under the GSP scheme.  
&& The representative of Rwanda expressed appreciation to the US for the new duty-free status that had been granted to a range of travel goods.
&& The representative of the Economic Research and Statistics Division said that he wished to conclude by reiterating that, at the present time, the Secretariat did not have all the 2016 tariff data necessary to prepare a full update of the 2015 Secretariat DFQF report, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/214. Noting that an updated report needed to be prepared for the next CTD meeting, he invited those Members implementing DFQF schemes that had not yet submitted updated tariff data to contact him if any clarification was needed on data requirements.
&& The Committee took note of the update by the Secretariat, and of all interventions.
-	Draft terms of reference for the clinical examination of implementation of the Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs (WT/COMTD/W/218) – submission by Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group
&& The Chairman invited Benin to introduce the submission contained in document WT/COMTD/W/218.  
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, highlighted the developmental importance of DFQF market access for LDCs, and noted that it had been recognized by the international community as key issue for LDCs. Recalling the discussion that had taken place at the CTD's 96th Session on the merits of a clinical examination of DFQF implementation, he indicated that the submission under consideration presented the draft terms of reference for such an examination, to be carried out by the Secretariat. He believed that all Members, and not only LDCs, needed to play their part in the process. He went on to say that the submission was divided into four sections. The first section provided background information on the clinical examination, emphasizing the legal foundations of DFQF market access and the decision-making procedure for conducting the examination. The second section set out the 11 parameters selected by the LDCs to direct the clinical examination. The third section proposed a methodological approach for the examination, while the fourth section suggested a timeframe for the preparation of the examination. According to the timeframe, the results of the Secretariat study would need to be made available no later than two months after the present meeting. He urged Members to agree to the proposed terms of reference.
&& The representative of Morocco, on behalf of the African Group, expressed appreciation for the recent initiative by the US to add new duty-free status for a range of travel goods for LDBDCs of the GSP scheme, and for AGOA countries. He believed that this was yet another step in the right direction to further help AGOA beneficiaries and LDCs integrate into the multilateral trading system. He elaborated on how AGOA had contributed positively to Africa’s textiles and clothing industry, and in this regard expressed concern that the industry was threatened by the implementation of the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, which would extend many of the same benefits to Africa’s competitors. It was for this reason that the African Group supported the submission contained in document WT/COMTD/W/218. He noted that the Group was especially drawn to parameters 10 and 11, particularly with respect to the extent of preference erosion as a consequence of the entry into force of the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement. 
&& The representative of the United States recalled that his delegation had expressed openness to review a proposal on the parameters for a possible Secretariat study on DFQF implementation, when the idea had first been raised. However, the US had also cautioned that Members should not expect the Secretariat to be able to illuminate or resolve the well-known differences of views on this complicated issue.  It had also been specified that a report from the Secretariat needed to be balanced and fact-based, and could not include any subjective assessments or suggestions of any particular policy directions. While commending the LDC Group for working to move this work forward, he said that it was clear, both implicitly and explicitly, that the proposed terms of reference sought to single out the US market and certain products of interest, rather than take a comprehensive approach. He regretted that the LDC Group had not attempted to work or consult with his delegation in an effort to produce a document that could achieve consensus. The US was not in a position to support the terms of reference proposed by the LDC Group, and had concerns about the type of analysis that was being proposed. The US had made great efforts to implement the commitment made at the Bali Ministerial Conference to improve DFQF market access for LDCs, and would continue to make such efforts. In closing, he indicated that his delegation stood ready to consult with the LDC Group on this issue. 
&& The representative of Canada said that any terms of reference for a Secretariat study needed to be objective and allow for a factual examination of DFQF market access for LDCs. She also emphasized that the content of the proposed study should not duplicate information that was already available in existing reports by the Secretariat.
&& The representative of China welcomed the submission under consideration. He said that China attached great importance to the implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs, and had been providing 97% DFQF access since 2015. However, he also emphasized that it was necessary to acknowledge essential differences in the responsibilities of developed and developing Members in this regard. Developing Members provided DFQF market access on voluntary basis, and faced more challenges in their economic development than developed Members. In this light, developing Members’ commitments could not be measured in the same way as for developed Members. The principle of "common but differentiated responsibilities" needed to be fully observed in the clinical examination. Not doing so could also discourage those developing Members that were considering providing DFQF market access to LDCs. 
&& The representative of India expressed support for the intervention by China. He recalled that the idea for a clinical examination of DFQF implementation had been proposed at the 96th Session. However, owing to a lack of consensus on the parameters, the Secretariat had not been able to proceed with the study. He went on to say that, according to the Hong Kong DFQF Decision, developed Members were required to provide DFQF market access to LDCs on at least 97% of tariff lines. In this context, he referred to the Secretariat report contained in document WT/COMTD/W/214, and noted that three developed Members were yet to implement the Decision. For developing Members, on the other hand, the provision of DFQF market access was voluntary. Developing Members were also permitted to phase in their commitments and enjoy appropriate flexibility in coverage. He informed the Committee that, in 2008, India became the first developing Member to announce a comprehensive scheme to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. India’s DFTP Scheme now provided duty-free market access on 96% of India’s tariff lines at 6‑digit level of the Harmonized System, while an additional 2.2% of lines enjoyed preferential duties. Only 1.8% of the tariff lines had been retained in the exclusion list, with no duty concessions. In closing, he said that his delegation’s expectation was that the Secretariat study would diagnose the critical challenges in DFQF implementation, and in particular the reasons for inadequate implementation by a few developed Members, which had an obligation to provide DFQF market access to LDCs on at least 97% of tariff lines. It was also hoped that the study would come up with options for implementing the Hong Kong and Bali DFQF decisions, taking into consideration all relevant aspects and the interests of all stakeholders.
&& The representative of Benin said that the LDC Group had taken note of the comments that had been made on the submission. He expressed the Group's willingness to discuss the matter further with the Members that had made comments, so that progress could be made.
&& The Chairman noted that some questions and concerns had been raised, and it was therefore not possible for the Committee to agree to the terms of reference for the study at the present meeting. He encouraged Members to consult amongst themselves, and also indicated his willingness to work with Members to explore possible ways forward. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
OUTCOME DOCUMENT FROM THE FIFTH MEETING OF TRADE MINISTERS OF LANDLOCKED DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, HELD IN GENEVA ON 23 AND 24 JUNE 2016 (WT/L/986) – STATEMENT BY PARAGUAY ON BEHALF OF THE GROUP OF LANDLOCKED DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that the Fifth Meeting of Trade Ministers of Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs) was held in Geneva on 23 and 24 June 2016. The outcome document from the meeting had been circulated in document WT/L/986, at the request of Paraguay. He invited Paraguay to make a statement on behalf of the LLDC Group.  
&& The representative of Paraguay, on behalf of the LLDC Group, said that the Fifth Meeting of Trade Ministers of LLDCs was co-organized by the WTO and the United Nations Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States (OHRLLS). The outcome document was a Ministerial Declaration, circulated in document WT/L/986. The Ministerial Declaration welcomed the recognition of the special needs of LLDCs in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and emphasized the importance of strong synergy in their implementation. It contained a clear outline of the development objectives of LLDCs, in particular to make full use of their trade potential in order to promote inclusive and sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction. It called for development objectives to be sufficiently met with coordinated policies in areas including investment, infrastructure, logistics, technology and the energy sector. Ministers encouraged concerted measures and actions required to support LLDCs’ efforts to reduce commodity dependence, including through enhanced value addition and the diversification of their export base. 
He went on to say that the Declaration highlighted the importance of a rapid and adequate implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action (VPoA) for LLDCs for the Decade 2014-2024, especially regarding the specific objectives on international trade and trade facilitation. These included: increasing the value added and manufactured component of LLDC exports; strengthening of economic and financial ties between LLDCs and other countries in the same region so as to increase the share of LLDCs in intraregional trade; further simplifying, harmonizing and streamlining border crossing and transit procedures, while improving transit facilities and their efficiency; and ensuring that all transit regulations, formalities and procedures for traffic in transit were published and updated in accordance with the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA). Ministers also called for the rapid ratification and implementation of the TFA, which had important provisions concerning transparent and efficient transit procedures. 
Finally, he noted that Ministers had called for a specific Work Programme for LLDCs in the WTO. It was envisaged that such a Work Programme would address the special needs, challenges and vulnerabilities of LLDCs in order to increase their participation in the multilateral trading system. Key areas of work would include trade facilitation, agriculture, Aid for Trade, services and accession. The Work Programme would help the LLDCs to have a stronger and more coordinated voice in the WTO, particularly on issues which contributed to reducing trade transaction costs. It would be a useful platform to analyze the challenges that LLDCs faced in their integration into global and regional value chains. In closing, he clarified that the Work Programme would not seek to create a new category of membership. A concept note and a draft proposal would be presented to Members in due course, so as to have the Work Programme as one of the deliverables for the Eleventh Ministerial Conference (MC11).
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation had some concerns about developing a specific Work Programme for LLDCs in the WTO. He noted that the Ministerial Declaration highlighted the importance of much of the work that was already underway, such as the ratification and implementation of the TFA, and the study of issues related to trade in specific sectors, which was taking place in the CTD's Dedicated Session on Small Economies.  
&& The representative of the European Union said that her delegation supported the VPoA, and particularly welcomed the focus on international trade and trade facilitation as one of the priorities, since this was a key issue for LLDCs. The EU believed that the VPoA adequately covered the LLDCs' needs, and therefore did not see the need for a specific Work Programme for LLDCs in the WTO. She added that the EU's trade and development policy prioritized LDCs, which were the most vulnerable Members. These benefits were enjoyed by the LLDCs that were also LDCs. She also noted that the EU was a leading provider of Aid for Trade to LDCs. In closing, she indicated that her delegation was ready to discuss LLDCs' needs on a bilateral basis. 
&& The representative of Rwanda supported the intervention by Paraguay. He said that the LLDC Ministers' meeting had recognized the constraints faced by all LLDCs, which included geographical location and transit issues. He also noted that LLDCs shared common development aspirations, including through structural transformation. He expressed particular appreciation for the participation of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) in the Ministerial meeting.  
&& The Committee took note of the outcome document from the Fifth Meeting of Trade Ministers of LLDCs, and of the interventions.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The representative of Japan said that he wished to inform Members of a proposal on e‑commerce which would be submitted shortly to the General Council. The purpose of the proposal was to reinvigorate discussions under the Work Programme on Electronic Commerce. Noting that e-commerce had become a powerful engine of global economic growth, he commended the MIKTA countries - Mexico, Indonesia, Korea, Turkey and Australia – for the recent e-commerce workshop they had organized. He believed that Members needed to start discussions on e-commerce from a broad perspective, aiming to identify what the WTO should do to best address the issue. It was important to not limit discussions to traditional issues, but to also include new topics surrounding e-commerce. The proposal that would be circulated outlined a possible course of action in this regard. In closing, he emphasized the importance of the development aspects of e-commerce, and the relevance of the CTD under the Work Programme on Electronic Commerce. 
&& The Chairman said that the 100th Session of the CTD would be held in November 2016, and that he wished to mark this milestone through the organization of a special half-day commemorative event. He believed that it would be useful if a number of WTO Ambassadors could be invited to this commemorative event, to share their views on trade and development. Additional panellists could also be invited, including representatives from other international organizations. The intention was to hold the commemorative event back-to-back with the CTD's 100th Session. He indicated that the details of the event remained to be settled. Interested delegations wishing to discuss elements of the programme for the event were invited to contact him.
&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation and support for the idea to hold an event to commemorate the CTD's 100th Session. He suggested inviting a range of speakers, including from the private sector, as he believed this would contribute to making the event as useful as possible.
&& The representative of the European Union expressed her delegation's appreciation for the Chairman's initiative. The EU stood ready to participate in, and contribute to, the commemoration of the CTD's 100th Session. 
The meeting was adjourned.

__________








WT/COMTD/M/97

-  PAGE 1 -


WT/COMTD/M/99

-  PAGE 21 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/99


9 November 2016
(16-6153)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/ NUMPAGES  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 21
Committee on Trade and Development
Ninety-Ninth Session
 






