WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/27
25 November 1999

(99-5108)


Committee on Trade and Development
Twenty-Seventh Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 18 OCTOBER 1999
Chairperson:  H.E. Mrs. Absa Claude Diallo (Senegal)

ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA
&& The Chairperson welcomed Members to the 27th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD).  The revised draft agenda for this meeting was to be found in WTO/AIR/1177/Rev.1.  She indicated that she had two items that she wished to raise under Other Business.  First, there was a request for observer status from the League of Arab States.  Second, she indicated that she would make a proposal regarding the dates of future meetings.  She also  asked if any Member wished to add any other item to the draft agenda, or to raise any other  matter under Other Business.  There being no such requests, she then proposed that the draft agenda be adopted.
It was so agreed.

PRESENTATION BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE OECD DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE COMMITTEE (DAC)
Continuing the series of information sessions on related work of other international organisations, the Chairperson invited Mr. Jean-Claude Faure, Chairman of the OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC), to make a presentation about the work the DAC in the development of trade capacity.  Two related OECD publications were available in the room.  The full text of Mr. Faure's presentation is included as Annex to this document.
At the end of his presentation, Mr. Faure stated that he felt that there was a need for dialogue among all of those concerned with co-operation in the areas of trade and development assistance.  He hoped that the present exchange of views would be the beginning of such a process.
&& The Chairperson thought that the Committee shared the sentiments expressed by Mr. Faure, and that the CTD would wish to maintain contact with the DAC.

ADOPTION OF THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CTD
&& The Chairperson said that the draft of the annual report of the CTD had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/63.  When the draft was circulated, the Secretariat had requested Members to communicate to it by 16 October any proposals or amendments.  The only such proposal, from Mexico, related to paragraphs 6, 8 and 16 of the draft report.  In order to meet the reporting requirements of the General Council, the final report had to be forwarded to the General Council by 22 October 1999.  Accordingly, the Chairperson proposed to suspend the Committee's formal meeting and to continue immediately in informal mode to discuss the draft report.  She would then close the informal meeting, ask the Secretariat to revise the document, and would revert to formal session to consider the revised draft.    
&& The Committee agreed.
Returning to the formal session, the Chairperson stated that the Secretariat had revised the draft annual report of the CTD, and she asked the Secretariat to read the amendments.
Regarding paragraph seven of the revised draft text, the representative of Mexico stated that the reference to High Level Symposia (HLS) on Trade and Development and on Trade and the Environment in the footnote raised a problem.  He explained that the HLS were outside of the official work of the CTD, and that Mexico did not wish to see this reference which could lead to difficulties for the Third Ministerial.  Accordingly, Mexico proposed to delete the phrase "A Secretariat background document was prepared for the HLS" as well as the words linking the two symposia.  He stated that if the WTO Secretariat wished to publish an informal compilation of material from the HLS that was one thing, but the CTD should not refer to these matters in its annual report.
&& The representative of the United States stated that the United States would not press the point of having the reference to the HLS on Trade and Environment, notwithstanding the fact that both symposia were agreed in the General Council to be held in tandem and that the United States had technical issues with respect to how its contribution to the symposia would be handled.  Another method would have to be found on how to handle this concern.
It was also agreed to remove footnotes 1 and 3 of page 2 of the revised draft text.
On paragraph 11 of the revised draft text, the representative of Guatemala said that the reference to presentations by the Commonwealth Secretariat and the World Bank at the 26th Session of the CTD should be in a separate paragraph, because this was separate from the submissions of documentation submitted by six countries on the issue of small economies.  This was agreed.
In paragraph 12, the representative of the United States requested that the qualifying adjective "extensive" be deleted.  It was so agreed.
&& The Committee adopted the annual report.

FUNDING OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE ACTIVITIES (WT/COMTD/W/20) CHAIRPERSON'S REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS WITH THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET, FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION

&& The Chairperson recalled that in the 25th Session the Committee had been informed about the critical financial situation in technical co-operation and about the resulting difficulties of the Secretariat in responding to Members' requests.  The Committee had requested the Chairperson to bring this matter before the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration (CBFA).  Accordingly, at the informal meeting of the CBFA on 14 September 1999, the Chairperson of the CTD and a representative of the Secretariat gave an overview of the situation.  The Chairperson thanked the Chairperson of the CBFA for organizing the informal Meeting of the CBFA and for the very positive exchanges of views that Members had on this subject.  She reported that there was a widely shared view that the funding of technical assistance should among the areas for immediate decision by Ministers in Seattle.  
&& The Chairperson asked the Secretariat to introduce the document WT/COMTD/20 on Technical Assistance Activities. 
&& The representative of the WTO Secretariat said that, at the informal meeting of the CBFA on 14 September 1999, Members had requested that the information provided on resources and expenditure on technical co-operation for 1999 be provided in writing and this was contained in document WT/COMTD/20, in which the information was also updated to 15 September 1999.  The document distinguished three types of resources used for technical co-operation: the Regular Budget, Extra‑Budgetary funds used for special activities and Other Extra-Budgetary funds.  The second part of the document provided a brief review of the evolution of technical assistance activities since 1995, demonstrating the rapid growth in demand for such activities, most of which were now financed by extra-budgetary funds.
&& The representative of Turkey asked the Secretariat to distribute to the CTD Members a document relating to the impact on Member's contributions in 2000 of possible increases in technical assistance funding through the Regular Budget resulting from the possible shift of funding from Extra-Budgetary funds to the Regular Budget.
In response, later in the day, the representative of the WTO Secretariat circulated to Members two documents (CRP (99) 31 and 32) on scales of contribution.  He explained that the Secretariat had provided information on two options for the integration of a total of Frs. 10 million into the  regular budget.  Under one option, there was an expansion to Frs. 4 million in the first year, to be followed by two more equal annual increases of Frs. 3 million, over a total of three years.  Under the second scenario, the full amount of Frs. 10 million would be integrated in one step.  These scenarios had been proposed by Members in the General Council.  The figures were also based on the budgetary proposals put forward by the Director-General for 2000 year, and did not take into account any changes that might result from the general review of the budget currently being undertaken in the Budget Committee.  However, in any event the last column of each document would not change since it represented the difference (Frs. 4 million in the first table, and Frs. 10 million in the second) that was the impact of Members contribution in the integration of the Regular budget in the first year under the two scenarios.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made.

THREE-YEAR PLAN FOR TECHNICAL COOPERATION (WT/COMTD/W/64)

&& The Chairperson recalled that, according to the guidelines adopted by CTD on 15 October 1996, the three-year plan for technical co-operation was to be presented to the CTD at its last Session of the year.  The document WT/COMTD/W/64 was a first draft for the three-year plan, 2000-02.  Given the critical financial technical assistance situation, as well as other issues, such as the launch of the "Global Trust Fund" for technical co-operation by some Members; the presentation of a number of proposals on the approach, the funding, the administration and evaluation of technical co‑operation activities; the results of the Working Group on improved technical co-operation, which had been circulated in March 1999; and the decisions to be taken in Seattle, the Secretariat had decided that a conservative approach had to be taken in preparing the three-year plan.  She also noted that the document raised several questions which needed to be examined, in particular, the broad guidelines for technical co-operation activities in 2000.  Some specific activities, divided up by regions, could be found in Annex 1 of the WT/COMTD/W/64.  For the years 2001 and 2002, the document gave some general vision in keeping with the spirit of continuity and it also contained some general information on priorities for the future.  She suggested that, as the CTD had just received this document and bearing in mind the aforementioned considerations, the CTD come back to the issue at its first meeting in 2000.  In that way, the CTD would be able to take account of decisions taken in Seattle.  Nevertheless, she asked if there were any comments on the subject. 
&& The representative of Guatemala noted that in the programme there were no changes to the programme of Trade Policy Courses that were normally held every two years for Spanish-speaking countries.  He asked that more frequent courses for Spanish-speaking countries, once or even twice a year, be included in the three-year plan.  Spanish-speaking countries had raised this concern on more than one occasion and they had sent a letter to the Director-General, Mr. Moore, on this subject.  They hoped that their concerns would be taken into account.
&& The representative of Cuba supported Guatemala.
&& The representative of El Salvador supported Guatemala and Cuba, adding that his delegation had also expressed its concern on the matter on several occasions. 
&& The Committee took note of the statements made.

THE WORK PROGRAMME OF THE COMMITTEE

&& The Chairperson recalled that the work programme of the CTD had been discussed at the previous meeting in July, based on an informal note by the Secretariat, and that, at that time, the Committee had dealt with the period to the Ministerial Conference in Seattle.  Since then delegates had been focusing on the draft Ministerial Declaration for Seattle.  Accordingly, she suggested that the Committee might look at what had been achieved hitherto and to have a preliminary discussion on what the Committee should do after Seattle.  In her view, four main themes could be discerned under the Committee's terms of references: special and differential treatment; technical co-operation; participation of developing countries in multilateral trading system; and the experience of the developing countries with their own implementation and the implementation by their partners of WTO agreements.  She also said that, at this stage, the Secretariat was completing two studies requested by the Committee:  a paper on Special and Differential Treatment, of which a draft had been sent to Members, and a paper with updated statistics on the participation of developing countries in international trade.  The Chairperson asked the Secretariat to inform the CTD on the progress of these studies.
&& The representative of the WTO Secretariat said that the two studies mentioned by the Chairperson were close to finalization.  The study on special and differential treatment had been more or less completed by the summer of 1999.  However, the Secretariat had since received some additional information from other divisions of the Secretariat.  This information referred to discussions on special and differential treatment in individual committees of the WTO.  He stated that the Secretariat was on the very last stages of this paper, and he hoped that this paper could be made available to Members shortly.  The second paper, relating to the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system, would be based on statistics on international trade available up to 1998 or 1999.  The Secretariat was trying to include, as far as possible, data for 1999 to try to get some feel for the latest developments.  The Secretariat did not want to look at only at the time of the financial crises and the immediate effect on the financial crises on trade of developing countries, which was obviously very important in 1998, but, hopefully, also to look at developments through the first seven or eight months of 1999.  The first part of the paper was a very long term look at the development of developing countries trade since the beginning of the GATT 1948 up to the present time, and this would be based on the paper that the Secretariat had produced for the High Level Symposium in March 1999.  The second part would take a look at developing countries' trade from 1990 to 1998, or least to the financial crises.  The third part would try to analyse developments during and following the financial crises of 1997-98.  The Secretariat had already drafted the second part of the paper and was now looking at the data for the third part. The Secretariat had not been able to complete the paper until now because reliable data were not been available for 1999;  these were important to show the post-crisis developments.  He hoped that the paper would be completed before the Seattle Meeting, as requested by Members of the Committee.  
Regarding the "Illustrative List of Elements for a Possible Work Programme" prepared by the Secretariat, (the Illustrative List), the representative of the United States asked the Committee to consider the same approach that the Chairperson had recommended for the Technical Assistance Three-Year Plan.  The representative of the United States stated that several tirets listed in the document included elements covered by various proposals before the General Council for Seattle.  Therefore, she proposed that discussion be deferred until after Seattle, otherwise it would be necessary to include additional points based on suggestions of which Members were aware. 
&& The Chairperson thought that the representative of the United States was in agreement with her proposal to hold discussions after Seattle, that is, in the first half of the year 2000.  She drew attention to the fact that the Illustrative List brought together  under four broad headings all the elements that had been previously discussed.  However, she would appreciate hearing from the Committee on the priorities that Members attached to these four headings, for instance, elements that Members believed needed further work or areas in which the Committee could cooperate with other international institutions, such as the fiscal implications of liberalization, where the World Bank and the IMF had carried out significant studies.  She asked what approaches the Committee might usefully follow.  For example, did Members think it worthwhile having seminars that could be organized under the auspices of the CTD and at which with experts might be invited to present and discuss their studies with Members outside of the formal framework of discussions?  The CTD also needed to look at special and differential treatment.  She would like to hear Members' comments.
&& The representative of the European Commission (EC) stated that he welcomed the Illustrative List drafted by the Secretariat.  However, points (I), (II), (IV) were the subject of proposals for Seattle, and it was premature to start a lengthy discussion on how to approach these issues which might be overtaken by events in six weeks time and which might seem to prejudge many political issues.  He proposed that the Committee use the disclaimer "Pending the Outcome of the Seattle Ministerial" before "Illustrative List of Elements for a Possible Work Programme".  If the Committee put this kind of sentence in bold in the heading, everybody would understand the character of the document.
&& The representative of the United States noted that her previous intervention was in lieu of putting disclaimers into the document, such as that suggested by the EC.  However, it was not enough to put in a disclaimer.  For example, in paragraph (II) on capacity building there was a reference to a proposal having been made for a day of reflection on technical co-operation activities.  In fact, several proposals had been made and this was being highlighted over others.  She said that the United States would perhaps like to see other proposals listed in the Illustrative List at this time, pending the outcome in Seattle.  Elements  could even be added to this Illustrative List in Seattle.  If the Committee went into this discussion at the present time or just put in a disclaimer, that would not do justice to the amount of work on proposals that had been already put in the General Council and in the preparatory process.  She would have to see whether the proposal for a day of reflection was before the CTD or any other body.  The United States with other delegations had made a proposal for a regular review of these issues in the General Council. The United States would not be comfortable with an illustrative list that only mentioned one proposal.
&& The representative of Mexico stated that he needed to consult with his capital on the Illustrative List.  However, what was described on the Illustrative List were development-related aspects, and this should be clearly defined.  As in the case of capacity building, that the Committee was talking about matters that should be focused on development.
&& The representative of Japan said that Japan welcomed the Illustrative List as a good basis for discussion.  Nevertheless, he had the same concerns that had been raised by the EC and the United States.  Members were, at this moment, in the preparatory process for the Ministerial Conference in Seattle.  There were also substantial proposals, made in the drafting phase of the Ministerial Declaration, that were not reflected in the document, such as the proposal to elevate the LDC Sub‑Committee to a full committee.  If this were accepted, what would be the relationship between the CTD and the Committee on LDCs?  Would the  concerns of small economies be raised in the CTD or in the future possible Committee on LDCs?  Another example was sustainable development which was very important for Japan, but which was not covered in the Illustrative List.  The list was useful, but the Committee could not be seen to prejudge the outcome of the Ministerial Conference of Seattle.  Therefore, the Illustrative List should be sent to capitals for consideration and then the CTD could revert to the issue after the Seattle in informal or formal mode.
&& The representative of India thought that there were two or three points of which Members might wish to take note.  The first, mentioned by the EC, had also arisen in the Committee on Trade and Environment which had used the phrase "pending the future work programme".  There, Members did not even want references to Third Ministerial Conference in Seattle.  The delegation of Japan was right.  There were several proposals which if accepted might or might not change the nature of the work in the CTD.  Japan would obviously want to change the role of the CTD to that of an advisory role.  India would not necessarily share this view at this point of time without understanding fully what an advisory role meant and what impact it would have on the various negotiating groups.  In order to preserve Members' positions, India suggested that the Committee either went in one or two ways.  One way approach might be to say "pending the future work programme".  Otherwise, it would be necessary to go through the painful process of referring this document to the capitals and sitting down and negotiating.  He supported the former approach, because those words had been used in another Committee which was at least similar if not the same.  He proposed that the CTD stated "pending the future work programme" and then went on saying  "Illustrative List" and that Members would come back to take a final decision at the first meeting in 2000.
&& The representative of Canada stated that this matter had been already discussed several times during the summer CTD session.  She thought that, generally speaking, the Illustrative List corresponded to the points raised in the CTD.  The list obviously did not try to coordinate all the proposals made by all delegations in the context of the General Council's work.  She proposed that the CTD examine the list at the appropriate time and come back to it on January 2000 year when the results of the Ministerial Meeting were known.  Those results would set out the priorities that the CTD should adopt, and nobody at the present CTD meeting wished to prejudge what would be decided at the Ministerial Meeting.  As the Illustrative List did not have an official number, the CTD probably did not need to take any action on the document.  It should be put it on hold and the CTD could come back to it in January at an informal meeting.  In the meantime, the Secretariat might even revise it in the light of the Ministerial results.  
&& The representative of Egypt stated that he supported the statement made by India.
&& The representative of the United States supported the statements by Japan and Canada.  The United States could not agree to adopting the document at the present meeting.
&& The representative of India suggested that the Committee could make it very clear that the Illustrative List was not the final work programme of the Committee.  Delegations need some time to see whether they could accept this paper with the disclaimer.
&& The representative of the European Commission thought that the Committee had nothing to decide now.  The Committee should merely take note of the paper,  adding the disclaimer "Pending" and decide to come back to it in January.
&& The representative of Turkey agreed with what had just been said by the representative of the European Commission.
&& The representative of the United States agreed with the last point made by the EC.  Nevertheless, in taking note, the United States would want to come back on some of the text as well, and did not feel that the disclaimer alone was enough.
&& The Chairperson reminded the committee that the informal note was mainly in order to elicit Members' comments.  It was not a formal draft.  
&& The representative of the WTO Secretariat stated that, in presenting this Illustrative List of Elements for a Possible Work Programme for the CTD, the Secretariat had tried to preserve an invisible wall between propositions in the Committee and in the General Council preparatory process.   If the Secretariat had it wrong, especially in relation to the day of reflection on technical assistance, this could be removed.  However, it was purely a document for reflection and it was not the intention to present it for any decision at the present meeting.  It had been the intention to look at it more closely after Seattle.
&& The Chairperson suggested that the Committee meet in informal mode in January 2000 to work on this item.  
It was so agreed.

MELANESIAN SPEARHEAD GROUP TRADE AGREEMENT: NOTIFICATION FROM PAPUA NEW GUINEA (WT/COMTD/N/9):  TEXT OF THE AGREEMENT (WT/COMTD/21).

&& The Chairperson drew the Committee's attention to document WT/COMTD/N/9 that contained the notification made by the delegation Papua New Guinea on the Agreement, concluded between Fiji, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu.  This was a preferential agreement between countries, notified under paragraph 2(d) of the Enabling Clause.  The text of the  agreement had been reproduced in document WT/COMTD/21 which had been circulated to WTO Members. 
&& The representative of Australia welcomed this notification.  WTO notification and transparency requirements were important, and Australia appreciated the notification and the communication from Papua New Guinea in that light.  Australia attached great importance to supporting the economic and trade development of the countries of South Pacific region.  It recognized the significant challenges that these countries faced and the need to ensure that WTO provisions catered for their needs.  
&& The Committee took note of the statement by Australia.

OTHER BUSINESS

&& The Chairperson recalled that a request from the League of Arab States for observer status had been circulated to Members.  As she had indicated earlier, no decision taken by the General Council on the status of observers.  However, she wished to hear CTD's comments on this request.
&& The representative of Egypt supported the request, and hoped that at the next CTD meeting Members would reach an agreement and would take a decision on this request.
&& The representative of Kuwait supported the request of the League of Arab States for observer status.  The Arab League Council of Economic and Social Affairs conducted work on  trade, investment and labour.  In addition, the Council had established an Arab Free Trade Area among its members based on Article XXIV of GATT 1994.  The endeavour of the Council of Economic and Social Affairs of the Arab League was to increase standards of living and improve the economic development of its Members.  Therefore, the representative of Kuwait asked WTO Members to give positive consideration to the request.
&& The Chairperson said the CTD had taken note of the request from the League of Arab States.  The request would remain on the agenda for the next meeting of the CTD.
Turning to the dates of forthcoming formal and informal CTD meetings, the Chairperson stated that the dates would need to take into account the Ministerial Conference in Seattle and the UNCTAD X Meeting which would take place in Bangkok from 13 to 22 February 2000.  She thought that it would be useful after Seattle to review the CTD work programme informally and proposed that the CTD meet in an informal mode on 18 January 2000 for this purpose.  She then proposed to hold the next formal meeting, the 28th Session, on 28 February 2000 (just after the UNCTAD Conference).  She proposed to hold the seminar on Special and Differential Treatment just before the next formal session on 25 February 2000. 
It was so agreed.   
&& The Committee was adjourned.
ANNEX

&& Address by Mr. Jean Claude Faure, Chairman of the OECD Development Assistance Committee
to the Committee on Trade and Development, 18 October 1999

Introduction

	Ambassador Diallo, ladies and gentlemen, 

	This is a welcome and timely opportunity for me to address the WTO Committee on Trade and Development and I am very grateful for the invitation. 

	As Chairman of an OECD Committee, I fully share in the consensus emerging from the OECD Ministerial meeting last May that in a new trade Round, development considerations must be a central element.  

	As Chairman of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC), I want to convey just how much importance the donor community attaches to interacting with the trade community, to better understanding the opportunities and constraints faced by developing countries as they strive to become more prominent players in the world trading system, and to working actively to help them do so through the instruments of development co-operation.

	I welcome this opportunity therefore to be able to inform you of the ways in which we work in the DAC and how donors might be able to respond constructively to some of the trade challenges faced by our developing partners. 

	Allow me to say a few words about the role of the DAC in the OECD, how we operate and how, through the co-ordinated activities of our Member states, we might make a contribution to enhancing the capacity of developing countries to share in the dynamic synergies between trade and growth in the global economy.

	As an intergovernmental organisation that promotes policy dialogue on a wide range of policy issues of relevance to its 29 Member states, the OECD has no executive powers or funds to disburse. It does not provide technical assistance in any classical sense, except in a few exceptional cases.  But by providing analysis in and across different policy areas as a basis for dialogue, encouraging peer review and good practices, working to produce policy guidelines and harmonising views as a basis for effective approaches to international issues, Member states benefit a great deal from sharing experiences with others.  And increasingly, this process of sharing experience, good practices and guidelines is extending beyond the membership of the OECD, as our Organisation reaches out to other regions and actors.

	This work of the OECD is essentially accomplished through our Committee structures.  The DAC is one such Committee, where representatives from bilateral agencies, with the UNDP, the World Bank and the IMF as permanent observers, try to develop common approaches, enhance effectiveness of aid delivery, improve co-ordination among donors, identify good practices and develop guidelines.

	In 1996, the DAC produced a short, high level report "Shaping the 21st Century:  the Role of Development Co-operation", which laid out a strategy based on internationally agreed development goals and partnership principles.  This has since become known as the Development Partnerships Strategy.  I must say that this approach has proved to be a powerful influence in the international system.  Just a few weeks ago, at the time of the annual IMF/WB meetings in Washington, it was agreed that World Bank and IMF programmes for poor countries will in future be based on poverty reduction strategies and partnership principles.  The Managing Director of the IMF, M. Camdessus, set out in the form of 7 Pledges , the key UN Conference goals that had been identified in the DAC Report.

	The centrepiece of these goals is the reduction of the incidence of poverty by one half by the year 2015.  It is clear that such a goal can only be achieved if developing countries can generate a dynamic and sustainable growth process.  That requires the possibility and the capacity to engage in, a dynamic fashion, in global trade and investment flows. In this context, a new WTO Round will be a major opportunity for the trade policy community to contribute to an historic reduction of poverty in the world at the beginning of the 21st Century.

OECD Support for Integrating the Developing Countries in the Global Trading System

	In the past two years, the OECD Council at Ministerial level has given prominence to better elaborating the links between trade, investment and development, to promoting more coherent policy making towards developing countries, and to enhancing the role of the OECD in helping to integrate developing countries in the global trading system.  At the meeting this year, Ministers emphasised that the new Round must be responsive to the needs of all developing countries and that in this respect, particular emphasis must be given to the special needs of least developed countries, including improved market access. 

	These views were echoed also at the DAC’s High Level Meeting of Development Ministers in May of this year.  The DAC HLM stressed the importance of reflecting development perspectives in preparations for the new Trade Round. Ministers also indicated that development co-operation could help identify effective instruments and approaches to build capacity for trade, for implementing Uruguay Round Agreements and for effective developing country participation in the new round.  These messages have also been emphasised at the Cologne G8 Summit and at the annual World Bank/IMF meetings just three weeks ago.

	In short, we consider the relationship between trade and development to be an essential one and a major priority for everyone.

	Developing countries clearly have a major responsibility themselves for putting in place trade-friendly policies that promote their further integration in the global economy. 

	But the OECD countries also recognise that policy coherence matters and the need therefore in OECD capitals, to become more aware of the development impacts of policy incoherence and to better co-ordinate policy-making in instances where trade or other policies risk undermining development prospects.

	So what does this mean for the OECD and for the DAC in particular? 

	We will try to move forward on two fronts. 

	First, we will confront the challenge of policy coherence by moving to set in train processes, both in OECD countries and at the OECD in Paris, to ensure that the development impact of policy making is analysed, discussed and acted on. 

	Second, we must try to become better aware of the particular needs and constraints in developing countries for enhancing their capacity to become dynamic participants in trade, and then to respond with effective development co-operation activities. 

	I will now briefly address these two areas of activity.

Addressing the Challenges of Policy Coherence

	The arrangements now in place for addressing policy coherence issues among the WTO, the IMF and the World Bank are an indication that policy coherence is an area that requires systematic attention. 

	In the OECD, we have responded to a mandate from Ministers to prepare a report on the links between trade, investment and development and how OECD countries can better promote policy coherence.  This report, entitled "Policy Coherence Matters", has been provided for this meeting. 

	OECD Ministers thus do indeed recognise the central importance of policy coherence towards developing countries, in national policy-making frameworks as well as in international policy frameworks.  But as we all know, coherent policy-making is far from easy in practice.  There are numerous political constraints at every level. 

	Keeping it on the agenda at the OECD is important.  And Members of the DAC and the Trade Committee are deepening their interaction as preparations step up for Seattle and beyond. 

	In the DAC itself, we are now systematically including an assessment of policy coherence in our "peer review" process.  This is a process of examining each DAC Member’s development co‑operation policies and is perhaps comparable to your Trade Policy Review Mechanism.  By considering a few issues of policy coherence for each of the DAC Members in the context of the Peer Review, we are able to stimulate awareness and policy discussion processes in capitals.  

	Further, we are setting out to prepare a "policy coherence checklist".  This checklist will provide guidance for policy makers in OECD capitals with respect to the impacts of policies on economic and social development in partner countries.  It will also consider the institutional aspects of policy coherence to see how different agencies, national and international are able to take development impacts into account.  It will address a variety of policy areas including:

	-	trade, agriculture and food security, and issues such as research, intellectual property rights and information technology;

	-	international finance, debt, investment, private sector relations and migration;

	-	environment issues;

	-	peacekeeping and conflict resolution, and the arms trade.

	An important aspect of policy coherence is of course to ensure that trade and investment flows are not only dynamic and inclusive, but contribute to rising social and environmental well being in developing countries.  Our current work programme in the DAC includes major projects in these areas.  We are working to produce Guidelines for Donor Assistance to Poverty Reduction.  And we are supporting the endeavours of developing countries to establish effective processes for defining and implementing national sustainable development strategies and to meet their commitments under global environment conventions.  In this way, the development co-operation community is actively engaged, in a direct and practical way, in the social and environmental concerns that are important issues in the WTO forum. 

Integrated Efforts to Enhance Capacity to Trade

	The other area where the DAC and its members can provide input is in developing common donor approaches and enhancing bilateral donor efforts to build trade capacity in developing countries. 

	We are very much aware of the Integrated Framework for least developed countries' trade development and we maintain close contact with the co-ordinators from the different multilateral organisations involved.

	Since 1997 we have organised two workshops in Paris on the subject of capacity development for trade in which we invited representatives of all six organisations, and we contributed a report to the WTO High Level Meeting in 1997 on the activities of bilateral donors in this area. 

	The stress given in the Integrated Framework to demand-led and locally owned approaches is fully in line with the orientations reflected in the DAC’s Development Partnership Strategy.

	Given the importance of trade and development linkages, many bilateral donors are now striving to be more effective in their efforts to help the less advanced developing countries strengthen capacity to trade.  The lessons we have learned from experience so far suggest strongly that successful trade development must consist of a concerted, multi-faceted approach that targets numerous actors, institutions and processes at the same time in an integrated and comprehensive manner. 

	This is not an easy approach when it comes to the level of operationalising it in the field. 

	We are therefore embarking on a project to prepare a set of good practices for donors in this area.  In May of next year we will hold another workshop with representatives from the public and private sector in partner countries to test the good practices before they are finalised and disseminated at the end of next year.

	Lessons learned from technical co-operation generally point to two critically important points. 

	First, donors need to tailor their strategies to the specific needs of the particular developing countries.  Systemic needs assessments undertaken by the partner country in co-operation with the private sector must be the point of departure.  Such assessments must be much more than shopping lists.  They must embody the country’s own vision of how it can insert itself into market-driven, client-oriented patterns of trade in goods and services where value-added retained in the country is high. 

	This implies a significant agenda of policy development and institution building and an intensive dialogue between the Government and the private sector.  It involves a heavy initial investment of time and effort, but ownership is essential for lasting impact.  

	DAC work in capacity building generally provides important guidance, including on strengthening the participation of the private sector and civil society in developing countries.  Here is a fundamental point, the wealth of nations is built not on natural resources or cheap labour, but on institutional development which provides the framework of accountable and effective governance in both the public and private sectors, so that enterprise and human and social development can flourish on a sustainable basis.  Technical assistance for trade capacity building thus goes well beyond the capacities needed to participate in the WTO. 

	Second, a locally owned,  needs based approach requires a shared agenda and good co‑ordination at the country level.  This can be facilitated by designation of a lead donor or multilateral agency with a strong local presence and a comprehensive understanding of local institutions and policy issues.  We cannot stress too strongly that donor efforts need to be more focused and coherent within each developing country.  This requires real long-term commitment on both sides, appropriate expertise and the cultivation of a "learning as you go" culture rather than the delivery of pre-cooked generic packages.  Our good practices will focus on this need for coherent and co-ordinated approaches keyed to specific country contexts. 

	We look forward to the participation of the relevant multilateral agencies and policymakers and other actors in developing countries as we elaborate these good practices.

	I believe that my presence here today symbolises the emergence of a more systematic process of interaction between the trade community and the development co-operation community.  We need to work at this interaction, it has to be a dynamic evolving process that we discuss and evaluate regularly. 

	Today we are in sense verifying that we are all attaching the same priority to the need for policy coherence in both developed and developing countries and to the role of trade capacity building.  These are key building blocks for the future of a well-functioning global economy in which all countries can take part. 

__________


 OECD, Trade, Investment and Development-"Policy Coherence Matters", Paris 1999; OECD, Trade, Investment and Development- "Reaping the full Benefits of Open Market", Paris 1999.

WT/COMTD/M/27 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/27 	Page  PAGE 13













