WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/83
2 April 2012


(12-1701)


Committee on Trade and Development
Eighty-Third Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 14, 17, 18, 25 AND 28 NOVEMBER 2011

Chairman:  H. E. Dr. Anthony Mothae Maruping (Lesotho)


 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787959" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC320787959 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787960" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC320787960 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc320787961" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc320787961 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc320787962" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc320787962 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787963" C.	biennial technical assistance and training plan 2012-2013 (wt/comtd/w/180)	 PAGEREF _TOC320787963 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787964" D.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC320787964 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787965" -	gulf cooperation council (gcc) notification of customs union – communication from china, egypt and india (wt/comtd/w/175)	 PAGEREF _TOC320787965 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787966" -	notification of the agreement on trade in goods between the association of southeast asian nations (asean) and korea	 PAGEREF _TOC320787966 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787967" -	notification of the comprehensive economic partnership agreement between india and korea (goods)	 PAGEREF _TOC320787967 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787968" -	generalized system of preferences - notification by Switzerland (wt/comtd/n/7/add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC320787968 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787969" E.	annual review of the implementation of the hong kong decision on duty-free and quota-free market access for least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC320787969 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787970" F.	electronic commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC320787970 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787971" -	effective participation of developing countries in electronic commerce as a means to combat poverty - communication from cuba, ecuador, nicaragua, the plurinational state of bolivia and the bolivarian republic of venezuela (wt/gc/w/635 - g/c/w/650 - wt/comtd/w/179; wt/gc/w/635/add.1 - g/c/w/650/add.1 - wt/comtd/w/179/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC320787971 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787972" G.	consolidating and mainstreaming development in the world trade organization - communication from the african and arab groups (wt/comtd/w/182)	 PAGEREF _TOC320787972 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787973" H.	participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system (wt/comtd/w/181)	 PAGEREF _TOC320787973 \H 27
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787974" I.	draft annual report for 2011 (wt/comtd/w/183)	 PAGEREF _TOC320787974 \H 29
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC320787975" J.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC320787975 \H 37



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 83rd Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3852 circulated on 2 November 2011.
The agenda was adopted.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that these organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation had highlighted at the 82nd Session the need to ensure the participation of intergovernmental organizations (IGOs) in the activities of the CTD.  It had been indicated that Article V of the Marrakesh Agreement emphasized that IGOs should be allowed to cooperate with the WTO and its subsidiary bodies.  It had also been emphasized that, in pursuance of the WTO's trade and development principles and objectives, the CTD should be permitted to collaborate with IGOs whose activities related to trade and economic development. 
The guidelines for granting observer status to IGOs as set out in Annex III of the CTD's rules of procedure had been devised with the aim of facilitating the representation of IGOs in the Committee's activities.  In a trading environment that was both more integrated and more complex, it was important for specialized and regional IGOs to be fully aware of the work of the CTD.  This would allow the maintenance of coherence in establishing strategies, as well as synergies conducive to the economic development and integration of developing and least-developed Members into the multilateral trading system.  The guidelines stipulated that requests for observer status were to be considered on a case-by-case basis by each WTO body.  Therefore, the CTD had the responsibility to address the requests it had received.  His delegation hoped that the Committee could proceed at the present meeting to consider the request made by the League of Arab States (LAS) since 1999, in accordance with the rules of procedure.  Due account needed to be taken of the fact that the request had been submitted by an IGO that had been associated with the work of the Contracting Parties to GATT 1947.  The guidelines indicated that favourable consideration should be given to such requests.
&& The representatives of Saudi Arabia and Jordan expressed support for the intervention by Egypt.
&& The Chairman said that the issue being raised was closely related to the second sub-item under the present agenda item, which concerned requests for permanent observer status.  He recalled that Egypt had made a proposal at the previous meeting which essentially called for work to be undertaken in the CTD so as to allow an early resolution to issues surrounding requests for observer status by IGOs.  He said that he wished to inform Members that he had consulted with some delegations on the matter after the last CTD meeting, and that he would consult further.  His understanding was that those that had previously expressed reservations continued to do so.  He observed that this was a broader issue.  He proposed that the CTD revert to the requests for permanent observer status at its next meeting.
&& The representative of Egypt said that Annex III of the rules of procedure stipulated that requests for observer status would be considered on a case-by-case basis by each WTO body to which such a request was addressed.  It was clear that the CTD needed to consider observer requests along these lines.  His delegation wanted to see whether the LAS could be granted observer status in the CTD at the present meeting.  If any Member had objections, they should voice them.  Otherwise, the CTD could take a decision on the matter.
&& The Chairman said that he had introduced this sub-item by proposing that the organizations being granted ad hoc observer status on a meeting-by-meeting basis be invited to the next meeting of the CTD.  On the proposal raised by Egypt on permanent observer status, he asked whether any other Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Israel said that the issue raised by Egypt was still the subject of consultations.  Therefore, he did not believe that the Committee could take a decision on it at the present meeting.
&& The representative of the United States said that she was under the impression that the Committee was currently addressing the sub-item dealing with ad hoc observers.  
&& The Chairman confirmed that the Committee was considering the sub-item dealing with ad hoc observers.  However, since the two sub-items under the present agenda item were closely related, he had allowed a discussion which also concerned the second sub-item.  He proposed that the Committee agree to invite the ad hoc observers to the next CTD meeting. 
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The representative of the United States indicated that her delegation was not in a position to accept any new observers to the CTD at the present time.
&& The Chairman said that there was no change in Members' positions.  He encouraged Members to consult amongst themselves.  
&& The representative of Egypt noted that Israel had indicated that it was still consulting on the request for observer status by the LAS.  In this regard, he urged Israel to provide feedback on its position as soon as possible.  He also asked the US to provide some detail on what its reservations were with regard to the request from the LAS.  This information could then be transmitted to his capital and to the LAS.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.    
BIENNIAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING PLAN 2012-2013 (WT/COMTD/W/180)
&& The Chairman said that the Biennial Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan) for 2012 and 2013 had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/180.  He invited the Secretariat to introduce the Plan. 
&& The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) said that she wished to start her intervention with a summary of the status of the implementation of the 2010-2011 TA Plan.  She would then outline the main features of the 2012-2013 TA Plan, and would go on to explain how it was to be implemented and what its key targets were.  She would also address the kind of monitoring and evaluation initiatives that were to be put in place, as well as some of the challenges that might be expected in the implementation of the new Plan. 
She said that one of the achievements from the 2010-2011 period concerned the introduction of the Progressive Learning Strategy (PLS).  The PLS aimed to achieve higher levels of learning, and ensured that Members benefitted from cumulative and sustainable capacity‑building.  She observed that a remarkable contribution had been made to both human and institutional capacity building.  Inter-linkages between programmes, the building of synergies and the leveraging of resources through partnerships had been strengthened.  This had helped to ensure coherence and effectiveness in the delivery of trade-related technical assistance (TRTA) by the WTO.  In terms of numbers, the Secretariat had delivered more than 700 activities.  Particular emphasis was placed on the least‑developed countries (LDCs), which had benefitted from over 40 per cent of the planned TRTA.  More than 4,000 officials had completed on-line courses, of which 23 per cent were from LDCs.  She indicated that the biggest challenge in implementing TRTA in 2010 and 2011 related to financial and human resource constraints.  To deal with these constraints, more emphasis had been placed on partnerships, so that resources could be leveraged.  Travel-related expenses had also been reduced. 
The TA Plan for 2012 and 2013 acknowledged and took into account financial constraints.  It also took into account the effects of a strong Swiss franc and the impact of exchange rates, as well as the fact that previous TA Plans had been budgeted above utilization levels.  The main objective of the 2012-2013 Plan was to enhance human and institutional capacities in order to enable Members to take full advantage of the rules-based multilateral trading system.  One of the novelties of the Plan concerned the introduction of Results‑Based Management (RBM).  This provided the basis for structural monitoring and evaluation of the Secretariat's trade capacity‑building programmes.  The Plan also contained a log frame which the Secretariat planned to refine in consultation with Members.  The Plan had been drafted in consultation with stakeholders and built on lessons learned and best practices from the implementation of previous TA Plans.  The activities focused on three main areas which concerned meeting WTO obligations, accessions and post-accession processes and trade capacity building in negotiations.  The broad subjects covered included WTO technical assistance and training, specialized and advanced technical assistance, academic support for training and capacity‑building, training and internship programmes, e-learning and outreach activities. 
Another element that was new in the Plan was the inclusion of the budget.  Based on the regular budget and the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF), the total anticipated budget for 2012 was CHF23.6 million and CHF24.3 million for 2013.  The activities presented in the Plan's matrix would be funded 80 per cent from the DDAGTF and 20 per cent from the WTO's regular budget.  For the WTO to be able to implement activities as of 1 January 2012, the Secretariat would need to have in hand at least 25 per cent of the overall budget by 31 December.  If this threshold was not met, it would be difficult to implement regional activities funded from the DDAGTF.  With regard to targets and outcomes, she explained that the Secretariat would continue to implement the PLS and to give priority to LDCs.  Meanwhile, the coordination of technical assistance was to be strengthened both internally and externally.  Emphasis would be placed on partnerships in the delivery of TA, with varying levels of involvement. 
The TA Plan provided for the delivery of approximately 700 activities - both national and regional - for an estimated 4,000 officials.  With regard to reaching the targeted results, three outcomes had been identified.  The first was an increased participation of beneficiaries in the core work of the WTO and its respective bodies.  The second was an increased participation to implement WTO Agreements and make full use of Members' rights.  The third outcome related to an increased participation and compliance with WTO accession processes and procedures related to TRTA.  On the monitoring and evaluation of these outcomes, she said that the Secretariat had been undertaking a review to ensure that it had the right tools to capture the data required.  She hoped that this exercise would be completed by the summer of 2012.  The Secretariat was also establishing baseline data using information from previous years and from reports and needs assessments, so that it would be in a position to establish a starting point for monitoring and evaluation.  Performance indicators had been identified.  However, because of the complexity of indicator construction, the Secretariat would involve Members in the refinement of the indicators provided in the log frame.  This would lead to more emphasis on tracking outcomes and a more efficient management of programmes.  She observed that it would be necessary to ensure that there was a balance in terms of resources used for monitoring and evaluation and resources meant for the implementation of specific activities.  
With regard to the long-term impact of TA and capacity‑building activities, she said that this required effective follow-up and the cooperation of beneficiary countries.  In addition, a holistic view had to be adopted when assessing impact.  It would have to be acknowledged that there were other providers of TA in most beneficiary countries.  For this reason, emphasis would be placed on partnerships.  Progress would be reported on an annual basis and this would be complemented by a newsletter recording events.  She noted that there would be challenges in the implementation of the TA Plan.  One challenge concerned the need to secure timely and predictable funding.  A second challenge was related to the need to maintain flexibility when it came to applying the PLS, which was a training tool as well as a selection tool for those wishing to attend advanced training courses.  Another challenge concerned the regional trade policy courses (RTPCs), which had been reduced from 12 to eight weeks.  One of the main reasons for the reduction in time was to ensure that all the regions were covered.  She additionally pointed to the challenge of introducing better tools for measuring results, outcomes and the impact of TA.   
&& The representative of Oman expressed appreciation for the WTO's TA activities.  She cited examples of specific activities, including activities concerning scheduling, anti-dumping and subsidies, and regional trade agreements (RTAs).  She also mentioned a one-week course on WTO issues that had been held for Omani journalists.  She was pleased with the positive response from the ITTC to include in the TA Plan a workshop for parliamentarians, the private sector and other stakeholders.  Her delegation was also pleased that the Arab region had been added to the beneficiaries of intermediate-level activities.  Oman had on numerous occasions indicated its willingness to host these activities. She also expressed appreciation and support for the WTO internship programme, the PLS and the e-learning programme.  Finally she said that attention should be paid to the deadlines for requesting participants to register for specific activities.  Better coordination was needed so that these deadlines did not come during the Islamic holiday period.  
&& The representative of Cuba expressed concern with the limited time that governments had to nominate candidates for TA activities.  He asked if it was possible to send out invitation letters at least one month before the date and inquired whether the information could be sent by e-mail as well as by fax. 
&& The representative of Chinese Taipei expressed support for the TA Plan, which set out a clear road map for the WTO's TA activities.  His delegation was pleased with the introduction of RBM into the Plan.  He believed that RBM, in combination with the PLS and e-learning, would make the ITTC's TA activities more effective, efficient and sustainable.  He added that his delegation had been a long‑term supporter of the WTO's goal of achieving cumulative and sustainable capacity building.  Even though most Members were experiencing fiscal constraints because of the global economic crisis, his government had contributed US$200,000 to the DDAGTF.  He hoped that this contribution would further upgrade the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system.
&& The representative of Kenya indicated that reduced training periods in the trade policy courses should not be seen as a reduction in the quality of the training.  
&& The representative of China noted that the DDAGTF faced budget constraints which would affect the TA Plan.  Past experience had shown that TA was vital for building capacity in developing countries.  Her delegation wished to reiterate its commitment to South-South cooperation within the framework of the multilateral trading system.  China had contributed US$400,000 in 2011 to help to establish its LDC and accession programme.  China hoped that the programme would prove beneficial to LDCs. 
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed appreciation for the consultative process which had been undertaken on the TA Plan.  He highlighted the importance of a gradual implementation and a further refinement of the PLS.  With regard to implementation, efforts needed to match the realities on the ground - especially in the context of e-learning, where the facilities available in LDCs had to be taken into account.  Another challenge lay in the area of resource mobilization and timely and predictable funding.  On this, he expressed concern over the declining flow of resources.  Since there seemed to be an over-reliance on the DDAGTF, he indicated that it would be useful if Members could focus more on the impact in terms of quality rather than on the number of programmes which had been implemented.  He appreciated the focus on cumulative and sustainable capacity building and on enhancing the efficiency of the Secretariat's TRTA.  In this regard, he noted the approach being taken in the broader framework of Aid for Trade.  In particular, he believed that the efforts being made to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation approach in the Aid-for-Trade framework would also help in the context of the monitoring and evaluation of TRTA programmes.  He added that the LDC Group wanted to see a positive outcome to the current exercise to identify the appropriate tools for an effective approach to monitoring and evaluation.  
He went on to address the issue of regional strategies for trade capacity building and the need for recognition of a specific national and regional context.  In this regard, he noted with appreciation the efforts being made to enhance synergy and partnerships in the regions.  The regional strategies needed to focus on enhancing capacity for the implementation of WTO obligations.  They also needed to focus on assistance to countries in terms of their trade policy review exercises, and to support countries' accession-related activities, including in the post-accession phase.  With regard to training programmes and internships, the LDC Group wished to see more clarity and transparency in terms of the criteria being used.  He also emphasized the need for broader consultations with relevant stakeholders, particularly the targeted beneficiary countries.  He believed that the Secretariat was aware of some of the concerns that had been raised with regard to per diem allowances, age limits and other factors in relation to training programmes.  Finally, he said that he supported the Secretariat's call for predictable resource mobilization.  He encouraged donor countries to ensure that the Secretariat received the necessary 25 per cent of the resources required to begin the implementation of the TA Plan. 
&& The representative of Canada said that his government had recently made a commitment to contribute 500,000 Canadian dollars per year from 2010 to 2014. This was long-term and predictable support, which covered the period of the TA Plan under consideration.  He welcomed the TA Plan's focus on RBM and the recognition of the need to report on outcomes and impact over and above short‑term activities and outputs.  He emphasized the importance of going beyond using RBM as a tool for reporting, to using it as a tool for management and the continual improvement of the ITTC's activities.  This would include adjusting programming based on the results encountered.  He indicated his delegation's interest in suggesting various improvements to the corporate level log frame, including the rationalization of outcomes and indicators and ensuring appropriate placement of output and outcome statements.  To this end, he welcomed the consultations undertaken by the Secretariat.  He indicated that his delegation was in a position to agree to the TA Plan.
&& The representative of the European Union expressed her delegation's support for the TA Plan and its implementation.  She said that the EU's contribution to the budget was expected to remain at the same levels as in previous years.  The EU was keen to remain involved in the implementation of the RBM framework.
&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation for the introduction of some innovations by the Secretariat in the delivery of TA.  She welcomed e-learning and the phased training efforts to reflect the different levels of knowledge of the participants.  Her delegation agreed that the WTO should continue to give priority attention to assisting LDCs to integrate into the multilateral trading system, to benefit from progressive liberalization in world trade and to participate fully in the negotiating process of the DDA.  She welcomed the introduction of RBM, and indicated that her delegation looked forward to learning more about how this tool was being implemented, particularly in the context of monitoring the use of RBM and making adjustments to the tool.  
Noting that budget contributions appeared to have decreased, she indicated that one of the contributing factors was the strong Swiss franc.  She said that the US had made one of its largest contributions to the DDAGTF, but that the amount appeared to be less because the TA Plan provided figures in Swiss francs.  She asked if the Secretariat could clarify how exchange rate effects impacted on its ability to deliver TRTA.  She next referred to the intensive course on trade negotiating skills, and in particular paragraph 161 of the TA Plan which described running simulations using the "Crawford Falconer Draft Modalities for Agriculture, Luzius Wasescha Draft Modalities for NAMA, 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, and the 2004 July package".  She said that her delegation disagreed with the notion that the course contributed to the objective of the DDA by engraining into course participants the idea that the modalities on the table presented a credible way forward in the negotiations.  Instead, she indicated that it would be more appropriate to use the Uruguay Round, WTO accessions or other request and offer models for this type of training.  Pending resolution of that technical issue, she said that her delegation could join the consensus to approve the TA Plan. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that he sought clarification on a few points.  With regard to the funding of activities, he indicated that his question was similar to that of the US.  In particular, he wished to know more about the decrease in funding for the TA Plan in the context of exchange rate considerations.  He also wanted to know how fiscal cutbacks had affected TA, and in which areas. In addition, he asked if there had been any changes concerning the participation of North African countries in TA activities, and any cutbacks with regard to regional activities for the Arab and Middle Eastern countries.  Finally, he wished to know more about the activities which had been cancelled, particularly in the context of what was stated in paragraph 148 of the TA Plan.
&& The representative of Kuwait said that he supported the request by Oman to take the Islamic holidays into account before scheduling events.  He also agreed with Cuba on the need to extend the deadline for submitting requests for participation in the various training activities. 
&& The representative of Australia said that it was appropriate that the TA Plan focused on recipients, thereby ensuring that it was demand‑driven and responsive to priorities set by Members.  He welcomed the RBM element in the Plan and indicated that this was something that a number of stakeholders in the WTO's TA activities had been advocating.  He said that RBM would strengthen all components of the TA cycle - from design and planning to implementation and reporting - and would lead to overall improvements in efficiency.  This was in line with Australia's own efforts to strengthen its aid programme effectiveness.  
He said that he also wished to comment on the regional priorities outlined in the TA Plan.  He welcomed the mention in the Plan of the specific challenges facing the Pacific region and the ongoing consultations which the Secretariat had conducted with Members in the region.  Furthermore, TA and training activities in the Pacific needed to be based on full consultations with stakeholders - including recipients, regional organizations and donors.  Continuing to ensure that Pacific Members and Observers were able to access the WTO's TA activities at levels proportional to their needs was a high priority for Australia.  He indicated his delegation's support for the prioritization of post‑accession assistance to LDCs in the region, as well as opportunities for Geneva-based training.  Given the Plan's recognition of the distinctive challenges faced in the Pacific, he welcomed further clarification on which of the 27 activities planned over the two-year period in the Asia-Pacific region would specifically target Pacific Members and Observers.  He noted from Annex 5 of the Plan that only two of the activities were targeted at the Pacific, while some involved the Asia-Pacific region as a whole.  He sought further clarification on the extent to which the Pacific would be involved.  With regard to the budget, he noted that the clear focus was on TA and training.  On budget line F concerning "other programmes", he inquired whether further detail could be provided. 
&& The representative of India said that her country was a strong proponent of South-South cooperation and had taken several initiatives to contribute to capacity building in other developing countries.  India shared the concerns about the decrease in resources and hoped that the quality of the TA programme would not be diluted.  She noted that the economies of the Asia-Pacific region played an important role in world trade.  Their share accounted for nearly 30 per cent of global merchandise trade in 2009.  However, the region had a diverse mix of countries in terms of their levels of development and their extent of trade share.  It was made up of 17 developing countries and ten LDCs, which had assumed varying sets of obligations and commitments.  Distinctive features of the Pacific Members and Observers included their small size - which was associated with vulnerabilities - their non-resident status in Geneva and the recently acceded status of some. 
Training activities in the Asia-Pacific region were beneficial to the region as a whole because of the substantial diffusion of knowledge and experience sharing that occurred between countries at various levels of development.  She noted India's recent experience in hosting the three-month RTPC in New Delhi from 5 September to 25 November 2011.  The 25 participants came from a variety of countries and this diversity was highly cherished.  The 12-week course had provided the right length of time for the participants to get a good grounding on WTO issues.  A curtailment in the duration of the training was likely to affect the quality and content of the RTPC, which had acquired a certain brand value.  She added that it was a positive development that the RTPC had a very high profile and that the WTO's Director-General, as well as the Minister of Commerce and Industry of India, had attended the opening ceremony.  She indicated that it was preferable to continue these courses over a 12-week period.  Various options could be explored such as making the RTPC part of the regular budget of the WTO in order to provide continuity and predictability for this flagship training activity.
&& The representative of Jordan said that the budget reductions could be understood as long as the main aims of TA were not compromised.  He supported the outreach components of the TA Plan and the initiative to conduct trade policy courses in the seven regions including the Arab region.  He also supported the call to observe the Muslim holidays when it came to organizing TA activities. 
&& The representative of Barbados, on behalf of the small and vulnerable economies (SVEs), noted the emphasis on monitoring and evaluation and the results-based approach, which had helped to enhance TA.  She welcomed the collaboration between regional agencies and specialized institutions, as this would also enhance the delivery of the overall programme.  She noted that the Aid-for-Trade Initiative and the ITTC's programmes were mutually supportive.  The focus on e-learning was welcomed, as was the cumulative approach to training.  At the same time, she urged some flexibility in the cumulative approach, in light of the relatively short time-frames of the attachment of many delegates to WTO portfolios. 
&& The representative of the Philippines said that her delegation was a strong supporter of the ITTC's initiatives.  She welcomed e-learning as a pre-requisite for further training.  She added that she understood the need for some reductions in the timelines of the regional courses, but that the quality of the courses should not be affected. 
&& The representative of Fiji highlighted the need for more TA for Pacific countries, given the particular circumstances of these countries. 
&& The representative of Japan emphasized the importance of RBM.  He said that the Asia‑Pacific region was a driving force behind world trade.  He welcomed further assistance to the region.
&& The representative of the Pacific Islands Forum said that Pacific countries appreciated the opportunities that had been offered to officials from the region.  However, he indicated that the TA Plan did not fully recognize that the Pacific region faced development challenges and supply-side constraints linked to small size and geographical remoteness.  He asked whether the Plan could be modified to reflect the Pacific trade context.  Future programmes could be developed with unique Pacific challenges in mind.  He added that Pacific countries would have been appreciative if a text box had been included in the Plan which listed their specific subjects and priorities for TA and training.  He cited as examples trade policy reviews, post accession, services, fisheries, and trade and climate change. 
&& The Director of the ITTC said that the quality of the RTPCs would not be compromised by a reduction in the duration of the courses.  As a complementary element to the RTPCs, the ITTC was making further improvements to the e-learning training modules.  In particular, e-learning was being expanded to include level two courses.  She explained that the RTPCs were currently categorized as level two activities, and that with the reduction of the duration of the regional courses, the e-training courses could help to make up for the reduced time.  Also, the specific needs of the regions would be taken into account.  
Turning to the Pacific region in particular, she said that all developing countries in the Pacific were entitled to two national activities per year and that LDCs in the region were entitled to three.  In addition, Pacific countries as well as LDCs were to be invited to all the global activities listed in the Plan.  There was also a focus on post-accession needs to be addressed at the national level.  This was in recognition of two LDCs - Samoa and Vanuatu - which were in the process of finalizing their WTO accession negotiations. Also available to the Pacific countries were the WTO's internship programmes.  The WTO had a number of internship programmes which were open to developing countries in general and Pacific countries in particular.  With regard to the criteria which were being used for internship selection, she said the ITTC had tried to be flexible in selecting interns and, that in a number of cases, the ITTC had accommodated individuals above a certain age limit.  The ITTC had also applied flexible criteria and included individuals who might not have necessarily completed all the on-line courses needed to qualify for an internship.  In such cases, relevant work experience was taken into consideration.  On training in the area of trade negotiations skills, she said that more appropriate language would be used in the future.  Finally, she said that budget line F was the line used to pay programme staff and trainers.  
In response to questions concerning the impact of exchange rates and the strong Swiss franc, a representative of the ITTC said that the TA Plan listed its expenditures in Swiss francs.  When incoming flows were in US dollars, for example, the amounts shown were lower.  The ITTC had tried to look at the extent to which the lower income flows were matched with lower payments and outgoing flows.  The reality was that most of the expenditures were actually in Swiss francs.  In particular, for any given amount received by the ITTC, approximately 80 per cent of that amount would be spent in Swiss francs and not in US dollars. 
&& The representative of Australia said that he was interested in learning more about how TA activities in the Pacific had been carried out nationally and regionally in previous years.  He indicated that the region had special needs, and that Australia wished to ensure that Members in that region were adequately represented in the activities delivered by the Secretariat. 
&& The representative of the United States indicated that the concern that her delegation had expressed earlier was not with the language in the report, but rather with the actual training provided.  The US would not block the adoption of the TA Plan, but did look forward to discussing the issue further with the ITTC. 
&& The Committee adopted the Biennial TA Plan for 2012 and 2013. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs.  He firstly informed the Committee that the India-Malaysia Agreement was notified in September 2011 in document WT/COMTD/N/37.  The Secretariat had requested from the parties the required data to prepare the factual presentation on the Agreement.  The goods aspects of this Agreement would be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD in 2012, assuming that the data were received in good time.  He added that, for a number of previously-notified RTAs – namely, RTAs between India and MERCOSUR, India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, and India and Bhutan – the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties.  Of these agreements, only data relating to India-MERCOSUR had been provided to date.  In particular, the Secretariat had received all the necessary data from MERCOSUR, but was still waiting to receive some data from India.  He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible.
He also recalled that it had been mentioned in past meetings that there were a number of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties.  Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), an RTA falling in this category would only be considered by the CTD after it had been ratified by all the parties.  There were three RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that fell within this category, namely the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA), the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) and the ASEAN-India Agreement.  The parties to these agreements were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications are complete.
&& The representative of Uruguay said that the members of the Latin American Integration Association wanted to inform the CTD that they were undertaking consultations on the question of the notification of agreements under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo.
-	GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL (GCC) NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMS UNION – COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA, EGYPT AND INDIA (WT/COMTD/W/175)
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND KOREA
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT BETWEEN INDIA AND KOREA (GOODS)
&& The Chairman said that he wished to say a few words on the first three sub-items under the present agenda item.  With regard to the first sub-item, which concerned the notification of the GCC Customs Union, he recalled that Members had expressed diverging views in past CTD meetings on how to address the issues relating to the notification of this Agreement under the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.  A communication from China, Egypt and India titled "Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council Customs Union" had been submitted.  The two subsequent sub-items under agenda item D concerned the notifications of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement.  These RTAs had been notified under the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.  Diverging views had been expressed as well on issues surrounding the notifications of these two Agreements.
He went on to say that he had held consultations with some Members after the last CTD meeting.  In particular, he had met individually with a number of delegations that had expressed views on the matter.  He had also met with small groups of Members sharing similar positions.  He believed that the consultations had helped him to better understand some of the concerns which had thus far not permitted consensus to be reached on the various pertinent issues.  That being said, it was clear that more discussions would be required before an acceptable way forward was found.  Therefore, he intended to continue his consultations, and would welcome the participation of all Members going forward.  He indicated that he would look into holding an informal open-ended CTD meeting as soon as possible.  He believed that this would provide a forum for a frank and open discussion and help to take the matter to a closure.  As his consultations would be continuing, he urged Members to refrain from entering into a substantive discussion at the present meeting. 
&& The representative of the United States indicated that it was best to address the sub-items under the present agenda item individually.  The first sub-item was concerned with an incorrect notification, on which discussion had already taken place and had now been exhausted.  The US regretted to see this sub-item appear on the agenda for the present meeting.  The second and third sub‑items concerned RTAs with dual notifications.  Because the issues were not the same, the three sub-items should not be discussed together.
&& The representative of Egypt expressed appreciation for the opportunity to once again convey his delegation's concerns regarding the systemic issues arising from RTAs with a dual notification, as well as its concerns on the legal and procedural inconsistencies regarding the manner in which RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause had been dealt with in the CTD.  He also recognized the Chairman's commitment to forge consensus, and said that he looked forward to the consideration of the three RTAs in question, as had been proposed at the last CTD meeting.  Making reference to the two rounds of consultations that the Chairman had held with China, Egypt and India, he expressed regret that the Members that were not in a position to agree on the way forward suggested at the last CTD meeting did not participate.  He recalled that the consultations were being held at the request of these Members.  China, Egypt and India had still not received any comments from these Members on the specific and systemic questions that had been raised with respect to the consideration of RTAs with a dual notification status.  The three delegations expected that these Members would have made use of the consultations to provide concrete substantive answers and comments to the questions that had been raised.  He encouraged these Members to provide their responses as soon as they were in a position to do so. 
He went on to say that the specific and systemic issues raised by China, India and Egypt became more crucial to address in light of four developments.  The first development concerned the publication of the 2011 World Trade Report (WTR), which did not shy away from venturing into controversial issues such as how the WTO could extend its purview over RTAs from co-existence to coherence.  He said that he wished to highlight three points in this regard.  The first point related to what was referred to as upholding the subsidiarity principle, wherein the report advocated that some policy areas covered by RTAs should be left for multilateral attention.  The second point related to the principle of "multilateralizing regionalism" - meaning that the application of the most-favoured-nation (MFN) principle should be extended to preferences provided under RTAs, including RTAs between developing and least developed countries.  The WTR suggested that this should be maintained.  The final point was seen from the report's concluding remarks, wherein it was questioned whether RTAs were compatible with the WTO and whether they posed competing systems which made the task of creating coherence a more difficult one.  The views expressed in the report were very serious ones, and they substantiated the systemic questions and concerns that China, Egypt and India continued to raise with respect to how RTAs had been considered by Members in the CTD, which went beyond the prescribed transparency procedures. 
The second development related to the alarms that some Members had been sounding with respect to RTAs, both in recent publications and in international fora as well as in the CRTA.  In this regard, the membership had been hearing about high-quality and low-quality RTAs, with no clear indication or criteria that had been agreed upon to qualify such propositions.  A senior official from a developed Member, in a discussion paper issued on 17 October 2011, had said that since the non-discrimination principle was suspended in bilateral and regional trade agreements, a world that allowed a round of multilateral trade negotiations to die was a world that invited the formation of discriminatory trade blocs of the sort that contributed to the outbreak of the Second World War.  The paper went on to suggest that it was necessary to agree on new disciplines for WTO-consistent bilateral and regional trade deals.  These disciplines should not depend nor wait for the success of negotiations in the negotiating group on rules (NGR) or depend on industrial tariffs, farm subsidies, export subsidies or anything else.
The third development that had raised the profile of the specific and systemic issues stemmed from the ideas that had been floated by the Director-General on 6 September 2011 regarding the future of the WTO, when it had been suggested that the WTO should develop a code of conduct for RTA practices.  This replicated an earlier suggestion made by the Director-General during the 29 April 2009 General Council, when it had been indicated that it was difficult to see why such deep concessions and commitments were undertaken in the context of preferential agreements, without any consequences in the multilateral context.  The Director-General had observed that there were differences between RTAs aiming at deep regional integration and other free trade agreements and had suggested that Members collectively think about gradually "multilateralizing" concessions made in free trade agreements.  Moreover, in the context of describing the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for RTAs, the Director-General had suggested that while progress had been made in transparency in RTAs, Members could collectively make a more muscular use of the Mechanism.  Egypt was not quite clear as to what the word "muscular" suggested or how it would be qualified.  Nevertheless, such propositions could not be casually left unattended.  Developing countries had clear positions with respect to improving the disciplines and procedures for the consideration of RTAs.
The fourth development which substantiated the systemic issues that China, Egypt and India had been raising for a number of years in connection to the consideration of RTAs by the CTD was reflected in the discussions that had taken place the previous week in the CRTA over a proposal that a number of developed Members had submitted to expand the mandate of the CRTA on the account of the CTD.  The proposal aimed, inter alia, to give the Secretariat a mandate to prepare reports – other than the factual presentations prepared in collaboration with Members - to identify trends and issues in RTAs and to allow for a process whereby Members would be assisted to identify which RTAs supported the multilateral trading system or otherwise. 
It was clear which direction some Members wished to take.  However, before taking any steps to see how RTAs could be further brought within the realm of the WTO, the WTO itself had to start addressing the specific and systemic issues that needed to be resolved with respect to how Members had preserved the mandate of the CTD and upheld its terms of reference, and how they had applied the TM for RTAs. Discussing and resolving these issues was no longer a luxury, but a necessity.  Any furtherance of the WTO's mandate in this regard would be contingent upon how these issues were addressed.  His delegation formally requested that the items concerning the consideration of RTAs with dual notification status be retained for further discussion at the next CTD meeting.  He hoped that by that time Members would have reached consensus over how to appropriately consider these RTAs in accordance with the terms of reference, procedures and mandate of the CTD.  Finally, in reaction to the intervention by the US, he indicated that it was not appropriate to refer to a notification as "incorrect". 
&& The representative of Japan welcomed the Chairman's efforts to resolve the matter through informal consultations.  He indicated that there was a clear difference between the GCC Customs Union notification on the one hand, and the notifications of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and India‑Korea Agreement on the other.
&& The representative of India supported the intervention by Egypt.  In India's view, the GCC notification issue was not different from the issues concerning the other two RTA notifications.  India saw all three as being part of the same complex problem that Members needed to address.  His delegation wanted all three sub-items to remain on the agenda until a satisfactory solution had been found.  He called on the Chairman to continue his informal consultations, in order to allow the CTD to function properly and be able to deliver on development issues.
&& The representative of the European Union regretted that some Members had once again insisted on having this discussion under the present agenda item.  From her delegation's perspective, there was nothing to add.  The EU believed that the discussion had been exhausted.  Members had already had the opportunity to take note of the relevant notifications, make their comments on these notifications, and even reiterate them on several occasions.  As the EU had noted in previous meetings, the problematic arising from an agreement being notified by each party under a different legal basis needed to be further clarified.  It was in this spirit that related discussions had taken place in the context of the review of the TM for RTAs.  Unfortunately, this problematic had taking away precious working time in different Committees.  The EU stood ready to discuss a constructive way forward, but not under the present agenda item.  She also indicated that the EU would continue to willingly participate in informal consultations called by the Chairman. 
&& The representative of China said that the problem was not simply a procedural issue dealing with the venue of consideration. More seriously and fundamentally, the issue related to the legal rights and obligations of Members under WTO Agreements.  In China's view, the proper solution had to consist of a number of elements.  The first was the need to respect the rights of developing Members under the Enabling Clause, especially the right to invoke paragraph 2(c).  Second, the central role of the CTD on development-related issues, as stipulated in paragraph 1 of the CTD's terms of reference, had to be maintained and strengthened.  He recalled that China, Egypt and India had tabled a joint communication in September 2010 illustrating the specific and systemic concerns arising out of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union.  The aim was to remind Members of the complexity of the implications of dual notifications, and to trigger the necessary brainstorming to find an appropriate solution.  However, he noted with disappointment that little progress, if any, had been made.  Numerous specific and systemic issues listed in the communication remained to be addressed.  He welcomed the Chairman's decision to hold further informal consultations, and urged the relevant Members to actively participate in the discussions.  Finally, he noted that, contrary to some Members, his delegation did not see any difference between the GCC Customs Union and the other two dual notifications.  China's position was that the three sub-items should be retained on the CTD's agenda for further discussion.
&& The representative of Canada expressed disappointment that these issues remained on the formal agenda, thus preventing the CTD from undertaking its regular business.  As discussions had amply demonstrated, the only way the issues would be resolved was through more frank discussion in informal mode.  He urged both the Chairman and those Members involved to follow this track.  He indicated that Canada was ready to participate in the discussion, but was of the view that these issues were clearly not yet ripe for inclusion on the formal agenda.  He also suggested that the CTD's agenda be better articulated in future to reflect the substantively different nature of the sub-items. 
&& The representative of Australia expressed his delegation's frustration with the present discussion.  He noted that there were other important issues of substance for the CTD to discuss, and this discussion had taken up too much time of the Committee's work.  He welcomed the Chairman's initiative to continue his informal consultations, which Australia was willing to participate in.
&& The representative of the United States said that she wished to speak only on the GCC issue, on which the US was willing to participate in further consultations.  The issue of dual notifications concerned the RTAs TM and were being discussed elsewhere.  It was not appropriate to group these issues together.  She also confirmed the US' position that the GCC Customs Union notification under the Enabling Clause was incorrect.  She explained that the customs union had subsequently been notified under Article XXIV and was in the pipeline to be considered in the CRTA.  The US considered the issue closed and continued to request that the item be removed from the CTD's agenda.  The US had no quarrel with any developing country notifying a qualifying agreement under the Enabling Clause.  The Enabling Clause provided a waiver from Article I of the GATT.  If an agreement required a waiver from more than just Article I, as was generally the case for customs unions, the parties needed the cover of Article XXIV.  This was an issue relating to WTO rules.
&& The representative of Egypt expressed his hope that the informal consultations to be called by the Chairman would focus on substance, and not on the formulation of the CTD's agenda.  The three sub-items under consideration should be retained on the CTD's agenda, as discussion had not been exhausted.  Finally, he said that the consideration of all three RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and Article XXIV had been put on hold in the CRTA.
&& The Chairman said that he would continue his informal consultations.  The purpose of the consultations was to move towards convergence.
&& The representative of the United States said that, after having discussed the first sub-item under the present agenda item, the Committee should now turn to other two sub-items, which dealt with a different matter.
&& The Chairman said that Members had different views as to whether the three sub-items were dealing with the same issue or not.  This would also be a subject for the informal consultations.
&& The representative of the United States sought clarification as to which delegation had requested the three sub-items.
&& The Chairman responded that Egypt had submitted a request in writing.
&& The representative of Egypt said that he wished to clarify that what had been sent by his delegation was a communication which stated that Members had not agreed at the 82nd Session as to how the three RTAs in question were to be considered.  Accordingly, the request had been for the items to be retained on the CTD's agenda for the present meeting.    
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES - NOTIFICATION BY SWITZERLAND (WT/COMTD/N/7/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman said that a notification had been received by Switzerland concerning its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme.  The notification was contained in document WT/COMTD/N/7/Add.4.  He invited Switzerland to introduce the notification.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that, like other industrialized countries, Switzerland maintained a GSP scheme to grant special preferences to imports from developing countries.  Switzerland, the EU and Norway had agreed to apply similar rules of origin for industrial products in their respective GSP schemes.  Switzerland had adopted the new rules of origin on 1 May 2011.  These rules were characterized, inter alia, by simpler criteria which were more easily understandable for operators;  increased generosity, for example by expanding the maximum allowed contents of non‑originating materials;  and a differentiated and more generous treatment for LDCs.  The revision of the rules had been complemented with a revision to the list of beneficiary countries of the Swiss GSP, which had entered into force on 1 July 2011.  The main amendments to the list concerned the exclusion of territories belonging to high-income economies, and the exclusion of countries with which Switzerland had recently concluded free trade agreements, usually via the European Free Trade Area (EFTA).  In conclusion, he said that the Swiss GSP remained a scheme based on objective criteria.  Switzerland hoped that the two revisions made in 2011 would allow developing and least‑developed countries to expand their share of the Swiss market in the future.
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed appreciation for the revisions to the Swiss GSP scheme.  He urged other developed Members to similarly work towards improving their preferential rules of origin, particularly in the context of the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs.   
&& The representative of the European Union welcomed the converging approach with respect to the Swiss and EU GSP schemes.  She also welcomed the changes to the Swiss GSP rules of origin, which were simpler, more transparent and more development friendly, notably towards LDCs.  The EU called for further steps in the direction of simplification of origin certification procedures by operators.  This was in light of the importance of trade between GSP beneficiary countries, Switzerland and the EU, and to take into account the fact that there was a significant volume of GSP beneficiaries' exports which transited via Switzerland into the EU.
&& The Committee took note of the notification by Switzerland, and of all interventions.  
ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE HONG KONG DECISION ON DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS FOR LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  At the present meeting, the CTD was to undertake its sixth annual review of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision, as mandated in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.
&& The representative of China said that the review of steps taken to provide DFQF to LDCs was an important item on the CTD's agenda.  The fact that the Doha Round would not be concluded by the end of 2011 further demonstrated the value and urgency of the issue.  China still firmly believed that the faithful implementation of the Hong Kong mandate on DFQF would not only provide the long‑awaited support for the poorest people in the world, but would also help to preserve the credibility and relevance of the multilateral trading system.  Discussions in the CTD could help achieve these goals.
He went on to say that China had submitted the notification of its DFQF scheme to the CTD and to the Council for Trade in Goods in October 2011.  He referred to documents WT/COMTD/N/39 and its addendum, as well as to document G/C/W/656. China began implementing the scheme on 1 July 2010, and renewed it on 1 January 2011.  Currently, the scheme covered products under 4,788 tariff lines, accounting for 60 per cent of total tariff lines.  According to Chinese statistics, China's imports from the LDCs under the DFQF scheme reached US$42.2 billion in 2010.  This accounted for 98.7 per cent of China's total imports from them.  At the recent G-20 Summit in Cannes, the Chinese President had announced that China would further open its market to the LDCs by extending such treatment to 97 per cent of total tariff lines in the next few years.  His delegation would submit an updated notification soon in order to provide Members information about the scheme, especially the products on which DFQF treatment was being offered. 
He said that DFQF treatment, together with many other bilateral initiatives, had made important contributions to the economic and trade cooperation between China and the relevant countries.  WTO data showed that, since 2008, China had become the world's largest export destination for LDCs. China’s annual growth rate of imports from LDCs during the 2000-2010 period was 27 per cent, which was much higher than that of developed Members.  Finally, he called on the membership to demonstrate its firm determination to retain an open and fair multilateral trading system and its good faith in honouring its commitments towards LDCs.
&& The representative of India said that paragraph 47 of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration encouraged developing country Members declaring themselves in a position to do so, to provide DFQF market access for products originating from LDCs.  The Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for LDCs was announced by the Prime Minister of India in April 2008, on the occasion of the First India-Africa Forum Summit in New Delhi.  India was, therefore, the first developing country to announce a comprehensive scheme under the DFQF mandate.  The DFTP Scheme was notified on 12 September 2011 under paragraph 1(b) of the Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements (PTAs). 	
The guiding objective of the DFTP Scheme was to provide effective and substantial market access to products of export interest to LDCs.  The Scheme had been operational since 2008 and provided market access on 85 per cent of India's total tariff lines.  This was to be implemented over a five-year period, with a 20 per cent cut in each year.  A margin of preference existed on 9 per cent of tariff lines, and an exclusion list covered 6 per cent of India's total tariff lines.  The Scheme provided preferential market access on tariff lines that comprised 92.5 per cent of the global exports of all LDCs.  Products of immediate interest to Africa which were covered included cotton, cocoa, aluminium ores, copper ores, cashew nuts, cane sugar, ready-made garments, fish fillets and non-industrial diamonds.
An important aspect of the Scheme was that it was open to all 49 LDCs, including 33 LDCs in Africa.  Of the 26 LDCs for which customs notifications had been issued by the Department of Revenue, seven had not yet submitted the necessary information regarding the agencies authorized to issue certificates of origin.  He urged these LDCs to complete the remaining formalities in order to take advantage of the Scheme.  An increase in the coverage of the Scheme was under consideration by the Government of India, and a detailed analysis was being carried out to make the Scheme more effective.  A similar exercise was being undertaken to make the rules of origin simpler.  India remained committed to improving the Scheme in order to further increase its effectiveness.  Feedback from LDCs was welcome in order to iron out any difficulties they faced in taking advantage of the Scheme.
&& The representative of Hong Kong, China, welcomed China's implementation of the Hong Kong Decision.  Noting that the Doha Round was at a critical juncture, he shared his delegation's view that China's initiative offered an important boost to its trade with LDCs.  He called on other Members to implement the Hong Kong Decision as early as possible.
&& The representative of Australia said that his country offered 100 per cent DFQF market access to LDCs.  Australia was among the first Members to take this step in 2003.  Australia's Prime Minister unequivocally reaffirmed the DFQF scheme and its 100 per cent coverage at the recent Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Perth.  Importantly, the rules of origin in Australia's scheme were simple and open.  For manufactured goods, the rules recognized a good as produced in an LDC if allowable factory cost was not less than 50 per cent of total factory cost, or if the last process of manufacture was performed in an LDC.  Australia called upon Members that were serious about delivering real benefits for LDCs and development in the WTO, including at MC-8, to implement similar measures consistent with the Hong Kong Decision.
&& The representative of the European Union welcomed the fact that emerging economies like China and India were extending DFQF market access for LDCs, and also welcomed these Members' recent notifications.  The EU looked forward to receiving further details about the exact time schedule and scope of these initiatives, notably from China in the context of the recent announcements made in Cannes on further extensions of its scheme.  She went on to recall that the EU offered DFQF market access to all products from LDCs, expect arms.  She encouraged Members, both developed and developing, to move forward on DFQF in line with the Hong Kong Decision.  The EU also supported transparency in this respect.
&& The representative of Bangladesh expressed appreciation for the steps being taken by Members to provide DFQF market access to LDCs' products, in line with the Hong Kong Decision.  The recent notifications by China and India were noted.  Appreciation was also expressed to China for its intention to enlarge the product coverage of its DFQF scheme.  He called on China to implement the extension of its scheme as soon as possible. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was fully committed to implementing its DFQF obligations consistent with the Hong Kong Decision.  However, the US also believed that it was important to do so carefully, taking into account the potential impact of DFQF on LDCs and developing country trading partners that already had access to the US market through preference programmes.  A key goal of US preference programmes was to assist LDCs and other low‑income countries increase their competitiveness in the US market.  Trade preferences could help poor countries gain a foothold in the US market, upon which they could build and expand, including into other global markets.  The US recognized that LDCs and low income countries were unique and that one size did not fit all.  The trade preference programmes and technical assistance had therefore been tailored to target specific development needs. 
There were three sets of US trade preference programmes that benefitted LDCs.  These were the GSP scheme, the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), and the Haiti Trade Preference Programmes - which included the Haiti Economic Lift Programme (HELP) Act, the Haitian Hemispheric Opportunity through Partnership Encouragement (HOPE) Act and the Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act (CBTPA).  Each trade preference programme provided duty-free access to beneficiary country products entering the US market under the specific tariff lines covered by the respective programme.  AGOA was designed to promote stable and sustainable economic growth in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).  The Haiti Trade Preference Programmes provided a strong commitment to the Western Hemisphere's only LDC.  Before the 2010 earthquake, Haiti had made important strides in promoting growth and development, including through a competitive apparel sector.  After the earthquake, apparel exports to the US dropped by 43 per cent compared to the previous year.  US preferences provided measures to preserve gains made - despite massive physical damage and unemployment - and to encourage buyers and investors to stand with Haiti through the crisis.
In 2010, 98.9 per cent of non-oil imports entered the US duty free from AGOA LDC beneficiaries.  During the same period, 99.5 per cent of all imports entered the US duty free from Haiti. Any potential negative impact on LDCs and developing country trading partners that already had access to the US market would need to be carefully weighed against the potential benefits to other LDCs, such as Bangladesh and Cambodia, which did not currently have such access.  Structuring and implementing the US DFQF commitment needed to reflect US goals and varying interests across the full range of developing country trading partners that could be impacted either positively or negatively.   
For example, in the textiles and apparel sector – which was perhaps the most significant sector in the US market with respect to LDC export opportunities – it was important to take into consideration the relative competitiveness of different LDCs.  Between 2004 and 2010, US apparel imports - Chapters 61 and 62 of the US' Harmonized Tariff Schedule - from Bangladesh increased by 105 per cent and from Cambodia by 56 per cent, even though both were suppliers on an MFN basis.  Bangladesh and Cambodia had also gained US market share - up by 89 per cent and 44 per cent respectively over the same time period.  During this period, US apparel imports from AGOA beneficiary countries dropped by 58 per cent and from African LDCs by 57 per cent. SSA's market share dropped by 61 per cent for AGOA beneficiaries and by 60 per cent for AGOA LDCs.  This suggested that Bangladesh and Cambodia were far more competitive in the US apparel market than other LDCs.  Expanding market access in the apparel sector for these competitive economies risked destabilizing gains made by current preference beneficiaries, as well as other low-income countries that competed with Bangladesh and Cambodia in the US apparel market on an MFN basis.  
Of the 31 LDCs that were WTO Members, 23 were beneficiaries of AGOA or HELP.  Both these preference programmes provided opportunities in the apparel sector.  Of the remaining LDCs, textile and apparel exports were significant portions of the export economy - more than 8 per cent of total exports - for only four.  The four in question were Bangladesh, Cambodia, Madagascar and Nepal.  In other words, in what was arguably the most important product sector under a potential DFQF programme, only four countries – including two highly competitive ones – would likely witness substantial benefit from DFQF in the US market, quite possibly at the expense of 23 other LDCs.  The apparel industry in Haiti was fragile and extremely dependent on unique provisions from the US.  In 2010, apparel exports accounted for 94 per cent of total exports to the US from Haiti.  This represented 77 per cent of Haiti’s global exports.  With unemployment of 70 per cent in Haiti, the apparel industry was the single largest employer, providing 28,000 jobs.
In conclusion, she said that her delegation viewed DFQF as an important part of its goals for the Doha Round.  The US continued to believe that the most significant benefits would be derived from strong overall market opening that benefitted all LDCs and other low-income countries by creating new market access into all key economies.  Until new market opportunities were achieved, the US believed that targeted preference programmes provided the most even playing field for accomplishing development goals.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
-	EFFECTIVE PARTICIPATION OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN ELECTRONIC COMMERCE AS A MEANS TO COMBAT POVERTY - COMMUNICATION FROM CUBA, ECUADOR, NICARAGUA, THE PLURINATIONAL STATE OF BOLIVIA AND THE BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF VENEZUELA (WT/GC/W/635 - G/C/W/650 - WT/COMTD/W/179; WT/GC/W/635/ADD.1 - G/C/W/650/ADD.1 - WT/COMTD/W/179/ADD.1)
&& The Chairman said that a communication from Cuba, Ecuador, Nicaragua, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was to be considered under the present agenda item.  The communication, titled "Effective participation of developing countries in electronic commerce as a means to combat poverty", was circulated to the General Council and the Goods Council, as well as to the CTD.  The CTD document reference was WT/COMTD/W/179 and WT/COMTD/W/179/Add.1.  He invited the proponents to introduce the communication.
&& The representative of Cuba, on behalf of the proponents, said that the proposal enjoyed the support of the Informal Group of Developing Countries (IGDC), the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group, the LDC Group, GRULAC and others.  The proposal was in line with the mandate given at the 2009 Ministerial Conference.  In particular, Members had agreed to a renewed approach to electronic commerce (e-commerce).  It had been agreed that proposals would have a development component, and would also touch on fundamental principles such as non-discrimination, predictability and transparency.  The purpose of the present proposal was to examine a range of difficulties that developing countries faced.  Recommendations had also been made for actions to be taken.
The proponents believed that the proposal was clear and objective.  It demonstrated what the purpose of the exercise was and contained a realistic account of the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) in developing countries.  The proposal touched on SMEs' limited access to ICT.  The proponents defended the right of non-discrimination towards all Members, and provided a series of recommendations relating to development and the enhancement of participation in e-commerce.  The document additionally contained a draft decision for the WTO's Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC-8), to be held in December 2011.  This draft was being discussed in special meetings being organized by the Deputy Director-General.  The debate in these meetings had been constructive, and the proponents had demonstrated significant flexibility.  The proponents felt that the draft decision reflected the interests of developing countries, and hoped that this would also be the case in the final decision taken by Ministers.
&& The Committee took note of the communication.  
CONSOLIDATING AND MAINSTREAMING DEVELOPMENT IN THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION - COMMUNICATION FROM THE AFRICAN AND ARAB GROUPS (WT/COMTD/W/182)
&& The Chairman said that a communication from the African and Arab Groups titled "Consolidating and mainstreaming development in the World Trade Organization" had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/182.  The communication contained a proposed decision to be forwarded to MC-8.  He invited the proponents to introduce the communication.
&& The representative of Kenya, on behalf of the African Group, said that the proposal started by acknowledging the necessity of reconciling trade and development needs.  The globalization process and the WTO were referred to.  The communication had five parts.  The first part dealt with the question of reasserting development principles and considerations in a changing global economic landscape.  In this part, the communication noted the difficulties that were being faced in the realization of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) and the Millennium Development Goals, in particular Goal 8.  These difficulties posed challenges to the multilateral trading system and to sustainable development.  In this light, the communication indicated that there was a need to keep under constant review the justifiable exceptions and flexibilities granted to developing and least‑developed Members in order to ensure their effectiveness.
The second part of the communication dealt with the revitalization of the role of the CTD.  While the CTD was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on all development issues in the multilateral trading system, not all development-related issues or decisions taken by various WTO bodies were regularly reported to the CTD.  The Committee was also not regularly consulted on these matters.  Against this background, there was a need to improve intra-reporting procedures and to operationalize the CTD's terms of reference to periodically review development- related work undertaken in other WTO bodies.  In the third part of the communication, which concerned monitoring and surveillance, the communication observed that the CTD was not fully exploiting its mandate to consider a wide range of development issues.  For example, since 2002 the Committee had not been able to report on the utilization of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions.  In addition, there was a lack of continuity in following up on the implementation of decisions in favour of LDCs, as well as other decisions. 
The fourth part of the communication was concerned with administering and strengthening the Enabling Clause.  He noted that the CTD played a pivotal role with regard to the rights of developed and least-developed Members, as prescribed in the Enabling Clause.  The final part of the communication focused on preserving the CTD's role in implementing the TM for RTAs.  In the General Council Decision establishing the TM, it was specified that the CTD was the body entrusted with the implementation of the Mechanism as it applied to RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  However, it appeared that the CTD was unable to maintain the proper application and implementation of the procedures established by the Mechanism.  In several cases, RTAs between developing and least-developed countries had been challenged on a prima facie basis - upon their notification - for having invoked the Enabling Clause.
With regard to the proposed decision for MC-8 that was included in the communication, he said that he wished to highlight two aspects.  First, the proponents were calling for a decision to maintain the centrality of the CTD and to strengthen its role as the focal point for the consideration and coordination of all development-related activities in the WTO.  In this context, the CTD would submit a report, including recommendations to improve its operation and effectiveness within the WTO, by the next Session of the Ministerial Conference.  Second, the CTD would regularly monitor and report on any development-related activities and issues raised in other WTO bodies.  The Committee would provide the necessary guidance and recommendations to the General Council for appropriate action.  He concluded by noting that the issues that had been raised in the communication were not necessarily new.  The proponents hoped that Members would consider the communication positively.    
&& The representative of Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the Arab Group, supported the intervention by Kenya.  He said that developing and least‑developed countries faced many challenges in realizing the benefits of the multilateral trading system.  The LDCs in particular remained largely marginalized from the global economy.  Developing and least-developed countries needed the capacity to translate the benefits of the multilateral trading system into real development outcomes and progress.  Members were called on to consider the communication positively.
&& The representative of Egypt expressed his delegation's support for the interventions by Kenya and Saudi Arabia.  He said that the communication by the African and Arab Groups was the outcome of an intensive screening exercise that had been undertaken to identify how development concerns and priorities had been addressed since the establishment of the WTO.  The communication focused on reforming the regular work of the CTD, on the basis of how developmental issues and concerns had been dealt with thus far.  It built on various communications submitted by the African Group, the ACP Group and the LDC Group since 2001, in which many areas of concern had been raised as part of the CTD's regular work.  The proposal capitalized on the fact that the CTD was the focal point for the coordination and consideration of all development work in the WTO.
The document took as its premise the numerous challenges faced by developing and least‑developed Members in a changing global landscape.  Since the establishment of the WTO, relentless efforts had been made to reconcile trade and development needs under the conditions of globalization in the 21st century.  However, the rules affecting developing and least-developed countries' participation in the multilateral trading system had evolved, as had the thinking about the nature of trade policies supportive for development.  Over the past 16 years, several failures to advance the interests of the WTO's developing, least-developed, and small and vulnerable constituencies had been registered.  As a result, confidence in the multilateral trading system was eroding.  This had been exacerbated exponentially due to the adverse effects of various global economic crises and growing protectionist tendencies.  The communication attempted to address the obstacles and challenges that the African and Arab Groups had faced in the WTO.  However, it did not aim to grant additional powers to the CTD or further its terms of reference.  Rather, the objective was to preserve the CTD's mandate, especially at a time when the development dimension of DDA was not merely facing a deadlock but had in fact come to a complete stop.  His delegation supported the proposal and hoped that consensus over the proposed decision could be reached.
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that the LDCs had had the opportunity to interact with the proponents and had made specific comments.  Some of these comments had been reflected in the communication.  The LDC Group supported the communication and looked forward to engaging with Members to further discuss the various elements in it.  He observed that some LDCs might wish to make further comments on the communication going forward.  
&& The representative of Jordan said that the centrality of development in the DDA was the core rationale behind the communication.  It was logical to revitalize the CTD and instruct it to submit recommendations on trade and development issues.  Strengthening the role of the CTD would have a positive impact in pushing ahead the DDA negotiations.  He hoped that Members would agree to submit the proposed decision to MC-8.  
&& The representative of Mauritius, on behalf of the ACP Group, welcomed the communication. She said that trade was an important engine for growth and development.  The WTO recognized that there was a need for positive efforts to ensure that developing countries, especially LDCs and SVEs, shared in the growth of international trade.  In accordance with this principle, it was necessary to strengthen the role of the CTD as a focal point for the consideration and coordination of development-related activities in the WTO, and to let it fulfil its role in monitoring the development dimension of WTO rules and activities.  The communication raised genuine concerns and issues which needed to be addressed within the Committee in order to allow developing countries, especially LDCs and SVEs, to further integrate into the multilateral trading system.  The ACP Group looked forward to a constructive engagement on all the issues raised in the communication.
&& The representative of the European Union said that the communication was rather ambitious in terms of legal form and substance.  She also observed that it had been circulated just a few weeks before MC-8.  She noted the proponents' interest in further strengthening the role of the CTD, including by broadening its purview.  Her delegation believed that such a proposal needed to be carefully considered, since it could reduce the purview of other regular Committees, and might also entail a legal review of the terms of reference of the CTD.  Because the proposal could have a legal and operational impact across the different fields of work of the organization, it was necessary for Members to have substantial discussions based on sound argumentation, and within a sufficient time‑frame. 
Given that one of the established tasks of the CTD was to review periodically, in consultation with the relevant bodies of the WTO, the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements, she wondered what the added value of the proposed language in the communication was.  On the specific references to RTAs, she said that Members should avoid creating confusion regarding the application of the provisions established by the TM for RTAs.  This Mechanism governed the transparency procedures for all RTAs, which were to be similarly applied in the CRTA and in the CTD.  Any modification and clarification of relevant provisions were being dealt with in the review process of the Mechanism.  With regard to the proponents' interest in looking into cross-cutting elements, trends and practices in RTAs affecting developing countries and LDCs, her delegation was of the view that this work would be more appropriately undertaken in the context of the RTA's work programme that the EU and other Members were pursuing in the CRTA.  Turning to the proposals relating to the Monitoring Mechanism and the S&D Agreement-specific proposals, she said that the EU was open to discuss these as one of the DDA-related issues that could be fruitfully negotiated in 2012. 
She concluded by noting that her delegation was open to discuss proposals to revitalize the CTD. The EU believed that it was important that the CTD's agenda contained up to date issues relevant to development, especially for the benefit of LDCs and other weak and vulnerable economies.
&& The representative of Ecuador said that his delegation agreed with the importance that the proponents attached to preserving and making effective the CTD's mandate.  His delegation believed that the revitalization of the CTD would have a positive impact on international trade and would also ensure the proper functioning of the multilateral trading system.  
&& The representative of Argentina said that it was important to re-evaluate and revitalize the CTD's activities. It was also necessary to emphasize that the CTD was the appropriate forum for the consideration of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  He expressed support for the communication.    
&& The representative of India congratulated the proponents for having put forward a comprehensive proposal for MC-8.  The proposal - which addressed development issues in the multilateral trading system - had come at a time when developing countries had begun to realize the futility of the WTO in addressing their concerns.  Developing countries felt that the system remained unbalanced and biased in favour of the developed countries.  The proposal highlighted the importance of mainstreaming development issues into the global architecture of trade, so as to ensure that these critical issues were not put aside.  The focus of the proposal was on strengthening the development pillar in the multilateral trading system - and in particular the CTD, which was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on all development issues in the system.  The communication had come at an opportune time, when systematic attempts were being made from some quarters to undermine the role of the CTD and weaken the pillar that was supposed to protect the issues of interest of developing countries and LDCs. 
His delegation was of the view that all Members must stand united to protect the CTD and strengthen it further so that it would be able to deliver on its mandate.  The proposal underlined important issues and steps to be taken in this regard.  The background information put the spotlight on the issues of prime importance to developing countries, and the attempts being made to undermine the role of the CTD.  Directions from Ministers could go a long way in not only strengthening and consolidating the role of CTD, but also providing the much needed confidence to developing countries about their place in the WTO.  His delegation was in consonance with the Ministerial language in the proposal.  Finally, he said that his delegation remained committed to the cause of the developing countries.  India had consistently championed the need for mainstreaming development into the WTO and had voiced concerns over this neglect in various WTO bodies.  It would continue to raise these issues in the interest of developing countries.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation fully supported the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system.  She noted, however, that Members were not fully exploiting the current mandate of the CTD.  While the Committee was experiencing difficulties on some issues at the present time, she indicated that this should not overshadow the good work that was being done in other areas, for example on the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs.  The US was impressed with the increasing participation of developing countries in international trade, as laid out in the Secretariat paper that would be discussed under agenda item H.  This implied that developing countries were faring well in the current system.
She referred to paragraph 3 of the communication, which suggested that the CTD had not been consulted on a range of development-related issues that had been taken up in other WTO bodies.  In this regard, she said that the US' understanding was that all developing Members could participate in the technical committees of the WTO.  While an issue could be referred to the CTD, the technical nature of some issues made it more suitable to have them reviewed in a technical Committee.  She next turned to paragraph 5 of the communication, which noted that the CTD did not fully exploit and capitalize on its mandate to consider a wide range of issues.  One example given was the CTD's inability to report on the utilization of S&D provisions. In response, she said that the issue of S&D was being discussed in the CTD's Special Session.  She encouraged developing countries to raise any concerns they may have with S&D in the Special Session.  Moving on to paragraph 6 of the communication, she said that the language seemed to indicate that the Monitoring Mechanism was not meant to replace or duplicate work on the Agreement-specific proposals.  The US was in agreement with this.  However, she noted in contrast that the proposed Ministerial decision suggested that the discussion on the Monitoring Mechanism should take place within the parameters of paragraph 44 of the Doha Declaration.
She observed that paragraph 7 of the communication contained references to non-tariff barriers (NTBs) in the context of the Enabling Clause. In this regard, she said that the US' reading of the Enabling Clause was that there had not been any rules established on NTBs.  Some clarification from the proponents was sought on this.  She added that the US fully recognized the right of developing countries to waive Article I of GATT 1994.  She also agreed with the comments made by the EU on the RTAs TM. 
She noted with concern that the communication seemed to be proposing an expansion of the mandate of the CTD.  The US believed that the CTD's current mandate already provided broad flexibility to bring new proposals to the table.  Furthermore, with respect to the proposal for the CTD to prepare additional reports, the US' view was that there was already a substantial amount of information in the existing CTD reports.  She gave as examples the LDCs market access paper that was prepared by the Secretariat for discussion in the Sub-Committee on LDCs, as well as the Secretariat paper to be considered at the present meeting under agenda item H.  The US was therefore reluctant at the present time to consider having any additional report in the CTD.  She suggested that it may be more useful to discuss existing reports in more detail.  Finally, she noted that the last paragraph of the proposed Ministerial decision mentioned the Agreement-specific proposals contained in Annex C of the draft Cancún Ministerial Declaration.  Since the Cancún Ministerial Declaration had not been adopted, the US had some concerns with this paragraph of the proposed Ministerial decision.
&& The representative of El Salvador agreed with the proponents that the WTO had an important role to play in addressing the challenges faced by developing countries in the current economic climate.  Given the vast number of global challenges facing developing countries, his delegation believed that S&D provisions, as well as the initiatives put forward to deal with them, were highly relevant.  As a country with a small economy, El Salvador wished to express its interest in pushing forward the communication.  His delegation therefore wished to voice its support for the objectives targeted by the African and Arab Groups in the communication.  He also expressed support for the overall thrust of the communication, since it contained elements and ideas that could prove beneficial to all developing countries.
He stressed that the CTD served as the focal point for the consideration and coordination of all development‑related activities in the WTO.  His delegation believed that if the Committee was to play its central role in development‑related activities in an effective manner, it was necessary to ensure as far as possible that there was no overlap with the functions and areas of competence of other WTO bodies.  He emphasized how important it was for the CTD to monitor activities relating to the implementation of S&D provisions on a regular basis and to be able to provide guidance and recommendations to the General Council for appropriate action.  El Salvador supported the initiative to establish the Monitoring Mechanism and to finalize pending matters so that these could be incorporated into the regular activities of the CTD.  He also underscored the need for the proposed Ministerial decision to reaffirm the CTD's role in implementing the procedures in the RTAs TM for RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  Finally, he agreed with the proponents in highlighting the importance of the Agreement-specific proposals contained in Annex C of the draft Cancún Ministerial Declaration.  His delegation hoped to continue sharing ideas with the proponents so as to clear the path for the adoption of the proposed decision by Ministers at MC-8.
&& The representative of Australia said that an increasingly integrated global economy provided a powerful engine for poverty reduction and development.  Increased openness to trade could pose challenges to developing countries, and these challenges needed to be addressed.  Nevertheless, the linkage between an open multilateral trading system and development was overwhelmingly positive.  Australia acknowledged that an increasingly integrated global economy alone was not enough.  Trade needed to be fully integrated into countries' development strategies.  Many supply-side constraints and behind-the-border issues needed to be tackled.  These were rightfully a central concern of the WTO. This was the framework through which Australia would examine proposals on development issues for MC-8.  In fact, this was the framework within which Australia saw work on development in the WTO as a whole.  Australia would always be asking how the work of the WTO helped Members to harness trade for real development benefits, including through economic growth, poverty reduction, and the generation of more and better quality jobs.  His delegation stood ready to participate in any discussion on these issues.
He next turned to the communication under consideration.  He noted that it was proposed in the communication that Ministers instruct the CTD to report on how it could improve its operation and effectiveness within the WTO.  There were a number of assertions that the CTD's work had been disrupted and that its mandate had been infringed upon.  Australia saw the CTD as an important member of the family of WTO committees, which considered a range of real and important trade and development issues.  Australia did not dispute that there remained work to be done in order to harness trade for development, and was open to ideas from Members on how the WTO could further this objective.  However, his delegation was not sure that the report suggested in the communication was a necessary addition to the existing mandate of the CTD. 
Turning to the paragraphs in the proposed decision which centred on on-going discussions between Members on RTA notification issues, he observed that the discussion on this matter at the present meeting demonstrated that the membership was far from reaching consensus.  It was therefore difficult to see how Ministers could be expected to take a decision at MC-8.  He also noted that the proposed decision had Ministers directing the CTD to submit a report on cross-cutting elements, trends and practices in RTAs among developing and least-developed Members.  Australia was not convinced that the work suggested for this report could not be undertaken in the CRTA.  Indeed, a number of developed and developing Members had submitted a proposal for a similar work programme covering all RTAs.  His delegation was not sure why the proponents would not want work on RTAs to be carried out in a holistic way so that it included all agreements.  This specific aspect of the proposed decision could not be supported by Australia.  Finally, he noted that the proposed decision made reference to the adoption of an unspecified number of the Agreement-specific proposals found in Annex C of the draft Cancún Ministerial Declaration.  Australia remained open to discuss this.  However, it sought more information from the proponents on why the number of Agreement-specific proposals was not specified, and if any of the Cancún Agreement-specific proposals were a priority.
&& The representative of Canada said that it was unclear that there was a need to strengthen the role of the CTD along the lines suggested in the communication. More could be done under the existing mandate, including with respect to existing reports.  He also noted that the CTD had specific sessions dealing with areas such as Aid for Trade and the Work Programme on Small Economies.  Furthermore, the monitoring of the implementation of S&D provisions was an issue being dealt with in the negotiations on a Monitoring Mechanism under the ambit of the Special Session of the CTD. It would be premature to prejudge these discussions.  In a related manner, Canada had reservations with respect to mandating the CTD to monitor other WTO bodies.  He added that his delegation was not in a position to accept the text in the communication referring to paragraph 44 of the Doha Declaration in relation to the Monitoring Mechanism.  This issue remained under negotiation in the Special Session of the CTD, and Canada had made its position on the mandate clear from the start.  This had been reinforced by the Ambassador's Group Guiding Principles.  Finally, he said that his delegation was not in a position to agree to the proposed language on RTAs in the communication.  In Canada's view, the language undermined the critical role played by the CRTA in reviewing relevant RTAs, thereby weakening the transparency role played by the WTO with regard to RTAs.
&& The representative of Mexico welcomed the proponents' initiative to revitalize the CTD.  He said that he did have some concerns with respect to the implications for the mandates of other WTO committees.  He believed that further work was required on the issues in the communication, and indicated his delegation's willingness to participate in discussions.
&& The representative of Hong Kong, China, said that his delegation saw the CTD as an extremely important member of the family of WTO committees.  Hong Kong, China was interested in discussing specific ideas from any delegation on how the CTD could be strengthened or revitalized within its own mandate.  With respect to the communication under consideration, he indicated that Members should be mindful of the existing balance between the CTD and other WTO bodies which had their own mandate and were discharging their responsibilities positively and dutifully.  His delegation welcomed further elaborations and clarifications by the proponents on this aspect of their communication.  He also noted that the proposed Ministerial decision indicated that the CTD should submit a report on cross-cutting elements, trends and practices in RTAs among developing and least‑developed countries.  In this regard, he indicated that the CRTA's mandate was unambiguous.  Members needed to bear in mind that the proposed language in the communication could have implications on how the CRTA undertook its work within its own mandate.
&& The representative of Cuba said that his delegation supported the communication, which was in line with what was laid out in Article IV of the Marrakesh Agreement.   
&& The representative of Chile said that she agreed with the proponents that development lay at the heart of the WTO's work.  Nevertheless, her delegation had some concerns with the communication, for example with regard to a possible duplication of work between WTO bodies.  She added that the CRTA had a clear mandate with respect to RTAs, and that her delegation could not support the proposal concerning RTAs.
&& The representative of Kenya said that the proponents stood ready to engage with Members in order to move forward on the proposals made in the communication.
&& The representative of Egypt said that his understanding was that the annual reports of the various WTO bodies needed to be submitted to the General Council by 18 November 2011.  In this light, he wished to know the deadline that Members faced in order to obtain consensus on proposals for MC-8.  He went on to provide some reactions to the comments that had been made by Members on the communication.  He noted that there were different views among Members as to the ambition of the communication, and as to whether ambition was perceived positively or not.  He added that the African and Arab Groups had been pursuing their initiative for MC-8 according to the procedures laid out by the General Council Chairman.  In particular, the General Council Chairman had indicated that proposals for MC-8 needed to pass through the relevant Committees.  If the present meeting was the first meeting at which Members were considering the communication, this was because this was the first CTD meeting to be held after the circulation of the communication.
He said that there was no intention for the CTD to step into the mandate of other WTO bodies, or to duplicate work.  The proponents were more than willing to engage with interested Members to point out where it was felt that the CTD's terms of reference and mandate were not being adhered to.  He also said that paragraph 5 of the communication referred to the regular work of the CTD.  In this context, the CTD had not been able to report on the utilization of S&D since 2002.  This issue was different from the negotiations taking place under paragraph 44 of the Doha Declaration.  With regard to the Monitoring Mechanism, he emphasized that the reference to it in the draft decision in no way pre-judged the outcome of negotiations.  He added that the 2002 decision concerning the Monitoring Mechanism mentioned that Members would take into account the suggestions made by the African Group.  His delegation was, however, open to discuss these points with Members.  With regard to the Guiding Principles which guided the negotiations on the Monitoring Mechanism, he said that these were not exhaustive and did not have any legal value.
On the language in the draft decision relating to the RTAs TM, he said that the intention was not for the CTD to undertake work that was mandated to the NGR.  The text, inter alia, reiterated that the RTAs TM was being implemented on a provisional basis and also recalled that the TM procedures were to be applied without pre-judging the substance of the notified RTA.  Finally, on the language concerning the Cancún Agreement-specific proposals in the last sentence of the draft decision, he said that these Agreement-specific proposals had been agreed to by Members on an ad referendum basis.  He recognized that a specific number of Agreement-specific proposals to be adopted by Ministers at MC-8 had not been included in the draft decision.  While Members could provide a number if they so wished, he observed that the sentence did not necessarily require a specific number.
&& The representative of the United States indicated that there were a number of issues mentioned in the communication on which there was as yet no consensus among Members.  Her delegation was ready to work with the proponents on their initiative. 
&& The Chairman encouraged the proponents to engage with the Members that had raised questions or concerns, in order to make progress on the proposal.  The CTD's annual report to the General Council would mention that the communication had been considered by the Committee. With regard to the process moving towards MC-8, he said that the General Council Chairman had indicated that the deadline for consensus on decisions was 2 November.  There was also a deadline of 18 November for the submission of the annual reports of the General Council's subsidiary bodies.
&& The representative of Jordan said that he still did not have clarity as to what was to happen to proposed decisions for MC-8.
&& The Chairman once again made reference to the 2 November deadline for decisions.  In the case of the communication that had been considered under the present agenda item, he reiterated that mention would be made of it in the CTD's annual report.    
&& The Committee took note of the communication, and of all interventions.    
PARTICIPATION OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN THE MULTILATERAL TRADING SYSTEM (WT/COMTD/W/181)
&& The Chairman said that the CTD had a mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  He recalled that it had been agreed at the 81st Session that the CTD's discussion under this agenda item would take place at the present meeting, based on a background paper prepared by the Secretariat.  He invited the Secretariat to introduce the paper, which had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/181.  
&& The Chief Statistician provided a broad summary of the information contained in the Secretariat paper.  As part of his presentation, he indicated that developing economies' trade rebounded quicker than that of developed countries following the economic crisis of 2008.  Before the economic crisis, the participation of developing economies in global trade was already at an historic high.  Subsequent to the crisis, the share of developing economies continued to rise.  In terms of merchandise exports, developing economies accounted for more than 40 per cent of world trade in 2010.  This was ten percentage points higher than in 2000. 
With regard to the regional distribution, he pointed to a significant amount of heterogeneity among developing economies.  Developing Asia accounted for the bulk of developing economies' trade.  In Africa and the Middle East, trade performance was subject to large fluctuations, due to fluctuations in commodity prices.  Latin America had a strong trade performance in 2010.  Overall, South-South trade had risen significantly between 2008 and 2010.  It presently accounted for 49 per cent of developing economies' exports.  Developing economies' share in global commercial services trade had also risen, though the importance of participation varied by services sector.  For detailed data on developing economies' trade he invited Members to consult the annexes to the Secretariat paper.  He also said that more information on market access for LDCs was available in another paper that had been prepared by the Secretariat for discussion in the Sub-Committee on LDCs and which was contained in document WT/COMTD/LDC/W/51.  Finally, he said that the Secretariat was projecting merchandise export volume to grow in 2011 by 8.7 per cent for developing economies and by 3.7 per cent for developed economies. 
&& The representative of Australia said that his delegation had taken note that developing countries' trade, and in particular South-South trade, was growing in importance.  However, the share of LDCs' trade, particularly in commercial services, remained small.  For LDCs, as well as for some other developing countries, there remained a lot to be done to address supply-side constraints, to improve trade performance and competitiveness, and to maximize the growth potential of trade.  This demonstrated the importance of the Aid-for-Trade agenda.  His delegation appreciated the long-term historical data that the Secretariat paper provided, and believed that it would be useful for future versions of the paper to similarly provide statistics over several years.  As for the forecast data that had been provided, Australia was interested in exploring how this could be broken down by sub‑groups of developing countries, given the considerable heterogeneity that existed within the larger developing country group.
&& The representative of the European Union regretted that, in light of the heavy agenda for the present meeting, there was not enough time to properly discuss the Secretariat paper.  She said that the paper confirmed the growing role of developing countries in global trade.  Compared to previous economic crises, the share of developing countries in global trade actually increased between 2008 and 2010.  This clearly pointed to the increased resilience of many developing countries, which had become less vulnerable to external shocks.  It was a very positive development that the EU welcomed.  South-South trade now accounted for about half of developing economies' merchandise exports.  It was thus safe to say that not only were developing countries participating actively in the multilateral trading system, they had actually become a key driver.  This trend would likely continue in the future.
She noted, however, that the picture was not a uniform one, as not all developing countries had seen an improvement in their trading performance.  The main drivers and beneficiaries were emerging economies and the Asian region - in particular China, which accounted for a quarter of all developing country trade.  LDCs and other developing countries most in need had seen very little or no progress, including in the context of South-South trade.  For these reasons, it was essential that emerging countries assumed their full responsibilities towards LDCs and other developing countries most in need.  She noted that responsibilities must come hand in hand with greater transparency. Although country-specific information was provided in the annexes to the Secretariat paper, she said that it would be useful to include more disaggregated information and analysis in the report.  This would net out the effects of outliers - notably very strong performers that tended to bias the overall picture of developing country trade.  The EU would also welcome more analysis and discussion on the reasons for the high performance in developing Asia, including its resilience during the crisis.  This could provide useful lessons to others, and would provide possible avenues to discuss real trade and development challenges faced by Members.
&& The representative of India said that the Secretariat paper came at an appropriate time, when there was significant activity in the run-up to MC-8.  With respect to the title of the Secretariat paper, he said that he wanted to quote from the economist John Whalley who had said that "when applied to global trade arrangements, the term 'system' implies a coordinated and well-organized set of rules and institutions that oversee and regulate world trade".  In this light, his delegation felt that the discussion under the present agenda item should be based on the effectiveness of the WTO system in addressing the concerns of developing countries and analyzing their participation. 
He went on to say that the current global trading system was not a monolithic structure, but was comprised of several overlapping and - in certain ways - conflicting pieces.  The overarching piece of the system was the GATT/WTO framework that had been shaped over more than 60 years of continuous negotiations over trade liberalization, as well as over new rules and laws that governed the framework itself.  The second piece was composed of bilateral and regional trade agreements that increasingly included deeper measures of political and economic integration such as monetary, fiscal, environmental, and even military policies.  The third group included unilateral arrangements such as the voluntary export restraints, and certain preference programmes for developing countries.
&& The Secretariat had compiled detailed facts relating to the trade figures of developing countries.  The report made the general observation that despite the slow or negative growth in  developed economies, the developing countries and LDCs had succeeded in bouncing back to almost pre-2008 levels on account of the trade diversion in favour of South-South trade.  The stimulus packages in the developing countries, especially in the Asian economies, had helped to compensate for the loss of trade directed to the developed countries.  While appreciating the Secretariat's work, his delegation believed that the analysis would not be comprehensive and complete if it did not reflect a number of points.
He noted firstly in this regard that the paper mentioned the positive experiences in many developing countries on account of short-term favourable trends, for example in commodity and fuel prices.  However, there was an absence of information on the stable determinants of growth such as domestic capital formation and savings as a proportion of gross domestic product (GDP).  His delegation felt that it was necessary to analyze these points if the global trading system was to provide an empowering voice and influence for developing countries.  He added that it was necessary to look at the role of RTAs and special arrangements like DFQF schemes.  Furthermore, an analysis of the contribution of the programmes carried out under the aegis of the WTO - for example Aid-for-Trade and capacity-building activities - would be useful, in particular to see whether these programmes had indeed strengthened the supply-side capacities of developing countries and provided them with the strength to sustain any future shocks like a sudden drop in commodity prices.  He noted that the paper gave factual information relating to the regional distribution of trade.  However, it would have been more useful if the paper had also provided an insight into the weaknesses of these regions in mainstreaming trade into national development.  In conclusion, he said that an analysis of certain critical aspects of interest to developing countries would have provided food for thought to policy makers in developing countries when planning appropriate policy responses.
&& The representative of the United States said that the Secretariat paper provided a clear indication that the face of international trade was changing rapidly.  The increasing importance of developing countries to the international trading system would help form the basis for future thinking on the direction of work in the WTO across a broad range of issues.  On a more technical level, she requested the Secretariat to clarify the criteria used in Annex 8 to designate developed countries.  She also asked why the Newly Industrialized Countries (NICs) had been broken out from developing Asia, and why the EU was not treated as a single trading block.  With respect to paragraph 23, which noted that Bangladesh and Viet Nam had registered outstanding export performances in manufacturers, she wished to know which manufacturing sectors in particular drove this export performance.  Turning to paragraph 27, she said that her delegation had noted with interest that developing economies' manufactured exports had increased by 8 per cent between 2008 and 2010, and that the share of manufactures in developing economies' exports rose from 58 per cent to 62 per cent.  While this demonstrated developing countries' strong performance in manufactured goods trade, she said that it would be helpful to have greater detail on the specific sectors covered.  Turning to Chart 7, which had a large "other manufactures" category, she asked whether the Secretariat could provide a further breakdown of this category.  Finally, with respect to paragraph 46, she suggested that the Secretariat clearly define Foreign Affiliates Trade Statistics (FATS) in a footnote. 
&& The Chief Statistician said that the comments by Members had been taken note of.  With respect to the question as to which manufacturing sectors had driven the export performance of LDCs in Asia, he said that it was mainly labour-intensive manufactures.  He noted that it was difficult to provide disaggregated forecasts, particularly for small economies.  However, efforts would nevertheless be made to at least provide some insight to Members in the future, even if it was not possible to do so in the report itself.  On the suggestion to expand the Secretariat's analysis beyond trade figures, he noted that the Secretariat was not in itself equipped to undertake such analysis.  However, steps had been taken in this direction in collaboration with other agencies.  One example was the recent publication with the Institute of Developing Economies — Japan External Trade Organization (IDE-JETRO) on production patterns in Asia and the global supply chain.  Other examples concerned the WTO's collaboration with the OECD in monitoring the impact of Aid for Trade, or the collaboration with the UN in monitoring the Millennium Development Goals.  Some of the results of these collaborative efforts could be presented to Members in the future.
&& The representative of Australia said that he wished to register his delegation's interest in continuing discussion at a future meeting of the Committee on the issues that had been raised under the present agenda item.
&& The Committee took note of the Secretariat paper, and of all interventions.
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT FOR 2011 (WT/COMTD/W/183)
&& The Chairman said that the CTD's draft annual report for 2011 to the General Council had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/183.  The report covered the work of the CTD's Regular Session and Dedicated Session on Small Economies, the CTD's work on Aid for Trade, and the work of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  He noted that the draft report contained a number of square brackets on items which were to be considered at meetings that took place after the draft was circulated.  This included the 62nd Session of the Sub-Committee on LDCs held on 8 November and the CTD's 22nd Session on Aid for Trade held on 10 November, as well as the present Regular Session.  As part of the process of adopting the report, the square brackets would be removed, and the discussion that took place at these meetings would be appropriately reflected in the report. 
With regard to the 62nd Session of the Sub-Committee on LDCs, he highlighted that the CTD's annual report would mention that it was agreed that the Chairman of the Sub-Committee would hold small-group informal consultations to make as much progress as possible on the proposal concerning a decision on the accession of LDCs to the WTO.  With regard to the CTD's 22nd Session on Aid for Trade, the report would reference the Aid-for-Trade work programme for 2012 and 2013 that was to be submitted to the General Council.  A reference would also be provided to the communication from Barbados - on behalf of the SVEs - that was considered at the 22nd Session on Aid for Trade.  He added that CTD's annual report contained a report on the Third Global Review of Aid for Trade, which had been held on 18 and 19 July 2011.  Finally, with regard to the CTD's Regular Session, he said that the annual report would report on the discussion that had taken place on the various items considered at the present meeting.  This would include, among other things, a report on the Technical Assistance and Training Plan for 2012 and 2013, as well as a report on the discussion concerning the proposal by the African and Arab Groups on "Consolidating and mainstreaming development in the World Trade Organization".   
He went on to say that, subsequent to the circulation of the draft annual report, suggested amendments to the draft were provided in writing by China, Egypt and India.  These were initially faxed to Members and had subsequently been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/185.  In the context of the draft annual report, he also referred to a communication from the EU, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/184, in which it was indicated that the EU – like most other Members – was agreeable to the draft annual report that was circulated.  In order to find language that would be factual and acceptable to all, he said that he had held a brief informal consultation prior to the present meeting with a small group of Members on the amendments suggested by China, Egypt and India.  At the present time, he did not believe that there was the necessary consensus to adopt the annual report. He would, therefore, continue his informal consultations.  Once language that was agreeable had been found, a revised draft report would be circulated. 
&& The representative of the United States said that he sought clarification on the Aid-for-Trade work programme.  His understanding was that the work programme was to be submitted under the CTD Chairman's responsibility to the General Council.  The draft report, however, also mentioned that the work programme would be transmitted to MC-8.  He added that his delegation, like the EU, was in a position to adopt the annual report that had been circulated by the Secretariat. 
&& The Chairman said that the Aid-for-Trade work programme would be submitted to the General Council, and that the Council may decide to bring it to the attention of Ministers.
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation supported the draft annual report that had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/183.  Nevertheless, Japan would participate constructively in the informal consultations that the Chairman would be holding. 
&& The representative of Saudi Arabia referred to the last sentence of paragraph 3 in document WT/COMTD/W/183, which read:  "At the 82nd Session, Egypt called for an early resolution to the issues surrounding requests for observer status by intergovernmental organizations".  He specified that this was, in fact, the position of the Arab Group as well.   
The meeting was suspended.
The meeting was reconvened on 17 November 2011.
&& The Chairman said that, after the suspension of the meeting on 14 November, he had met with a number of delegations in a small-group format in order to explore various textual possibilities on the basis of the suggested amendments to the draft annual report.  The informal consultations had been useful in helping him to formulate language on the paragraphs in question.  The revised draft annual report - circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/183/Rev.1 - was the outcome of his consultations.  He said that he was aware that the language in the revised text was not perfectly in line with what each and every Member would have liked to see.  It was well known that there were some issues in the CTD on which Members had divergent views.  Nevertheless, he appealed to all Members to see the revised draft as an honest effort to strike a balance between the different positions of Members on certain issues.  He indicated that he personally saw the text in the revised draft as being balanced, and that was why it was being circulated.  He once again emphasized the importance of the annual report, and asked Members to consider adopting it.
Discussion continued in informal mode.
In switching back to formal mode, the Chairman said that the Committee had still not reached the necessary consensus to adopt its annual report.
&& The representative of the European Union said that her delegation was prepared to accept the revised draft as contained in document WT/COMTD/W/183/Rev.1.  She expressed regret that the report could not be adopted by the Committee.  The EU was wondering whether the report could nevertheless be transmitted to the General Council, along with a note from the CTD Chairman indicating that some Members had reservations on certain identified paragraphs.  This process would be without prejudice to Member's positions or their rights and obligations.   
&& The representative of Australia expressed his delegation's interest in considering the EU's proposal.  He emphasized the importance of bringing the CTD's work to the attention of the membership.
&& The representative of Egypt highlighted the importance of the CTD's work and regretted that the report could not be adopted.  He pointed to the rules of procedure of the CTD, which indicated that the General Council should be informed if the Committee could not reach consensus. Furthermore, according to rule 36bis of the CTD's rules of procedure, the EU's proposal could not be followed through.  He urged Members to stick to the rules of procedure.
&& The representative of Colombia added his voice to others who had expressed regret that the CTD could not adopt its annual report.  His delegation was willing to consider the EU's proposal.
&& The representative of Angola said that the concerns raised by Egypt needed to be taken into account.  He suggested that the US and Egypt work bilaterally, and report back to the Committee on any compromise found.
&& The representative of the United States reaffirmed his delegation's support for the original report as circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/183.  He also indicated the US' willingness to work with the Chairman in further consultations.
&& The representative of Mexico, while expressing understanding for Members' positions, regretted that the CTD could not adopt its annual report.  He wondered whether the CTD Chairman could write a letter to the General Council, outlining the CTD's activities in 2011, and also highlighting the issues on which language could not be agreed upon.
&& The representative of India said that the CTD was an important pillar in the WTO architecture. His delegation was concerned that the role of the Committee was being undermined.  He urged Members to show restraint and work towards finding consensus.
&& The representative of Pakistan wondered whether it may be possible to put the text on which there was no agreement in square brackets.  This would at least allow a report to be transmitted to the General Council.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation recognized the value of the CTD's annual report.  This was why it had been participating in various consultations in order to try and find compromise language.  He expressed regret that Members were not able to achieve consensus, but indicated his delegation's willingness to continue to work towards finding a solution.
&& The Chairman said that he remained optimistic that some compromise language could be found with respect to the annual report.  He would continue his informal consultations.
The meeting was suspended.
The meeting was reconvened on 18 November 2011. 
&& The Chairman informed Members that his consultations had still not allowed consensus to be reached.  A brief discussion followed on the deadlines for submission of the annual reports to the General Council.
The meeting was suspended.
The meeting was reconvened on 25 November 2011.
&& The Chairman said that he wished to brief Members on the status of discussions on the CTD's annual report.  He indicated that discussions in recent consultations - in which the Director-General had participated - had been on paragraph 9, and in particular the placement of a sentence in that paragraph.  The proposal made in the consultations had been to remove the sentence in question from paragraph 9, and to place it in a new paragraph 9bis.  Paragraph 9 would then read as follows:  "The RTA notifications concerning the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union, the ASEAN‑Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement continued to be discussed in the CTD during 2011.  The communication from China, Egypt and India titled 'Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council Customs Union' (WT/COMTD/W/175) was presented.  During the 81st, 82nd and 83rd Sessions these Members also raised a number of specific and systemic concerns over the legal and procedural implications of RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.  The Chairman's consultations on these issues remained inconclusive".
As for paragraph 9bis, it would read as follows:  "Members continued to express divergent views on how to address the issues relating to the RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV and their implications".  He expressed his hope that the Committee could now adopt the CTD's annual report.  He went on to say that he did not see any requests for the floor, and that the annual report could therefore be adopted.
&& The representative of Egypt said that, before his delegation could be in a position to adopt the annual report, it wished to know the status of the other paragraphs - namely, paragraphs 3, 10 and 13 - on which China, Egypt and India had raised concerns and made suggestions.
&& The Chairman responded that these paragraphs would remain as had been discussed in the recent consultations in which the Director-General had participated.  At the request of Egypt, he read out the text of these paragraphs. Paragraph 3 was read out as follows: "The CTD continues to have outstanding requests for observer status from the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting (GOIC), the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement.  At the 82nd and 83rd Sessions, the Arab Group called for an early resolution to the issues surrounding requests for observer status by intergovernmental organizations, specifically highlighting the League of Arab States, according to the existing rules of procedure.  Other Members felt that this was a broader, cross-cutting issue". 
With respect to paragraph 10, he said that this paragraph would be moved to a new section at the end of the report which would be titled "Final Remarks". He read out the new paragraph as follows:  "In January 2011, following a request from the Chairman of the Negotiating Group on Rules, the Chairman of the CTD provided a brief statement, in his own capacity, of the CTD's experience in implementing the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs (JOB/RL/2)".  Finally, he read out the text of paragraph 13 as follows:  "The Decision taken at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference on DFQF market access for LDCs remains a standing item on the CTD's agenda.  Information was shared and clarification was sought on the steps being taken by Members to provide DFQF market access to LDCs' products, including in respect of preferential rules of origin.  The LDCs took the floor at each of the formal meetings of the CTD, calling for an expeditious and faithful implementation of the Decision". 
&& The representatives of Jordan and Saudi Arabia indicated that the proposed language on paragraph 3 was satisfactory to their delegations, and to the Arab Group.
&& The representative of Egypt said that paragraph 3 appropriately reflected the position of the Arab Group.  However, his recollection from the recent informal consultations was that a Member had wanted the last sentence that read "Other Members felt that this was a broader, cross-cutting issue" to be deleted.  He added that, in the view of this delegation, this phrase did not correctly capture what had transpired in the CTD.  Nevertheless, his delegation was open to further discussions on this point.  With regard to the textual proposal on paragraph 10, as well as the suggestion to move the paragraph to the end of the report, he believed that the consultations had not been exhaustive.  His delegation had been satisfied with an earlier drafting suggestion by the Secretariat.  On paragraph 13, he indicated that his delegation was willing to show flexibility.  Finally, moving to paragraph 9bis, he said that the language that had been shared with Members at the present meeting did not reflect what had been shared earlier with his delegation.  In particular, his delegation's understanding had been that the words "consider and" would appear before "address" in the sentence. In this light, he was not in a position to adopt the CTD's annual report at the present meeting.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation was willing to show flexibility in having a one-sentence paragraph 9bis, provided that the words "consider and" appeared before "address" in the sentence.  Like Egypt, it had been China's understanding that this would be the case.  He was, therefore, not in a position to adopt the CTD's annual report at the present meeting.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation had worked constructively with Members in order to have consensus on the four outstanding paragraphs.  However, he was not in a position to adopt the CTD's annual report at the present meeting, since it had been his delegation's understanding that the words "consider and" would appear before "address" in the sentence in paragraph 9bis.   
&& The representative of the European Union said that her delegation had shown flexibility throughout the discussions on the annual report.  In particular, the EU had been willing to accept the various revisions and textual proposals that had been discussed.  The text on the table at the present meeting was also acceptable to her delegation.  She urged Members to adopt the annual report.
&& The representative of the United States said that it was his understanding that the annual report had been adopted, since the Chairman had indicated so and had gavelled upon it.  He welcomed any clarification from the Chairman on this point.
&& The Chairman said that it had appeared from the informal consultations that the proposals on paragraphs 3, 10 and 13 were acceptable to the participating delegations.  As for paragraph 9bis, he recognized that the process of consultations had included discussions on various textual proposals.
&& The representative of Egypt asked whether the Chairman could provide clarification on the point raised by the US - namely, on whether the annual report had been adopted by the Committee.
&& The Chairman said that he had indeed gavelled.  However, Egypt had subsequently requested the floor.  He had welcomed the intervention from Egypt, as he would have from any Member.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation was in a position to adopt the CTD's annual report with the language that had been circulated at the present meeting. 
&& The representative of Egypt explained that he had not been in a position to request to speak before the Chairman gavelled, as he had been listening to the translation.  When he took the floor, he had raised a number of reservations.  Therefore, it was his delegation's understanding that the annual report, and in particular the proposal on paragraph 9, had not been adopted.  He added that his delegation was concerned that the textual proposals that had been made at the present meeting reflected only the suggestions of some Members.  While his delegation could accept the proposals on paragraphs 3 and 13, concerns remained on paragraphs 9 and 10.  He would have liked to see other contributions on these paragraphs being reflected.  He also expressed concern that the language on paragraph 9bis which had been discussed with his delegation before the present meeting had not been circulated to the larger membership.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that every delegation had the right to point to any factual errors or omissions in an annual report.  At the same time, he called on all Members to show the necessary flexibility to adopt the CTD's report. 
&& The representative of Colombia said that her delegation attached great importance to the CTD's annual report.  She called on Members to show the flexibility that would allow the report to be adopted.
&& The Chairman said that the CTD's annual report was not legally binding on Members.  He added that the textual proposals that had been shared at the present meeting were not meant to reflect the position of any Member or Members.  These reflected the proposals of the Chairman and of the Director-General.
&& The representative of the European Union said that Members should have faith in the efforts of the Chairman and the Director-General.  The EU had shown flexibility in trying to accommodate the concerns of Members, and called on others to do the same.
&& The representative of Mexico emphasized the importance of the CTD's annual report, particularly in the year of a Ministerial Conference.  He agreed with the Chairman that the annual report did not create any obligations on Members.  He called on Members to show flexibility.
&& The Chairman asked whether the annual report could be adopted.
&& The representatives of China and Egypt indicated that their delegations were not in a position to adopt the annual report. 
In response to a suggestion by the representative of the European Union that Members be given until the close-of-business on 25 November 2011 to adopt the annual report, reservations were expressed by the representative of Egypt.  The representative of Jordan suggested that Members be given enough time to allow the eventual adoption of the annual report.  The representative of Nigeria suggested that the CTD could meet again to adopt its annual report.
&& The representative of Chile asked whether the adoption of the report was subject to the approval of paragraph 9.
&& The Chairman said that there were apparently other paragraphs on which further discussion was required.  
The meeting was suspended.
The meeting was reconvened on 28 November 2011.
&& The Chairman said that his consultations had led to convergence on the outstanding paragraphs.  The Committee was, therefore, in a position to adopt its annual report.  Noticing that Egypt was requesting the floor, he asked whether the representative of Egypt could make his intervention after the report was adopted. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that his instructions were to make his intervention before the adoption of the annual report.  He said that his delegation had consistently argued for a factual report that gave an accurate, realistic and precise account of the activities and deliberations that had taken place in the CTD in 2011.  An annual report that was both accurate and factual should not have been a preoccupation or a source of contention for the CTD.  On the contrary, it should have been a simple and straightforward exercise to be undertaken on the basis of what actually took place in the Committee.  Egypt did not share the views of some Members that felt that it was sufficient to include one phrase to capture the extensive discussions that had taken place over a vast array of systemic issues.  This would have served the interests of some, but would have fallen short of factually capturing what the CTD had deliberated extensively on. Egypt's view was that the CTD should produce a report that was both representative and lived up to its terms of reference as the focal point for the consideration of all development work undertaken in the WTO. 
He went on to say that the annual report was neither a legal document nor a statement of position that should be used to propagate the views of some.  Rather it should only reflect the deliberations that took place in the CTD as reflected in the minutes of its proceedings.  His delegation was therefore disappointed to witness that the draft report fell short of reflecting the numerous specific and systemic issues that had been raised by Members.  Egypt, along with China and India, had sought to rectify this situation in an attempt to give a factual account to Ministers on the nature and diversity of the discussions that had taken place in the CTD over the systemic implications of RTAs with dual notification status.  The three delegations had also accepted with an open mind the fact that there were divergent views expressed on a number of issues, including the appropriate manner to consider RTAs with dual notification status; the legal and procedural implications of the specific and systemic issues raised with respect to the application of  the TM for RTAs;  the CTD's mandate;  the scope of application of the Enabling Clause;  and the inconsistencies that had been maintained with respect to the implementation of the 1995 General Council decision on the avoidance of procedural and institutional duplication. 
He noted, however, that divergences between Members should not be an excuse to not report factually in the annual report.  His delegation believed that all the issues raised in the CTD should have been captured and presented uniformly, with no asymmetries.  Members should not shy away from highlighting their differences.  All the issues that had been raised in the CTD needed to receive the same priority, and no attempts should have been made to place any weights or rank development issues.  It was Members' responsibility to ensure that Ministers had an opportunity to take note of the extensive discussions that had taken place in the CTD. 
Despite the numerous informal consultations that had been held, his delegation believed that the annual report was far from being factually representative.  In fact, his delegation had expressed its reservations on the way the process had been conducted and what had been agreed to during the informal consultations led by the CTD Chairman.  He said that he would not repeat these concerns and reservations, for they had been relayed formally to the Director-General by the Permanent Representatives of China, India and Egypt.  It was hoped that these shortcomings would be avoided in any future work to be undertaken in the CTD or any informal consultations led by its Chairman.  He recalled that at one point in the discussion on the annual report, the Secretariat had been able to provide a compromise proposal that was accurate and representative, as well as factual.  However, it was unfortunate that some Members had decided not to agree to this proposal, thereby prolonging further any prospects for a compromise. 
In conclusion, he said that the annual report did not capture what his delegation would have hoped to see in an annual report of the CTD.  His delegation was not satisfied with the report and was not in a position to support it.  Nevertheless, in keeping with the utmost restraint and flexibility that Egypt had shown throughout the discussions on the annual report, he indicated that the intention was not to block the adoption of the report.  He noted that if there was still any doubt as to why the Doha Round had failed on its development mandate, it would be advisable to consider the inability of Members to agree to a factual report on the CTD's work.
&& The Committee adopted its annual report for 2011.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation recognized the value of having an annual report for the CTD, especially in the year of a Ministerial Conference.  China had actively engaged in the Chairman's consultations and had demonstrated great flexibility, particularly with respect to paragraph 9.  He observed that the annual report should reflect the CTD's work in a factual and neutral way.  Although not fully comfortable with the draft, his delegation was willing to accept the compromise language in order to avoid a repetition of what had happened in 2010 with regard to the CTD's annual report.  However, the adoption of the annual report did not mean that the issue of dual notifications had been resolved.  He called on Members to actively engage in future consultations with the aim of finding a satisfactory solution.  He also expressed his hope that the Chairman and the Secretariat could play a neutral and objective role in the process.
&& The representative of India said that some Members were creating the impression that China, Egypt and India had been trying to block the adoption of the CTD's annual report, and that these delegations were trying to insert unnecessary and trivial issues into the report.  He emphasized the importance of development issues, and said that attempts had been made for several years to undermine the position of the CTD and the Enabling Clause.  The same attempts were being made in the adoption of the annual report.  China, Egypt and India were trying to protect the rights of developing countries, including their right to notify under the Enabling Clause.  He highlighted the flexibility and restraint that the three delegations had shown in adopting the annual report, even though they were not completely satisfied with it.  He called on Members to engage on substance so that the matter could be resolved as soon as possible.
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.  


__________
 The 83rd Session was reconvened on 17, 18, 25 and 28 November 2011 in order to consider agenda item I only.
 The report was issued as document WT/COMTD/74.









WT/COMTD/M/83 Page  PAGE 36



	WT/COMTD/M/83 	Page  PAGE 37



 

 

 

 



