WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/65
23 November 2007


(07-5158)


Committee on Trade and Development
Sixty-Fifth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 8 OCTOBER 2007

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)



 TOC \O "1-6" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493375" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC183493375 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493376" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC183493376 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc183493377" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc183493377 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc183493378" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc183493378 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493379" C.	report of the 40th session of the joint advisory group on the international trade centre unctad/wto (itc/ag(xl)/214)	 PAGEREF _TOC183493379 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493380" D.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC183493380 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493381" -	communication from brazil on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC183493381 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493382" -	communication from china on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC183493382 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493383" -	communication from india on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC183493383 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493384" -	communication from pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC183493384 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493385" -	communication from the european communities – responses to questions submitted by brazil, china, india and pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC183493385 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493386" -	amendment to the first agreement on trade negotiations among developing member countries of the economic and social commission for asia and the pacific (bangkok agreement) – notification by china (wt/comtd/n/22 – wt/comtd/62)	 PAGEREF _TOC183493386 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493387" E.	declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries	 PAGEREF _TOC183493387 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493388" -	statement by the chairman	 PAGEREF _TOC183493388 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493389" F.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (wt/l/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC183493389 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493390" G.	paragraph 51 of the doha declaration on identifying and debating developmental aspects of the negotiations, in order to help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected (wt/comtd/w/143/rev.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC183493390 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493391" H.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC183493391 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493392" I.	participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system	 PAGEREF _TOC183493392 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493393" -	statement by the chairman	 PAGEREF _TOC183493393 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493394" J.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC183493394 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493395" -	biennial technical assistance and training plan – 2008-2009  (wt/comtd/w/160 – to be issued):  information by the secretariat	 PAGEREF _TOC183493395 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493396" -	semi-annual review of the implementation of activities (1 january ‑ 30 june 2007) (wt/comtd/w/161)	 PAGEREF _TOC183493396 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC183493397" K.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC183493397 \H 14



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 65th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3065/Rev.1 issued on 3 October 2007. 
The agenda was adopted.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
REPORT OF THE 40TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XL)/214)
&& The Chairman invited Ms. Patricia Francis, Executive Director of the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), to present the report of the 40th Session of the Joint Advisory Group (JAG).
&& The Executive Director of the ITC said that the JAG had held its fortieth session from 25 to 27 April 2007.  The report of the meeting was contained in ITC document ITC/AG/(XL)/214.  She had the pleasure of submitting the report to the CTD – with a few remarks on the proceedings of the JAG meeting – on behalf of the JAG Chair, Ambassador Balihuta of Uganda.  She informed the Committee that the JAG meeting had a new interactive format, with panel sessions to consider issues of importance to each region.  In their opening statements, the Secretary General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the Director-General of the WTO had indicated that the ITC had their full support and continued to be a partner, given its focus on the business community.  In her own opening remarks, she had informed the JAG that the ITC had just embarked on an internal reform process.  The organization would firstly move from having strong products to delivering strategic solutions for its clients.  It would also work towards more holistic delivery, based on it's comparative and competitive advantage.  Finally, it would work with a range of partners, including UNCTAD, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the WTO, the World Bank and others, to develop an architecture for export development.
She said that the JAG had had before it the ITC's Annual Report, the ITC Programme Document and a Draft Strategic Framework for 2008 and 2009.  The Group had encouraged the ITC to proceed with its reform process and expressed wide support for the organization's efforts to have a more consolidated and strategic approach to its programme of work.  The ITC Programme Document was considered a good basis for the development of further strategic priorities for the organization.  Efforts to build strategic partnerships with other trade-related technical assistance (TRTA) providers were appreciated and the ITC's key role in implementing projects under the Enhanced Integrated Framework and Aid for Trade was recognized.  On strengthening governance and accountability, the Group had endorsed the suggestion to have a single trust fund for greater transparency, and had noted that the ITC would present a refined governance structure and a revised Programme Document at the next JAG meeting in December 2007.  Finally, she thanked the Governments of Canada, China, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, India, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland for their announcements of voluntary contributions to the ITC.
The Committee took note of the report of the 40th Session of the JAG and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.3)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the European Communities had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD on 11 May 2006.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4, respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would continue with his informal consultations on this matter and would report back to the Committee.  In this regard, he reported that his consultations had allowed some progress to be made on the matter, but it also appeared that more consultations, and more time, would be required before this item could be taken off the CTD's agenda.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor. 
&& The representative of Pakistan said that she wished to reiterate what her delegation had indicated at earlier meetings, namely that the EC's special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance did not comply with the requirements set out in paragraphs 2(a), 3(a) and 3(c) of the Enabling Clause.  She said that GSP schemes were required to be generalized, non-reciprocal and non-discriminatory.  They also needed to be designed to facilitate and promote the trade of developing countries and not raise barriers or create undue difficulties for the trade of any other Member.  The EC's scheme clearly did not fit under the umbrella of the Enabling Clause as envisaged by the membership.  She added that her delegation had as yet not received responses to the second set of questions that had been posed to the EC.  She also observed that the EC's scheme was supposed to undergo a review in 2007, and her delegation had expectations that the scheme would be rectified to take other eligible countries on board.  The year was, however, into its last quarter and nothing had yet been heard about the review or its outcome.  She said that the continued implementation of the scheme in its original form was against the business interests of countries like Pakistan, not only because of the market access being denied, but also in terms of the consequent damage to production chains and the ensuing unemployment.  As a low‑income, developing country with a limited choice of forums to have its grievances addressed, Pakistan wished to maintain this item on the CTD's agenda, and requested the EC to review its GSP scheme in a fair and trade-friendly manner.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation supported the intervention by Pakistan.  He informed the Committee that Brazil had sent a communication to the EC on 7 July 2007, requesting more detailed and updated information on the EC's revised GSP scheme, including trade data for 2006.  A first reply from the EC was received by Brazil on 3 August 2007, with supplementary information received on 14 September 2007.  While the competent authorities in Brazil were still in the process of analyzing the information, he said as a preliminary comment that it appeared that no information had been provided on graduation criteria and their application.  In addition, he observed that the EC's database appeared to provide information on preferential trade flows as a whole, without separating trade flows by preferential scheme.  This made it difficult to identify which trade flows could be attributed to the GSP, in particular for countries which benefited from other preferential schemes.  His delegation, therefore, suggested that the EC endeavour to present a database which would allow for the separation of trade flows by preferential scheme.  His delegation also looked forward to receiving trade data for 2006, as had been requested.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the EC, through its various preferential schemes, offered significant preferential market access to a large number of developing countries.  Monitoring trade flows from all these countries implied the maintenance of a huge database.  The basic database that the EC maintained was available to the public via the Eurostat website, and it was possible to make calculations from this database on the share of any beneficiary country in the EC's GSP-covered imports.  The EC, however, preferred to provide more specific requests for data on a bilateral basis.  This allowed the opportunity to explain aspects of the database in more detail and therefore avoid misinterpretation.  His delegation was always willing to hold informal consultations on such matters on a bilateral basis.  On the issue of graduation, he said that the basic principle of graduation occurring when certain sectors became competitive was an inherent feature of any GSP scheme.  Questioning the criteria used by the EC in this regard was an issue of policy appreciation, and there were other avenues available in the WTO for such a discussion.  On the matter of the provision of data to Brazil, he believed that the information that his delegation had transmitted included data for 2006.
He went on to say that the EC's GSP scheme would soon be subject to its regular update.  In terms of procedure, the EC would submit a draft proposal to member States, which would be made public.  Consultations with member States would then take place on the basis of the proposal, and it was expected that a new regulation would be published in early 2008.  The regulation would lay out, inter alia, the arrangements for implementing a special incentive scheme, which would require applications from eligible and interested governments.  It was expected that the final list of countries incorporated in the special incentive scheme would be published towards the end of 2008.  He believed that the procedure he had just laid out would provide for ample transparency.  In addition, the updated GSP scheme, once finalized, would provide predictability and stability for three consecutive years.  He believed that the CTD had reached the limit of its consideration of the EC's existing GSP scheme, in particular since information on the updated scheme would be available soon.  He suggested that the CTD's consideration of the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements would provide a better context for Members to discuss issues concerning transparency in the notification of preferential trade arrangements.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation recognized the openness of the EC market.  However, he believed that an appropriate level of transparency was as important as the provision of preferential market access.  In this regard, the level of transparency the EC was currently providing with regard to its GSP scheme was unsatisfactory.  He requested that the item concerning the EC's revised GSP scheme remain on the CTD's agenda, and asked the Chairman to continue with his informal consultations to find an appropriate solution to this matter.
&& The Chairman said that he encouraged the concerned delegations to pursue bilateral consultations to help clarify certain issues.  At the same time, he would continue with his informal consultations, and would report back to the CTD.  The item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.  
It was so agreed.
-	AMENDMENT TO THE FIRST AGREEMENT ON TRADE NEGOTIATIONS AMONG DEVELOPING MEMBER COUNTRIES OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMISSION FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC (BANGKOK AGREEMENT) – NOTIFICATION BY CHINA (WT/COMTD/N/22 – WT/COMTD/62)
&& The Chairman said that the notification by China, concerning an amendment to an existing regional trade agreement (RTA), had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/22.  The amended text of the agreement had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/62.  He invited the representative of China to introduce the notification.
&& The representative of China said that the present notification was being made on behalf of Bangladesh, China, India, Lao PDR, the Republic of Korea and Sri Lanka.  Her delegation had the honour to notify WTO Members that the First Agreement on Trade Negotiations among Developing Member Countries of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific – the Bangkok Agreement – had been amended as the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), pursuant to Paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause.  She informed the Committee that the Bangkok Agreement was notified to the GATT on 2 November 1976.  On 2 November 2005, delegates from all participating States of the Bangkok Agreement adopted certain amendments to the Agreement and agreed to rename the Bangkok Agreement as the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement.  She explained that APTA was an amendment to an existing RTA.  The amendment reflected changes in the international trading system that had taken place since the Agreement was first established.  The revised text had a preamble, eight chapters consisting of 40 Articles and two Annexes.  Annex I contained the national lists of concessions, on the basis of which she informed the Committee that the third round of tariff concessions – which entered into force on 1 September 2006 – covered 4,270 products (plus 587 for LDCs), with an average margin of preference of 26.8 per cent (58.8 per cent for LDCs).  The common rules of origin were provided in Annex II.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation welcomed the notification and the opportunity to discuss the amendments to the Bangkok Agreement.  The supporting documentation had been found to be easily accessible.  The format used by the parties to notify the amendments was, however, an important reminder that there was work to do in the CTD to make arrangements to implement an appropriate process to consider notifications of RTAs in a manner consistent with the relevant General Council Decision.  Her delegation looked forward to working with Members to ensure that the process enabled solid improvements in the transparency of these agreements.  The present notification in particular raised the issue of how the process would provide for the transparency of significant amendments and expansions of previously notified agreements.  Given the trend towards significant expansions in RTAs, her delegation believed that this was an important question.  For example, according to the information provided on the website, the Bangkok Agreement collectively covered only 104 products when it was originally negotiated in 1975.  The present notification, however, concerned a product coverage of 4,270, which represented a major expansion.  The material provided on the website indicated that the parties had recognized that in order for the Bangkok Agreement to realize its full potential, trade between Members must be further liberalized, and that the goal was to deepen and widen concessions so as to increase intra-member trade flows to significantly higher levels than was currently the case.  Her delegation was pleased with the recognition that liberalization would lead to the greatest developments for development.  Comprehensive liberalization was also the most compatible with advancing the goals of the multilateral trading system.  She informed the Committee that her delegation sought some clarifications on the notification, and would be submitting written questions in the coming weeks.  She, therefore, requested that this item remain on the CTD's agenda. 
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee take note of the interventions made.  He said that this item would remain on the CTD's agenda.  
It was so agreed. 
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
	-	STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN
&& The Chairman said that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that the World Bank would be invited to the present meeting to make a presentation on its commodities work.  Unfortunately, in spite of best efforts, it had not been possible to secure the participation of commodities experts from the Bank.  He recalled that it had also been agreed at the last meeting that the Secretariat would explore the possibility of inviting a private sector organization to a future meeting of the CTD.  In this regard, he informed the Committee that the Secretariat had entered into contact with a number of organizations, including Cargill, Nestlé and Archer Daniels Midland.  Interest had been expressed by some of these organizations to participate in a CTD meeting, perhaps even later this year.  He proposed that the Secretariat continue in its efforts to find a suitable private sector organization to make a presentation to the CTD.
It was so agreed.
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman recalled that in his report to the General Council in July 2007, he had informed Members of the progress that had been made with regard to the Decision on Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements, which was contained in document WT/L/672.  In particular, he had outlined the outcome of his informal consultations up to that point, and had informed the Council that the proponents – Brazil and India – were preparing a draft paper which would contain the elements of what they believe should be contained in Members' notifications of preferential trade arrangements (PTAs).  He had reported that he would continue to work informally with Members once the Brazil/India draft paper was ready, and that he would eventually have the matter discussed in an open‑ended format.  The Council had approved the request he had made on behalf of the CTD to allow the Committee until December 2007 to consider the matter and report back for appropriate action.  He was now pleased to inform Members that a non-paper by Brazil and India had been circulated to the membership in document JOB(07)/142.  He said that he had consulted informally with some Members on the basis of this non-paper, and now wanted the CTD to consider it.  In this regard, he invited the proponents to introduce the non-paper. 
&& The representative of India recalled that on 14 December 2006, the General Council had decided to set up a procedural package to improve transparency for a subset of Members' PTAs, in particular RTAs falling under Article XXIV of GATT 1994, paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause and Article V of the GATS.  On that same date, the General Council had also invited the CTD to consider transparency for other preferential trade arrangements falling under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause but not considered RTAs – essentially arrangements under GSP programmes.  It was these latter preferential trade arrangements which were the focus of the non-paper which had been jointly prepared by Brazil and India.  The non-paper discussed the main elements that Brazil and India believed should be incorporated in a procedural framework aimed at enhancing transparency for non-RTA preferential trade arrangements.  The proposed framework would provide the WTO membership with a clear, reliable and consistent source of information on PTAs. 
He said that transparency procedures for PTAs should be adequate, feasible and parallel to those contained in the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.  The procedures should not prejudge the substance of the relevant provisions of the Enabling Clause, nor affect Members' rights and obligations under the WTO Agreements in any way.  They should also not overburden the administrations of the notifying Members.  The procedures should additionally aim at increased transparency for future PTAs – new or extended – as well as those which might be under application at the time of adoption of the procedures.  Brazil and India requested Members' consideration of the proposal, which would go a long way in fulfilling the Doha mandate on clarifying and improving disciplines and procedures for RTAs.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation associated itself with the intervention by India.  He explained that the objective of the proposed mechanism outlined in the non-paper was to increase the amount of information available to Members on particular PTAs, without overburdening the administrations of notifying Members.  It was hoped that the non-paper would be the starting point for negotiations on this issue.  
&& The representative of Pakistan said that Brazil and India had considered the issue of transparency for PTAs in a comprehensive manner.  The elements outlined encompassed what a potential mechanism to consider PTAs should have, and what it should not have, as well as its scope.  Her delegation looked forward to further discussion on the basis of the non-paper, and on the basis of any other appropriate elements.  Her delegation in particular sought consideration of how the information provided by notifying Members would include details on graduation criteria and their application, as well as the coverage of countries that were eligible.  She explained that non-reciprocal schemes were specific types of PTAs, and special care should be taken in devising procedures for their transparency, in particular because several Members could be eligible for such schemes.
&& The representative of Malaysia said that the non-paper provided a good starting point for discussion in the CTD on the issue of transparency for PTAs, and for eventually allowing the CTD to fulfil its mandate.  He informed the Committee that the non-paper had been transmitted to his capital, and that he would share any comments with Members.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the non-paper was a good starting point for discussion in the CTD.  His delegation hoped that negotiations on this matter would allow the membership to clarify what should be the appropriate level of transparency for PTAs, and what information should be provided as part of a notification – and in what format.  He suggested that the proponents could elaborate on some of the procedures that they had laid out in a preliminary fashion in the non-paper.  For example, only a brief reference without explanation was made in several parts of the non-paper to the procedures being similar, though not identical, to the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.  It was also not clear whether notifying Members would be required to provide data to the Secretariat, or whether it would suffice to disclose the relevant internet links.  The role of the Secretariat had additionally not been sufficiently clarified.  In this regard, he indicated as a preliminary comment that his delegation was of the view that the role of the Secretariat should be limited to facilitating the exchange of information, and should not include any interpretational or analytical work.  He also noted the caution in the non-paper that the provisions should not prejudge the substance of the relevant provisions of the Enabling Clause, but some clarification was needed as to how this caution would be linked to the procedures that would eventually be put in place.
&& The representative of Barbados agreed that the non-paper was a useful starting point for discussion in the CTD.  At the same time, there were a number of areas that needed to be clarified.  As a preliminary comment, he sought some clarification on the relationship between the fifth bullet point on page 1, the second bullet point under section 3 on page 2, and section 5 on page 3.  The fifth bullet point on page 1 stated that the procedures should aim at increased transparency for new or extended PTAs and those which may be under application.  The second bullet point under section 3 on page 2 indicated that the role of the Secretariat would be one of organization, and would not involve any analysis.  However, in section 5 on page 3 the role of the Secretariat was not specified.  He believed that there was a need for clarification as to whether the role of the Secretariat in the context of PTAs being currently applied would also be limited to organizing meetings and information, and would therefore not be analytical in nature.
&& The representative of Brazil said that he would try to offer some preliminary reactions to the comments and questions that had been raised by Members.  He clarified that the aim of the proposed mechanism was to cover PTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were not covered by the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.  While the specific scope of the mechanism for PTAs would be subject to negotiations, he said that the way in which the proponents envisaged the obligations of notifying Members was very similar to the notification requirements of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.  In cases where information was already available in WTO databases or in other publicly available databases, there might not be a need to provide this information again in a notification, which could be a way of not overburdening notifying Members.  The procedures to ensure an appropriate level of transparency for a PTA would include notification, the preparation of a factual presentation by the Secretariat, and the consideration of the PTA in a meeting.  He emphasized that the role of the Secretariat should be one of gathering and organizing information to make it easily accessible to the membership, but should not include any analytical work. 
As for the mention in the non-paper of the envisaged procedures being in many respects similar but not identical to those established in the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, he explained that the proponents had made this reference thinking about the similarities in the need for transparency in various PTAs.  At the same time, certain differences in procedures would exist in view of the different nature of the arrangements considered in the proposed mechanism.  For example, the notifications would be made by the Members sponsoring the scheme, and not by beneficiary countries.  He said that the proponents were willing to provide any other clarifications that Members might require.
&& The representative of El Salvador said that his delegation's comments were of a preliminary nature.  He said that his delegation was still not clear when the proposed mechanism would be applied.  He also asked to what extent the procedures in the proposed mechanism would have a relation to the various stages set out in the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, including the preparation of a factual presentation by the Secretariat.
&& The representative of Brazil said that the CTD had a mandate to report back to the General Council in December 2007, by which time the proponents hoped that the negotiations on the proposed mechanism would have been completed.  Members could then begin their consideration of PTAs under the new procedures in 2008.  The timing of the consideration of specific PTAs would partly be an organizational issue, and could be discussed by Members in the context of the negotiations.  He said that the proponents were willing to hold bilateral discussions with any Member on how the proposed mechanism would compare to the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.
&& The Chairman said that he encouraged the proponents to reflect on the comments that had been made by Members, and to start thinking about revising and updating the non-paper.  He said that this item would appear on the agenda of the last CTD meeting of the year, and invited Members to prepare themselves for a more focused discussion at that meeting.  In the meantime, he proposed to continue his informal consultations with some Members. 
It was so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED (WT/COMTD/W/143/REV.3)
&& The Chairman said that, under this agenda item, the Committee had since its 54th Session been undertaking a review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations based on a periodically updated background paper prepared by the Secretariat.  It had been agreed at the last meeting that discussion would continue under this agenda item at the present meeting, based on the third revision of the Secretariat paper, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.3.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
No Member took the floor. 
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee revert to this agenda item at the CTD's last meeting of the year. 
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that this agenda item was considered by the Committee at the three meetings of the CTD already held in 2007.  It was on the agenda once again for the present meeting, in line with the CTD's 2007 work programme – found in document WT/COMTD/61.  He said that at the CTD's final meeting of 2007, the Committee would undertake its mandated annual review of the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that the CTD had heard several reports in past sessions from developed countries, as well as some developing countries, about the steps they had taken, or steps they planned to take, to provide DFQF market access to the LDCs.  The LDCs were appreciative of these reports, and urged Members to continue to report back to the CTD about the initiatives taken by them to facilitate the access of LDC products into their markets. 
He emphasized the importance of taking into consideration the words "facilitating market access", which were specifically mentioned in the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.  In this regard, he indicated that declarations by developed countries, as well as developing countries, of DFQF market access for the LDCs would bring no benefit to the poorest countries of the world if they could not utilize these packages.  To ensure that the preferential market access offered to the LDCs really helped them to boost their exports, and thus help them integrate with more confidence into the multilateral trading system, it was the responsibility of the developed and developing Members of the WTO to support the LDCs in their endeavours.  DFQF market access would bring real benefits to the LDCs when this group of countries would have such access for all of their products, thus being able to widen their export baskets.  Until and unless DFQF market access for all products from all LDCs was ensured, LDCs would continue to face the challenge of uncertainty and unpredictability with regard to their exports.  In this connection, he requested that developed countries, and developing countries in a position to do so, update the Committee on the progress of their internal processes to provide DFQF market access to LDCs, as per the Hong Kong Decision. 
He went on to say that LDCs had very limited capacities in all areas.  It was, therefore, important that Members provide sufficient support and assistance to LDCs to allow them to become competitive.  He noted that at the start of the implementation period after the conclusion of the Doha Round, the preferences enjoyed by the LDCs would erode quickly.  To address that challenge, the LDCs needed DFQF market access to the developed and developing countries from day one, without staging.  At the same time, they needed feasible technical assistance and capacity-building programmes to help them build strong export bases.  He urged Members to continue to support the LDCs in their efforts.
The Committee took note of the intervention by Bangladesh.
PARTICIPATION OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN THE MULTILATERAL TRADING SYSTEM
&& 	-	STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN
&& The Chairman said that the CTD had a mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  The Committee's 2007 work programme included an item concerning the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system, which was scheduled to be considered at the present meeting.  It had also been agreed at the last meeting that, as on previous occasions, this agenda item would be discussed on the basis of a background paper that the Secretariat would prepare.
He informed Members that the Secretariat had started working, early this year, on its background paper on the basis of the most recent data available at the time, namely for the year 2005.  Early in September 2007, however, when quite a bit of work on the paper had already been completed, data for 2006 became available.  The Secretariat considered that it would be more useful to Members if the paper contained analysis based on the most recent data.  For this reason, the finalization of the Secretariat paper had been slightly delayed.  He understood that the paper would be ready shortly, and would be circulated in time for the next CTD meeting in 2007.  In view of these developments, he proposed that the Committee postpone its discussion under this agenda item to its last meeting of the year, by which time the Secretariat paper would be ready.
It was so agreed.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	BIENNIAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING PLAN – 2008-2009 	(WT/COMTD/W/160 – TO BE ISSUED):  INFORMATION BY THE SECRETARIAT
-	SEMI-ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES (1 JANUARY ‑ 30 JUNE 2007) (WT/COMTD/W/161)
&& The Chairman invited a representative of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) to provide information and updates on a number of issues relating to technical assistance (TA), including the latest Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan) – which was a biennial plan and would be circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/160 – and the Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities for the period 1 January to 30 June 2007 – circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/161.  
&& The representative of the ITTC said that he would provide a brief summary of the discussions that had taken place at the informal consultation on TA issues held on 27 September 2007.  He recalled the decision taken at the previous informal consultation – held on 14 June 2007 – to move towards creating more coherence between the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration (CBFA) and the CTD in preparing all aspects of the TA Plan, so as to provide more time for Members to anticipate the budgetary implications.  In this regard, he informed Members that the relevant officers responsible for the CTD and the CBFA had been invited to the 27 September consultation, in which the Chairman of the CBFA also participated.  The four items on the agenda for the informal consultation were: the financial situation and the state of play in the implementation of the TA Plan for 2007;  the Biennial Technical Assistance and Training Plan for 2008 and 2009;  the Secretariat issues paper on financing the WTO's Biennial TA Plan;  and the Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities for the period 1 January to 30 June 2007.
He said that, following a brief introduction by the Secretariat on the status of implementation of TA activities, Members had been briefed on the current financial situation.  It was pointed out that the amount that had been received (CHF 22.5 million) came very close to the target amount for the year (CHF 24 million) for the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF).  Outstanding pledges amounted to CHF 2.5 million, but Members were reminded that further pledges would be required to meet the target amount of CHF 6 million to start implementing activities as of January 2008.
On the Biennial TA Plan for 2008 and 2009, he explained that it had been the Secretariat's intention to hold an initial discussion of the Plan at the 27 September informal consultation, followed by a formal discussion at the present CTD meeting.  However, the Plan was still in the process of finalization and could, therefore, not be circulated in time for these meetings.  He explained that the delay was due mainly to the many events that were scheduled in September and early October 2007 that required the Secretariat's full attention, including the Aid for Trade Regional Round Tables, the Integrated Framework pledging conference in Stockholm and the WTO Public Forum.  Informal consultations on the Plan would be held after its finalization, and before its formal consideration by the CTD. 
He said that the Biennial TA Plan was evolutionary, building on experience and the recommendations contained in the Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance (TRTA) Activities, as well as those contained in the evaluation reports prepared by the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit.  The Plan aimed at further improving the quality of the products and the coordination of activities with partner organizations.  One of the key objectives of the Biennial Plan was to allow for cumulative and sustainable capacity building and to create more predictability in terms of financing.  The enhanced transparency in the delivery of TRTA activities would be achieved through the trade capacity building webpage and the use of e-Training as a cost‑effective tool in the delivery of TRTA.  In the absence of the Plan itself, the Secretariat had been requested to prepare a short summary of the Plan for the present CTD meeting.
With regard to the issues paper on financing the Biennial TA Plan – which the Secretariat had been asked to prepare and which had been circulated as document JOB(07)/140 – he said that a lively discussion had taken place at the informal consultations.  It had been noted that the paper addressed all the issues that had been raised in previous consultations, and support was given to four out of the five options presented in the paper.  These four options were:  moving towards a Biennial TA Plan; coherence between the CBFA and the CTD;  providing more visibility to donors' contributions through the trade capacity building webpage;  and developing a marketing campaign.  It was further observed that these four options were already being implemented.  It was additionally noted that enhancing visibility did not only entail the provision of information on donors' contributions, but also meant that information should be provided on performance indicators, as well as the practical benefits and effectiveness of TRTA.  He said that some donors had indicated that they might be in a position to make multi-year pledges, while others stated that they would not be in a position to do so.  The Secretariat had reiterated that the main objective of the biennial approach was to create predictability in financing the TA Plan, and that the intention was not to ask Members to make biennial contributions at once.  He also informed the Committee that the general feeling in the informal consultation had been that the fifth option – the proposal to transfer part of the DDAGTF to the regular budget – would need further reflection.
In introducing the Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities for the period 1 January to 30 June 2007, he said that the Review mainly provided a quick quantitative overview of the delivery of TRTA in the first six months of the year.  It showed that the e-Training mode had increasingly found ground as a tool for the effective delivery of TRTA and to generate cost savings.  It also noted, however, that national seminars had rather frequently been postponed or cancelled at the very last minute by the beneficiary, often without justification, which undermined the Secretariat's delivery of TRTA.  At the 27 September informal consultation, questions were raised with regard to the underutilization of entitlements to TRTA by LDCs, and Members had been particularly interested in knowing the source of funding for different products and/or activities, including which ones were financed from the Regular Budget, the DDAGTF or other trust funds.  It had been specifically suggested that a report on the status of the utilization of funds be included in future semi-annual reviews.
&& The representative of Bangladesh expressed appreciation for the technical assistance provided by the WTO.  He informed the Committee that, with the assistance of the WTO, a trade facilitation needs assessment seminar would be held in Dhaka in October 2007.  His delegation was also appreciative for the funding of an intern in the Bangladeshi mission.  The intern had made valuable contributions to the work of the mission and he, therefore, requested that the WTO continue to fund interns to work in his mission.   
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation was in favour of moving towards a biennial TA Plan, but also noted that this need not stop donors from making contributions on an annual basis.  He said that it would be useful if future TA Plans contained more details of budgetary implications, as this would help donors in their planning.  On the DDAGTF, he was pleased to note that the funding situation seemed satisfactory.  He announced that the EC would be contributing a further 1 million euros in the coming weeks.  On the Semi-Annual Review, his delegation had noted with concern the underutilization problem and the late cancellation of activities.  He urged concerned parties to ensure that the utilization rate remained high and that TA activities could be implemented according to plan. 
&& The representative of Burkina Faso said that his country continued to benefit from WTO technical assistance activities, including e-Training activities.  He expressed his appreciation to the donors and to the Secretariat.  
&& The representative of Zambia thanked the donors and the Secretariat for their support.  She expressed appreciation for a recent national workshop held in Zambia, which had been of great value to stakeholders in gaining a better appreciation of issues relating to the TRIPS Agreement, in particular those issues of interest and concern to LDCs.  She also expressed appreciation for an upcoming national workshop on agriculture.
&& The Chairman said that the item concerning the Biennial TA Plan for 2008 and 2009 would be placed on the agenda of the next CTD meeting.  He proposed that the Committee take note of the Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities, and of all interventions.
It was so agreed.  
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business"
The meeting was adjourned.

__________


 The summary was made available in the meeting room.

WT/COMTD/M/65 Page  PAGE 14



	WT/COMTD/M/65 	Page  PAGE 13



 

 

 

 



