WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/49
12 July 2004


(04-2986)


Committee on Trade and Development
Forty-Ninth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 11 MAY 2004

Chairperson:  H. E. Mr. Trevor Clarke (Barbados)


Subjects discussed:

 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC77133913" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC77133913 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC77133914" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC77133914 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc77133915" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc77133915 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc77133916" (ii)	Request for ad hoc observer status by the Common Fund for Commodities for the specific item related to "Declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries"	 PAGEREF _Toc77133916 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc77133917" (iii)	Further Consideration of request for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc77133917 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC77133918" C.	Technical Co-operation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC77133918 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc77133919" (i)	Annual Report on Training and Technical Co-operation (WT/COMTD/W/127)	 PAGEREF _Toc77133919 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc77133920" (ii)	Implementation Report - Fourth Quarter 2003 (WT/COMTD/W/126)	 PAGEREF _Toc77133920 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc77133921" (iii)	2003 Technical Co-operation Audit Report (WT/COMTD/W/125)	 PAGEREF _Toc77133921 \h 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC77133922" D.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC77133922 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC77133923" E.	Report on the 37th Session of the Joint Advisory Group on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG/(XXXVII)/200)	 PAGEREF _TOC77133923 \H 26
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC77133924" F.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC77133924 \H 28
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC77133925" G.	Electronic Commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC77133925 \H 30
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC77133926" H.	Graduation of the Maldives From LDC Status (WT/COMTD/W/128)	 PAGEREF _TOC77133926 \H 33
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC77133927" I.	Work Programme for 2004	 PAGEREF _TOC77133927 \H 38
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC77133928" J.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC77133928 \H 39


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman extended a special welcome to the representatives of WTO's non-resident Members and Observers who attended the meeting as part of their "Geneva Week".  He said that the draft Agenda for the meeting was contained in Airgram WTO/AIR/2292/Rev.1, dated 6 May 2004.  As Ambassador Iversen of Denmark, who chaired the Joint Advisory Group of the ITC, was unable to attend the morning session, he suggested that the item concerning the report on the JAG be taken up in the afternoon.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation wished to introduce a notification regarding her Government's GSP scheme under "Other Business".
&& The representative of Switzerland suggested that the sequence of the submissions under item E, relating to commodities, be changed so that the Committee first treat the submission by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda who were the proponents of the item, and for the submission by his delegation to be taken up thereafter.
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman said that agenda item B related to requests for observer status.  He recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite the following intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the Organization of African Unity (OAU);  the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the South Pacific Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the last meeting of the Committee, those organizations had been invited to that day's meeting.  He also proposed that those organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.  
It was so agreed.
Request for ad hoc observer status by the Common Fund for Commodities for the specific item related to "Declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries"
&& The Chairman said that sub-item B (II) related to a request for ad hoc observer status by the Common Fund for Commodities for the specific item related to "Declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries" only.  He said that WTO bodies had the right, according to paragraph 5 of the rules for observer status for international intergovernmental organizations in the WTO, to extend invitations, as appropriate, and on a case-by-case basis, to specific organizations to follow particular issues within a body in an observer capacity.  The Common Fund for Commodities had requested observer status in the CTD on a regular basis.  Such observer status had, as Members were aware, not been granted.  The Common Fund for Commodities had recently expressed an interest in attending only the CTD item related to the declining terms of trade for primary commodities in an observer capacity.  He suggested that, following his informal consultations of the previous week, the Committee agree to invite the Common Fund for Commodities to follow only the commodity issue on the CTD agenda in an observer capacity at the CTD's next formal meeting.
&& The representative of Egypt said that it was his delegation's understanding that, since the start of the work of the CTD in 1995, it was up to each subsidiary body of the WTO to decide on an ad hoc basis at each meeting which international organizations to invite and take a decision welcoming their attendance on an ad hoc basis.  He said that it therefore was unclear why the case was being taken up.  The General Council had dealt with the issue of observer status for a long period of time.  However, the General Council had not resolved the issue or issued any guidelines for how subsidiary bodies should deal with it.  His delegation would welcome the attendance of the Common Fund for Commodities on an ad hoc basis at the CTD meetings.  Such a decision could be taken at each meeting of the CTD.  His delegation acknowledged the contribution by the Common Fund for Commodities.  However, he said that he did not have any instruction from his authorities to approve regular observer status, but could agree to the suggestion on an ad hoc basis.
&& The Committee agreed to invite the Common Fund for Commodities to follow only the commodity issue on the CTD agenda in an ad hoc observer capacity at its next formal meeting.
Further Consideration of request for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman said that the third sub-item under observers related to outstanding requests for observers status.  At previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of such requests.  Those came from the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and from the Common Fund for Commodities.  The positions of delegations were well-known and on the record.  He asked whether there was any change of positions which would extend observer status to any of those applicants.  If not, he proposed that Members revert to those requests at the next formal meeting.
It was so agreed.
TECHNICAL CO-OPERATION AND TRAINING
Annual Report on Training and Technical Co-operation (WT/COMTD/W/127)
Implementation Report - Fourth Quarter 2003 (WT/COMTD/W/126)
&& The Chairman suggested that the Committee first consider sub-items (i) and (ii) of Agenda item D relating to technical information regarding the activities carried out in 2003.   
&& The Secretariat said that, before addressing the issues included on the agenda, i.e. the annual and quarterly reports on technical assistance (TA) and training, it wished to brief the Committee on the process of informal consultations that had taken place since the beginning of 2004.  The Committee had agreed, at its meeting at the end of 2003, to launch a process of informal consultations so as to pursue a number of outstanding issues of a policy-oriented nature.  Three rounds of informal consultations had taken place, beginning in January 2004, with beneficiaries and donor countries, to address the following issues:  how to conduct a process of needs assessment, how to engage the least-developed countries (LDCs) more fully in TA and training activities, in fulfilment of the mandate from the Doha Ministerial Conference, monitoring and evaluation, how best to exploit partnerships with other organizations, and the strategic dimension of academic partnerships.  The informal consultations had been constructive and productive, and the attendance had overall been encouraging.  The informal context had allowed for a free exchange of views, with inputs into the discussion from both donor and beneficiary countries.  Inputs in the form of ideas and papers from Members were also encouraged as the process did not have to be fuelled solely by the Secretariat.  The Secretariat explained how it had addressed the issues mentioned.  First, from the beginning of 2004, the Institute for Training and Technical Co-operation (ITTC) had conducted consultations with each regional grouping, as well as with the LDC group, to present and discuss the 2004 TA Plan, to consider how Members made requests for national activities, and to address the question of how the beneficiaries could best be engaged in the delivery process.  All beneficiaries had been encouraged to submit their national requests.  Seventy-nine governments had submitted requests as at the beginning of May 2004, and contacts had been established with delegations to discuss how those requests could best be addressed.  The Secretariat reminded Members that had not already done so, that they might make requests for national activities at any time in the year, but to bear in mind the risk that the later such requests came forward, the more difficult it would be for the Secretariat to respond.  The Non-resident Members who were attending the "Geneva Week", but who had not submitted requests for national activities, might wish to take advantage of their presence in Geneva to discuss with the desk officer for their region. 
A second way in which the Secretariat had addressed the issues was by preparing several informal discussion papers which had been discussed during the informal consultations.  Those papers had been welcomed by Members, and in the case of the needs assessment, led to the preparation by the Secretariat of two "pilot needs assessments", for Madagascar and for Zambia.  The Secretariat recalled that the purpose of the papers prepared by the Secretariat was to assist beneficiaries to identify their needs, the idea being that the primary responsibility for identifying needs lay with the Member, but that the Secretariat could help if needed.  The delegations of those two Members had agreed to discuss their needs assessments during the informal consultations.  The outcome of the discussions had not only encouraged the Secretariat to further pursue its efforts in that regard, but had also resulted in further needs assessments for other members.  Following suggestions by the Members, the Secretariat was in the process of preparing "guidelines" for needs assessments.  Those guidelines would allow beneficiaries to adopt a similar approach as the one followed by the Secretariat, so that they could more easily conduct their own needs assessments.  
Thirdly, an informal discussion paper had been prepared on partnership arrangements, which explained in some depth the rationale of partnerships and the different approaches chosen with various partners.  The information provided by the Secretariat in the informal discussion paper had again seemed much appreciated and the Secretariat had been encouraged to provide examples or case studies of partnerships to illustrate how they operated in practice, the synergies that could be developed, the benefits, etc.  The Secretariat was working on those, and they would be discussed at a next informal meeting. 
Fourthly, on the question of monitoring and evaluation, a process had been set in motion to prepare terms of reference for an external evaluation.  Members would receive more information about that under the next sub-item on the agenda.  There were also some other issues in the pipeline, including the review of outreach activities, which the Secretariat would deal with shortly.
&& The Secretariat then turned to the first two sub-items on the agenda regarding the Annual Report on Training and Technical Co-operation (WT/COMTD/W/127) (the Annual TA Report) as well as the Report on the Implementation of Trade-Related Technical Assistance in the Fourth Quarter of 2003 (WT/COMTD/W/126) (the Quarterly Report).  The Annual TA Report largely complemented the information that had been provided in the reports by the Director-General to Ministers at the Fifth Ministerial Conference.  As Members would see, in 2003, the Secretariat had delivered some 450 activities, which seemed to be the natural limit as to what could be done in one year.  Moreover, while the Secretariat had maintained a regional balance in activities, particular emphasis had been put on the LDCs and on Africa.  The numbers spoke for themselves, and Members would see that the LDCs had been associated with roughly a quarter of all activities, and in many cases, activities had been held in the LDCs themselves.  As for the Quarterly Report, covering the last quarter of 2003, the Secretariat believed that it spoke for itself, and that Members might be more interested to hear about the current situation, i.e. what had happened in 2004.  In that regard, the Secretariat said that it had prepared a quarterly report for the first quarter of 2004.  However, in view of the delays in the financial reporting on the one hand and the rules with regard to the timely circulation of documentation in the three official languages, on the other, the Secretariat had not been able to circulate that report in time for the meeting.  The Secretariat recalled that the approach adopted to trade-related TA in the TA Plan for 2004 had been quite different from other years, with the identification of specific products and more flexibility with regard to national activities.  The Secretariat continued to be on track in the delivery of trade-related TA.  In fact, the Secretariat had made a good start in terms of numbers, with over 100 activities undertaken in the first three months of 2004, including national and regional activities, as well as Geneva-based activities and the field-based training courses.  Moreover, another 67 activities would have been undertaken between 1 April and 15 May 2004.  The report that Members would receive on the implementation in the first quarter of 2004 had been adapted to the format Members had requested in the consultations, and it would provide more analytical information and include examples.  However, while the reporting was generally considered useful, it also was a resource-intensive exercise for the Secretariat.  The Secretariat suggested that less frequent reporting might be just as effective, and more efficient, especially in combination with the informal process.  The Secretariat drew Members' attention to the unsatisfactory resource situation in the ITTC.  The establishment in the Institute had not kept pace with the exponential growth in volume of TA and training that had occurred, with the result that 30 per cent of the staff in the ITTC were on temporary contracts, but carrying out ongoing, non‑temporary work.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the three informal consultations held had been useful and that Members had made progress on the issues of needs-assessment and evaluation.  However, his delegation was concerned that the mid-term review agreed upon and which, at the meeting of the CTD in November 2003, had been indicated for the month of June 2004, did not seem to be planned.  Time was running out and there were several issues that had not yet been covered, and Members needed to formulate general conclusions on the issues covered to guide the Secretariat in the design of the 2005 TA Plan.  His delegation was looking forward to the next informal consultation and asked when it would be held.  Regarding the two reports before the Committee he said that his delegation was pleased with the large number of activities undertaken, especially in the last quarter of 2003.  Members had to bear in mind that 2003 had been a busy year for the Secretariat.  He noted that the number of activities undertaken matched the activities that had been planned.  However, that was not the case in terms of the financial implementation.  He said that he had two questions to ask.  First, he noted from the Annual TA Report that 1000 requests for TA activities had been made and that 450 activities had been carried out.  He asked the Secretariat to explain the process of reducing the number of activities requested to those carried out, and to what extent requests for national activities had been taken up in regional activities.  The second question related to co-operation activities with universities.  There was a substantive number of such activities in the Quarterly Report.  He sought more information about the general approach towards that issue.  The notion of capacity building had been mentioned.  He asked to what extent the "hub-universities" played a role in that respect and on what basis other universities and institutions, not being designated as "hub-universities" had been selected for co-operation activities.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation appreciated the TA carried out and the informal process of consultations.  Her delegation looked forward to the proposed guidelines for needs-assessments that were being prepared.
&& The representative of Venezuela said that his delegation welcomed the entry into effect of the agreement between the WTO and UNIDO and hoped that it would be to the benefit of developing countries.  His delegation was interested in the development of WTO's relationships with academic institutions and sought further information in that regard.  Furthermore, the WTO should continue to make considerable efforts to fulfil the aspirations of many Members for TA.  He thanked the Secretariat for the activities undertaken in 2003 in Venezuela.  They had been important for technical and institutional capacity building.  The participation of officials from other organizations such as UNCTAD had also been important for the success of that TA.
&& The representative of the United States believed that the Annual TA Report was a useful one, as were the informal consultations held and the exchanges of views among Members.  The Secretariat was trying to be innovative and creative and it was moving forward with the overall policy dialogue and plans for improving trade-related TA even further.  Her delegation welcomed the recent efforts to carry out individual needs assessments for some LDCs and encouraged other developing countries to follow the same model.  She noted that work was proceeding on the first 2004 Quarterly Report and looked forward to the more qualitative element that the Secretariat foreshadowed.  She appreciated that the representative of Venezuela had taken the floor and provided the perspective of a beneficiary.  It was useful for the CTD to hear the perspective of the beneficiaries of trade-related TA.
&& The representative of Switzerland welcomed the series of informal consultations on technical co-operation that had been held.  They presented a good way to work on the main TA issues and should continue.  With respect to the Annual TA Report he said that his delegation would have preferred more qualitative information regarding the achievements of WTO's TA activities, such as the results of the regional trade policy courses or the regional workshops for university professors and academics.  In future, the Annual TA reports should include a section on how the recommendations from the audit reports had been taken into account.  What his delegation wished to see was that the self-evaluation activities were reflected in the reporting as well.  That would make the audit reports independent and would turn them into critical outside assessments of those achievements.  Finally, he asked what "Capacity Building" covered in Table 2 in the Annex to the Annual TA Report.  With respect to the Quarterly Report, his delegation would not object to the suggestion that reporting be done on a six-monthly basis.  However, his delegation wished to see those reports reflect internal benchmarks and criteria as a regular feature.
&& The representative of Trinidad and Tobago said that her delegation had noted with satisfaction that extensive TA had been carried out involving national institutions and universities.  That type of approach had a broader and deeper reach in terms of the beneficiaries of the programmes.  She asked whether there was any area in which the beneficiaries could work differently to make such assistance more effective.  She expressed appreciation for the preparation of needs assessment guidelines.  The guidelines would be useful for all developing countries when they considered how to move forward.
&& The representative of Norway said that her delegation welcomed the progress made on TA at informal and formal meetings.  With respect to the Annual TA Report, she said that the focus on the LDCs was a long-standing priority for her Government.  Her delegation therefore noted paragraph 8 of the Annual TA Report which focused on the LDCs, as well as a reference to the Integrated Framework (IF) in Table 2 of the Annex and suggested that it would be useful if future reports could underscore the importance attributed to the work with the LDCs.  That could be reflected more clearly, for example, by having a separate column on the LDCs in the tables and more information on what those activities would include.
&& The representative of Thailand said that the reports were useful in providing Members with information on the status of the trade-related TA provided by the Secretariat.  Her delegation had noted the informal consultations held and wished to learn more about the needs-assessments as well as the selection process for hosting regional TA activities.  A regional activity had been held in Bangkok in 2003.  It was important that the national coordinators were informed about regional TA activities.
&& The representative of Egypt welcomed the launching of informal consultations on TA.  He wished to stress the importance his delegation attached to section F of the Annual TA Report regarding the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme for Selected Least-Developed and Other African Countries (JITAP).  His delegation looked forward to the process of expanding that programme as its assessment was that the JITAP was one of the most important programmes that contributed to development, especially in rural areas.
&& The representative of Solomon Islands looked forward to receiving the guidelines for needs assessments.  With respect to the TA provided, particularly when organizing seminars and workshops in LDCs, it would be useful if funding to attend such activities was extended to staff of embassies of non-residents with accreditation to the WTO, instead of only inviting capital-based trade officials.  For some administrations, such as that of the Solomon Islands, the officials at the Embassy in Brussels were more involved in the current trade negotiations than the officials working in the capital.  The reason was simple and related to the cost implications.  Other Members might argue that it was for the Government to nominate its participants, but the Secretariat response was that funding for participation in seminars and workshops was only available for capital-based officials.  His Government had wished to designate Brussels-based officials to attend WTO workshops, but had been unable to do so because of the response given by the WTO Secretariat.  His Government hoped that the Secretariat would change that policy so that small administrations like his own could take real advantage of the TA provided.  Even if a Brussels-based official was trained, that person would at some stage return to the capital and take the knowledge acquired with him.
&& The representative of India said that, regarding what the Secretariat had mentioned with respect to needs-assessments, it was the responsibility of the beneficiaries to identify their own needs.  However, if a beneficiary requested assistance to identify its needs, the Secretariat could provide some help.  His delegation had always seen trade-related TA as being demand driven in nature.  The representative of the European Communities had referred to the Secretariat's co-operation with universities.  His delegation sought more information about progress in that respect and what the Secretariat's overall approach to such co-operation had been.
&& The representative of Namibia wished to underline the importance of TA and capacity building.  However, it was important that local institutions were taken into account in order to ensure broad local capacity building.  That type of support should continue as much remained to be done, although his Government appreciated the assistance already provided.  
&& The representative of Nepal said that, as a beneficiary, he expressed his Government's gratitude to the WTO for providing valuable TA.  As he spoke for the first time in the CTD since Nepal became a WTO Member, he expressed his delegation's thanks to all WTO Members for their support to the process of accession of Nepal.  His delegation would be actively participating in all WTO activities.  His delegation was hopeful and confident that it would receive the assistance necessary, particularly in the context of its new membership and its efforts to integrate the economy of Nepal into the multilateral trading system.
&& The Chairman extended his welcome to the delegation of Nepal.  He looked forward to working with it.
&& The representative of the European Communities wished to come back to the issue of reporting, and supported the suggestion by the Secretariat to reduce the number of progress reports.  His delegation agreed with the suggestion made in the Audit Report to move to a semi-annual reporting system.  With regard to reporting in general, he believed that it would be possible to streamline the current reporting system.  As there was an overlap between the narrative sections of the various reports, those sections might be merged in one report.  The issue of reporting might be more productively discussed in the informal consultations.  Regarding needs assessments, his delegation shared the approach outlined by the Secretariat and the delegation of India.  The needs assessment process should be owned by the governments.  Some Members might require some assistance to achieve the level of comprehensive analysis needed to prepare a good needs-assessment.  Other Members might be able to carry out that process themselves.
&& The representative of the United States wished to take the opportunity to welcome the participants in the "Geneva Week".  Resident Members benefited from the presence of the non-resident Members and Observers.  Some years back her delegation had supported the inclusion of "Geneva Week" as an element of TA and hoped that the "Geneva Week" participants continued to find it a useful mechanism for participation.  Her delegation looked forward to more engagement from the non-residents.
&& The Secretariat said that the comments made by Members motivated it to improve the products and the dialogue with the Members.  The representative of the European Communities had asked how the Secretariat had dealt with the process of bringing the large number of requests for TA activities in 2003 down to the 450 activities carried out in the end.  The Secretariat reminded Members that the planning process for the 2003 TA Plan had been different from the process for the 2004 TA Plan.  All activities for 2003 had been planned in the sense that, in July 2002, there had been an invitation to Members to indicate what their needs were in terms of national activities and other activities which could be covered under regional programmes, etc.  As a result of that invitation, the Secretariat had received a large number of requests for TA activities.  The process of bringing the number of activities down to what the Secretariat could reasonably do and what appeared in the 2003 TA Plan was one that had been conducted by the Technical Co-operation Division at that time.  The process had been based on a number of factors, such as the capacity of the Secretariat to carry out the activities requested.  A rule of thumb for the number of activities to be undertaken in each Member had been introduced, which was the same as still existed, i.e. two activities per developing country and three per LDC.  A number of requests for national activities had been transformed into regional activities.  It was through that process that the Secretariat had produced the 2003 TA Plan containing about 450 activities.  One of the reasons for the new approach taken in 2004 was precisely so that the Secretariat was not  inundated at a given point in time by requests, which it then had to find a way of reducing to manageable proportions.
Some delegations had focused on the university programme, what it was and how the "hub-arrangement" differed from other programmes with universities.  The Secretariat assumed that what was referred to by the "hub-arrangement" was the partnerships for the regional trade policy courses.  The Secretariat has three such partnerships with the University of Nairobi, Kenya, the University Mohammed V, Morocco, and the University of the West Indies, Jamaica.  Those were the WTO Secretariat's university partners both for the regional trade policy courses and for other aspects of the university programme.  The other aspects were curriculum development, the development of research networks, and possibly most important, the training of trainers component.  The Secretariat had also begun with training of trainers at other universities which were not hosting regional trade policy courses.  Hence, there was a programme of regional seminars for academics from universities in each of the regions, at which the academics were briefed on the WTO system, the state of negotiations, computer-based and other documentation available, and how they could network among themselves.  In addition, the Secretariat assisted by providing material that could be used in libraries or as parts of degree programmes.  One partner was the Agence internationale de la Francophonie which had developed a similar programme aimed at universities, called REXPACO, which aimed at developing the capacity of the students to work in the area of the multilateral trading system and for teachers to provide research material and to interact with others working in that field.  Some of the academics with whom the WTO worked in the non-hub situations later became co-teaching partners in the regional trade policy courses.  In that way, all programmes were inter-linked.  
With regard to the point made by the representative of Switzerland on reporting, the Secretariat thanked the Members who had supported the idea that a lower frequency of reporting could be acceptable on condition that the reports contained the information Members wished to receive.  Once Members had before them the first quarterly report of 2004, they would have a chance to see whether the Secretariat had understood what they wished those reports to contain.  The contents of those reports could then be further discussed at the informal consultations.  The reason why the Annual TA Report for 2003 did not include as much qualitative information as Members might have expected was that the Secretariat had prepared a report to the Fifth Ministerial Conference in line with the mandate in paragraph 41 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  Although that report only covered the period up until the end of July 2003, from the qualitative point of view, there was not much that could have been added from the remainder of 2003 to what was already in that report.  The Secretariat had therefore not felt that there was a need to repeat everything that had been stated in the paragraph 41 report.  The Secretariat would carefully consider how it could take into account the recommendations that appeared in the Audit Report.  The Secretariat assured Members that, in terms of the process, i.e. how it conducted the seminars, and how it decided which teaching methods worked and which were less successful, it took the advice of the Technical Co-operation Audit into account.  It was possible that the Secretariat might have to go deeper into that and that there were more fundamental issues raised in the Audit Report that the Secretariat could take into account.  The Secretariat would work on that in determining how it reported to Members in the future.
&& The representative of Trinidad and Tobago had asked who the beneficiaries of the WTO TA programmes were.  The Secretariat had the mandate to provide TA addressed to Government officials, with the exception of the academic programme which was addressed to academics.  A related issue was the choice of participants in the activities which, apart from the choice of participants in the Geneva-based activities and the regional trade policy courses, was in the hands of the Members.  The Secretariat had no control over that choice.  It was a problem that the participants themselves sometimes mentioned.  Participants sometimes were not working in the area of trade.  However, even when all participants worked with trade issues, their knowledge about the multilateral trading system varied greatly.  That fact posed a problem for all presenters in the sense that it was difficult for them to pitch their presentations at a level which would suit all participants.  If the presenters assumed that the participants had extensive knowledge, some of the beginners would be left behind, and if they assumed that all participants were beginners then the ones with good knowledge would waste their time and be bored.  The Secretariat did not know how to resolve that problem, other than exhort Members to select carefully the officials they sent to attend the various WTO TA activities.  It would be too onerous for the Secretariat to engage in a selection process for a one or two-day seminar.  The selection therefore had to be left to the Members.  With respect to the question of how the Secretariat organized the activities and ensured that the national authorities were informed, the Secretariat would do what Members wanted it to do.  If the Secretariat dealt directly with the officials in the capitals, it would receive complaints that the officials at the missions in Geneva had been by-passed.  One delegation had mentioned that the co-ordinator in his capital had not been informed.  The Secretariat had a system whereby the first point of contact was the mission in Geneva.  However, the Secretariat tended to deal more directly with the officials in capitals in the case of non-residents.  The Secretariat felt that it was for the missions in Geneva to ensure that their authorities were informed.  In every instance, the Secretariat copied all information to their contacts in the capitals.  The Secretariat therefore did not know what had gone wrong in the particular case referred to.  However, the Secretariat would try to ensure that it was not repeated in the future.  
In response to the question of the selection of participants from the point of view of whether they were capital-based or mission-based, the Secretariat said that it followed an approach that reflected the wish of Members.  The TA programme had always been designed for capital-based officials.  Until Members decided to change the approach, the Secretariat would decline any request to fund the travel of a mission-based official to WTO TA activities.  Members also had to realize that, as the mission-based officials were usually based in Geneva or elsewhere in Europe, and the activities were normally carried out in the regions, the cost implications of any change of policy would have to be taken into account.  
There had been a question with respect to what capacity building covered.  Capacity building covered any activity which did not fit into any other category and included activities such as attendance at meetings of other organizations which had not been specifically listed in the programme of activities. 
&&  Finally, the Secretariat said that in order for the Secretariat to provide Members with new documentation, the next informal consultation was tentatively set for mid-June 2004.
&& The representative of Chad said that the "Geneva Week", held twice a year, made it possible for non‑resident Members and Observers to follow the negotiations taking place in Geneva.  His delegation had a comment with respect to the organization of activities.  In Central Africa, the region to which Chad belonged, regional activities were only held in one or two of the Members of the region.  That did not make it possible to get a critical mass of officials to ensure the follow-up of the activities.  His delegation suggested that the hosting of  regional activities rotate among the Members of the region so that all Members would benefit.  Concerning national activities his Government had submitted a request for three activities in 2003.  It might be a question of programming which had prevented them from being held in N'Djamena.  In 2004, his Government was among the 19 Members which had submitted their requests and he hoped that its request would be taken into account since activities had not been organized at the country level in 2003.  That put his Government at a disadvantage compared to the other Members of the region.
&& The representative of Barbados said that paragraph 24 of the Annual TA Report mentioned that groundwork was undertaken for widening the coverage of the regional trade policy courses in 2004.  In that context, she mentioned that a regional trade policy course for the Caribbean region had been concluded earlier in 2004 in Jamaica, and that the reviews of that course were good.  She wished to stress the usefulness of that course for the CARICOM region.  The Secretariat had recognized the CARICOM as being a region with special challenges requiring targeted TA.  That reflected the mandate given in the Doha Ministerial Declaration relating to technical co-operation.  Given that Members would be considering the draft 2005 TA Plan at the next meeting of the CTD, it might be timely to note that a useful TA activity had been initiated in the Caribbean region and she hoped that another such regional trade policy course would be delivered in 2005.
&& The representative of Trinidad and Tobago said that her delegation had not asked who benefited from the courses.  Part of the question she had asked related to the involvement of universities in WTO TA programmes.  She said that she wondered whether there was any way in which the beneficiary universities, or the institutions in the beneficiary Members, could be more effective in their participation in the programmes.  If a response could be provided through a bilateral discussion later, her delegation would welcome such a discussion.  
&& The Chairman suggested to close the debate as there would be a possibility for Members to discuss with the Secretariat during the next informal consultation.  
2003 Technical Co-operation Audit Report (WT/COMTD/W/125)
&& The Secretariat said that the Technical Co-operation Audit (TCA) Report for 2003, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/125, (the Audit Report) examined the issues of TA relative to its different phases, starting from its planning phase, in which the most important tasks were the identification of the needs of the Members, and the collection of other basic information.  The Audit Report then examined the design phase of the TA, which included, inter alia, the definition of the target groups, the formulation of objectives and indicators, and the definition of what should be done and how.  The Audit Report further addressed the implementation and delivery phase and finally, the evaluation phase.  In the latter section, the Audit Report provided observations on the effectiveness and efficiency as well as the relevance and sustainability aspects of the WTO TA.  The TCA had come to the conclusion that WTO TA had continued to benefit a great number of developing country staff from ministries of trade, commerce, foreign affairs, industry and other agencies.  They constituted an impressive group of more than 14,000 people.  The objectives were to reach as many people as possible and to produce lasting capacities.  However, the TCA preferred a qualitative approach which might benefit fewer people, but whose results were more sustainable.  The TCA was satisfied with the positive feedback received from the participants of WTO workshops, seminars and courses.  Therefore, the highlighted weak points and suggestions should be seen in the light of hundreds of successful TA activities.  The TCA had found that there was room for improvement in every phase of the TA cycle.  Inter alia, the report suggested:
a more systematic analysis of the needs both of the Members and the selected participants, thereby the TA activities could be made even more relevant to the participants' work,
improvements in the formulation of TA objectives and the measurement of their achievement,
the consideration of sustainability issues already in the design phase, 
continued improvement in the teaching methods, and
encouragement of a more regular and systematic application of the evaluation procedures and the lessons learned.  
Regarding the issue raised by one delegation on an external evaluation, the Secretariat said that the TCA was in the process of finalizing a first draft of terms of reference for an external evaluation.  Once a complete draft was ready, a meeting would be organized to discuss it.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation appreciated the fact that the Audit Report built upon recommendations made by Members at previous CTD meetings.  However, the Audit Report noted the continuing high proportion of activities implemented on an ad hoc basis.  Although her delegation did not wish to restrict flexibility, she said that a high proportion of ad hoc activities could have implications for the planned activities.  She said that her delegation looked forward to seeing how the new process of planning in 2004 would impact on the ad hocism that had been somewhat of a problem in the past.  In addition, she said that her delegation supported the aim to do fewer things better, and ensure quality of the activities undertaken rather than quantity.  That comment had been made by many delegations over the course of the last meetings.  She said that her delegation had a few technical questions to ask.  Paragraph 59 of the Audit Report stated that the monitoring and evaluation procedures provided for other types of evaluations such as thematic and ex-post evaluations which the Secretariat had not yet experimented with, and that the first ex-post evaluation was planned for 2004.  She asked how the Secretariat compared those with other types of evaluations, and when it was planning to take that particular type of evaluation into account.  She further asked if the database which had been developed in the WTO to show evaluation, mentioned in paragraph 109, was accessible to Members.  Paragraph 110 related to the recommendations from the Audit Report to various divisions of the WTO.  She said that her delegation would welcome a discussion of those recommendations, perhaps at the next informal consultation.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that, although the Audit Report was good, it had to some extent been overtaken by the events, by the 2004 TA Plan, and the change in method for 2004.  That was a good sign of the capacity of the Secretariat to adapt.  However, his delegation was of the view that some statements in the report were somewhat congratulatory.  That was acceptable if such statements were supported by elements to that effect.  His delegation understood the need for diplomacy in an institution and the need for close interaction between the TCA and the people responsible for technical co-operation.  However, there was also the need for independent scrutiny.  The TCA had to be totally independent in its judgement and he said that he knew that that was the case.  That objectivity nevertheless had to show in the report, and it was in that sense that his delegation voiced slight criticism.  He said that he wished to repeat the comment made about the Annual TA Report, and stressed the importance of establishing a monitoring mechanism to ensure that there was a regular follow up of the recommendations and the lessons learned in the audit reports.  The area of needs assessments was one in which events had overtaken the conclusions of the Audit Report.  The Audit Report stated for instance that it was important to have homogeneous groups and longer term capacitation objectives and that that should not be beyond the realm of the Secretariat.  The Audit Report then stated that the ideal would be to develop individual country programmes for two to three years.  That had to be done.  It was not just an ideal, it was important that it was put into practice.  It also had to be clear that the Member was in charge of its own process as well as the choice of participants for instance.  Such choices and the selection of participants still had to be related to a needs assessment and to the building of institutional capacity and not the training of people.  The focus of the TA plans should be on how to develop trade policy and trade operation institutions in individual Members, what the requirements were, and how training and support related to that development.
He said that the next point he wished to make related to monitoring and evaluation.  His delegation felt that the WTO had embarked on a good system, but which still had to be developed.  The TCA service to TA providers was a good idea as it was not certain that high level professionals also were good trainers.  There might even be a contradiction between the two.  The TCA service to TA providers was therefore essential.  The Audit Report showed that some of the basics, even in short-term seminars, still had to be changed, such as the lack of baseline evaluations and the confusion between activities and results.  Those were small details but they were essential because they were the building stones for the evaluation system.  If they were more accurate, the feedback would be more accurate as well, and Members would get better quality TA in the future.  Technical co-operation was expensive and difficult to evaluate and it was therefore important to have tools to improve quality and cost effectiveness.  In that sense, the question was the lack of elements for considering the sustainability and the relevance of the system.  He said that his delegation wished to put emphasis on the need for ex-post evaluation, and considered that it would be good for such an exercise to be undertaken in 2004.  However, that should not be the only one.  More such evaluations should soon be undertaken.  
He further said that he had some comments regarding the documents and the funding of the TCA.  The Audit Report mentioned that some of the internal WTO documents produced were useful as sources of information for the training.  He said that his delegation wished to add that documents from other relevant institutions could also be used such as from UNCTAD or some of the recent research by the World Bank, which had become more closely linked to the negotiating process than before.  There were also many other capacity-building tools which might be worth pursuing.  It was important to link any training to actual problems and hands-on support in Members, as Members even saw some training and seminar fatigue at the bilateral level.  Activities such as trade clinics or training related to the solution of real problems might be a way of achieving a higher efficiency in many cases, rather than seminars based on an identification of needs.  Finally, he said that his delegation believed that the size and the funding of the TCA Unit was a problem.  His delegation wished to see that a long-term solution be found to ensure that the unit was able to accomplish its tasks in a stable and predictable environment.  He said that his delegation therefore proposed that a certain percentage of the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund be used to finance the activities of the TCA Unit.  In that regard, he asked what was happening with the financial support provided by the Department of International Development (DFID) of the United Kingdom, as he had understand that that support would cease by June 2004.  He asked what measures the Secretariat was considering to ensure the continuation of the TCA's work after that.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that a general assessment of the Audit Report was that the Secretariat was doing a good job in delivering on its TA mandate.  The Audit Report also noted that there was room for improvement and he said that he believed that the report provided a useful contribution to further improve the planning, delivery and evaluation of TA.  The Audit Report pointed out that the percentage of ad hoc activities had been 36 per cent in 2003.  There was one procedural and one substantive aspect to that.  As to the procedural aspect, he pointed out that the 2003 TA Plan stated that ad hoc activities would be kept at 5 per cent.  He said that, to put it mildly, 36 per cent was therefore somewhat too much.  He suggested that it would have been appropriate for the Secretariat to signal that issue to the Members when it was half way through the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan so that Members could have been consulted.  On the other hand, the Members themselves might partly bear the blame for the situation running slightly out of hand.  Members had received the quarterly reports and his delegation had noticed that the number of ad hoc activities had been quite substantive without raising it at that point.  He said that the message he wished to convey was that his delegation did not consider the TA Plans as loose guidance for the Secretariat.  When there was such an important policy principle laid down in the TA Plan as to cap the percentage of ad hoc activities, it was important that that policy was being implemented.  As to the substance, his delegation understood the Secretariat's difficulties in planning the technical co‑operation and recognized that some degree of flexibility was needed.  He was therefore not surprised to see a substantive percentage of ad hoc activities.  His delegation nevertheless felt that that number could be reduced by improved planning.  He said that he agreed with the comments made by the representative of Switzerland regarding planning on the basis of needs, and he also agreed with the suggestion made in the Audit Report to put the planning of needs in a multi-year respective in each Member.
He continued by saying that the Audit Report contained some good recommendations to improve monitoring and evaluation.  His delegation supported most of the points mentioned.  Evaluation was an integral part of the management process of TA.  His delegation therefore supported the TCA efforts to include evaluation in the design of activities.  With regard to the sustainability of the activities, the Audit Report made the important point that ensuring sustainability was a joint responsibility of the Secretariat and the recipient Members.  The CTD had just discussed the selection criteria.  The selection of participants was key to ensuring the sustainability of an activity and he had heard the Secretariat pointing out that beyond the trade policy courses at the WTO headquarters in Geneva and at the regional level, the Secretariat did not have the possibility to select the participants.  However, he understood the Audit Report to take that argument a step further by actually proposing the establishment of selection criteria, and he sought information from the TCA and the ITTC on how that approach could be further enforced.  He asked if it would be possible to enter into dialogue with the recipient countries, especially regarding the expensive regional activities, to ensure that the right participants were attending the activities.  Finally, he said that he wished to make a general point regarding the funding of the TCA Unit.  His delegation noted the comment in the Audit Report and agreed with the representative of Switzerland that the TCA was important and should be continued.
&& The representative of Nicaragua said that his delegation wished to comment on the information received and provide some ideas for the new phase of TA with new programmes and mechanisms being implemented.  His delegation had for some time felt the need to formally create sub-divisions of countries which one particular country or sub-region was responsible for, as was done in other organizations.  He said that, although he knew that the Secretariat already operated in that way, he agreed with the representative of Switzerland that, in order to make it official there was a need to create individual programmes for Members.  Although many developing countries faced the same realities, their problems still varied in many respects.  All Members had to move on to the next phase, although not with the same pace.  The best way to proceed would therefore be for the Secretariat to create a TA plan, activity by activity, which would be specific to each Member and which dealt with each individual Member's realities and took the problems each Member encountered into account.  Regarding the ad hoc activities, he said that, at that stage of the negotiations, the playing field had changed.  It was therefore necessary to maintain a certain flexibility within the Secretariat  to adapt what had been foreseen to situations that might arise.  His delegation also believed that evaluation was important as the lack of an assessment of the TA activities undertaken meant that the same tools might be provided to the same Member, ministry or person several times.  That was not a problem which was unique to the WTO, but it happened in other international organizations as well.  Such duplication would result in a loss of time and resources that could have been be used for other activities.  Another problem was that experts in Nicaragua had received so much TA that they could move on to another stage with different courses or different mechanisms to meet their needs.  In addition to courses attended by capital-based experts, the experience of his Government was that what stimulated the understanding of the WTO most and led to a more active participation by his Government in the debates in Geneva was the participation of experts from the capital in WTO events or negotiations in Geneva.  That could be achieved by coinciding workshops or other TA activities with specific formal meetings in the WTO.  That practice, as well as internships, had a positive effect on his delegation's performance at the WTO.
&& The representative of Barbados said that she wished to comment on one small aspect which was the issue of ad hoc activities.  She said that she had listened closely to the representative of the European Communities, expressing his delegation's concerns at what he termed a high percentage of ad hoc activities in 2003.  She said that her delegation believed that the Secretariat's ability to deliver effective and results-oriented TA depended, to some extent, on its capacity to exhibit flexibility and responsiveness to Members' needs.  Members, and particularly the ones with smaller administrations, were sometimes unable to articulate all their needs at once or sufficiently in advance of a delivery period during the preparation of the TA Plan for the following year.  She said that, although she understood the concerns of expressed by the representative of the European Communities, her delegation was not too worried about the increase in the number of ad hoc activities.  A high number of ad hoc activities would only be problematic if they endangered the implementation of the approved TA Plan.  She reiterated that the ability of the Secretariat to be flexible in its responses was important and her delegation did not, under any circumstances, wish to see a return to the previous policy of zero tolerance for ad hoc activities.
&& The representative of Panama said that her delegation wished to stress the importance it attached to the evaluation of the TA activities undertaken.  She agreed with what had been said by the representative of Switzerland on the audit exercise and the value of the TA evaluation instrument.  She requested that the CTD discuss how the TA evaluation exercise could be better focused.  The evaluation was an instrument that would assist Members make TA a stronger, more solid tool for true assistance.  Trade-related TA should take the way Members had been applying trade policies into account and should identify areas where Members still needed to do more work in order on to abide by their WTO commitments.  She said that her delegation had the same concerns as those expressed by the representative of Switzerland.  It was only by effectively assessing the TA activities already undertaken that future assistance would meet the specific needs of developing countries.  A thorough evaluation would also help Members identify how TA had been used by the Members, and that would help other Members do likewise and improve their ability to fulfil their duties.
&& The Secretariat thanked the Members that had intervened for their comments and their critics of the Audit Report.  The TCA had tried to be critical and had not had the impression that it was self‑congratulatory or too nice towards the WTO staff.  In fact, some WTO staff had not reacted positively to some of the comments and suggestions contained in the Audit Report.  The TCA had considered it important to raise the issue of ad hoc activities.  However, the new design of the 2004 TA Plan would to some extent neutralize the problem of ad hoc activities, for the Members who considered them problematic.  Several elements that had influenced the number of ad hoc activities in 2003.  One was that the Secretariat, had been preparing for the Fifth Ministerial Conference.  Certain deadlines, such as for the preparation of market access and services offers, had required TA which had not been planned.  The database that the TCA used had been set up when the TCA had been launched in 2002, and was being used to introduce the information contained in the back‑to‑office reports prepared by the TA providers.  The database contained the raw-material for the elaboration of the Audit Report, both in terms of statistical and substantive information.  There was no direct way for Members to access the information in that data base, but any Member that wished to have a look at it could contact the TCA.  However, the way it was set up would only provide Members with raw-material and might not provide Members with the possibility to draw conclusions.  However, Members' access to its content could always be discussed.  As the TCA had been put up on a provisional basis, it had decided in the revision undertaken in the second part of 2003, that it would be useful to consider how the system was working, and had arrived at some conclusions that had been included in the Audit Report, before the last paragraph on recommendations.  However, if Members felt that some of those elements could be subject to consultations or discussion in a different fora, the TCA would be pleased to follow Members' wishes in that respect.  There were two possible ways for the Secretariat to follow-up on the recommendations of the audit.  One was through the internal WTO Technical Assistance Management Committee (TAMC) with the ITTC and the TA focal points from the operational divisions.  TAMC Members had already began to exchange lessons learned by individual divisions from the implementation of different TA activities.  Those lessons were often useful for other divisions as their applicability extended beyond the particular subject matter.  The TCA found that it was important for TA providers to share lessons that were particularly negative or positive with other TA providers.  The second way for the Secretariat to follow-up on the recommendations of the audit was something that the operational divisions were already doing, namely by immediate follow-up by the operational divisions to lessons learned through the self-evaluation of the individual activities.  One official then shared with the rest of the division any problems encountered in the delivery of any TA activity and ways of resolving those problems.
The TCA went on to say that it was true that the Secretariat staff who provided the TA were not necessarily formed as trainers, and that was one of the points made by the representative of Switzerland.  In fact, the professionals in the Secretariat had to undertake the technical co-operation activities in addition to their other duties of servicing WTO bodies and elaborate background documentation, etc.  In spite of them having attended a course for trainers in 2003, which had improved the quality of the training they provided, it was true that not all Secretariat professionals had a culture of training.  The TCA was attempting to explain to the TA providers how to improve, from the design phase of any TA activity, everything that was linked to the preparation of objectives, the determination of indicators of achievement etc. until the final evaluation.  For instance, the Audit Report mentioned that many evaluations were still based on the views of the participants.  The TCA was trying to make the point that that was only one element of evaluation, and that, in addition, it was important to know what the TA providers had to say as they were introducing more dynamic teaching methods in the seminars.  The TA providers were moving away from typical lecturing from a podium to more inter-active exercises and tests and by organizing the students into different groups to tackle particular problems.  Those new teaching methods was one of the positive elements identified through the reading of the back-to-office reports.  The Audit Report could have mentioned the inclusion of documentation provided by other organizations as it was a fact that, in all activities organized jointly with other international organizations, whether it was the World Bank, UNCTAD or any other organization, participants did receive documentation prepared both by those organizations and by the WTO.
Regarding ex-post evaluation, the TCA further said that it had decided that, after two years of application the policy, it was necessary to consider if other methods of evaluation could be put in place.  The TCA would therefore attempt some ex-post evaluations and had the intention of starting with the three-month trade policy courses because they were activities of a long duration which required much investment, both in financial terms and in terms of human resources.  The idea was to carry out such an evaluation in the second part of 2004.  The ex-post evaluation would consist of considering what lessons could be learned about the current situation of government officials who had attended a particular trade policy course two or three years ago.  The issues to be considered were what those officials were working with and if, and how, they were using the knowledge they had acquired during the three-month course.  The TCA was still in the process of designing questionnaires and preparing other elements that it was going to use for that purpose.  With respect to the funding of the TCA, the situation was as mentioned in the Audit Report.  Thanks to the financial contributions made by the Government of the United Kingdom, the Secretariat had, during the past two years, been able to engage a consultant who had worked in the TCA.  Apart from that consultant, the TCA Unit only consisted of one professional on a regular post, as even the secretary was financed with resources for temporary assistance.  The TCA had began discussions within the Secretariat to find out if resources could be made available for the TCA to continue its work from September to December 2004.  The TCA recognised the suggestion made by the representative of Switzerland that financial resources could be taken from the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund.  That was a possibility of resolving the situation if Members so wished.
&& The Secretariat wished to respond to a number of points that had been raised. With regard to what had been said by the representatives of Chad and Trinidad and Tobago, the Secretariat had a policy for the delivery of TA.  However, it was not a policy invented by the Secretariat but something Members had asked for, and that the Secretariat considered to be an important part of the TA programme.  One policy was that the Secretariat tried to spread regional activities as much as possible among the Members in the region or sub‑region.  There was only one requirement and that was that the infrastructure necessary for the holding of an activity be available.  Such infrastructure included not only accommodation but also ease of access in terms of air connections, etc.  The Secretariat had no a priori regarding the hosts of regional activities and was prepared to discuss with any Member that was interested in hosting a regional activity, bearing in mind the requirements mentioned.
  && The Secretariat said that it was still not certain it had understood what the representative of Trinidad and Tobago had asked and suggested that the Secretariat contact that delegation to discuss the issue bilaterally.
  With respect to ad hoc activities, the Secretariat said that, as had already been mentioned by the TCA, the Audit Report referred to activities carried out in 2003.  Ad hoc activities had been an issue in 2003 because of the way the 2003 TA Plan had been devised.  There were a number of reasons why the Secretariat undertook activities that had not been programmed in the 2003 TA Plan.  One of the most important reasons, as had been mentioned by the TCA, was the preparations for the Fifth Ministerial Conference.  Members had, in the run-up to the Fifth Ministerial Conference, put in place a number of activities at which it would have been unthinkable for the WTO Secretariat not be present at.  The flexibility built into the 2004 TA Plan should neutralize the problem of ad hoc activities.  However, even in the best made plans, and even in the parts that the Secretariat had planned, there were still going to be unforeseen events which the Secretariat could not account for when it presented Members with the TA Plan for the following year.  In particular, the Secretariat could not account for meetings and conferences which were organized by other organizations or by groups of countries such as ministerial meetings, etc.  A number of such meetings were going on at that particular moment and it would be difficult for the Secretariat, which was being invited to be present at those meetings, not to attend, as they were directly linked to the negotiations.  The question that Members might wish to consider was whether the financing for the Secretariat's attendance at such meetings should come from the TA budget or from some dedicated fund for that purpose.  Those were core activities of the WTO.  The TA fund was often solicited, but it was not always easy to make the link between the solicitation of the TA fund and the TA aspects of the activity.  However, there was no other source of funding, and the Secretariat had to attend such meetings and that posed a problem.
On the selection criteria for activities that were not trade policy courses, he said that some of the operational divisions did carefully go through the lists of proposed participants for regional activities and, if it seemed obvious from the title of the person that he or she should not be attending the activity because it was not related to the person's field of work, then the division raised the matter with the authority concerned.  The Secretariat also tried to be as precise as possible in the letters of invitation to help ensure that the people who came to the activity were the ones that should be there.  However, that was not necessarily possible for all activities as some were easier to identify than others.  The Secretariat was nevertheless prepared to consider any system of vetting proposed by participants as long as it was resource-light and could be put into place, either by the ITTC or the operational divisions, in order to help resolve the problem of unsuitable participants, because the Secretariat acknowledged that there was a problem.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had understood the question posed by the representative of Trinidad and Tobago and hoped that, after the bilateral consultation between the Secretariat and that delegation had been held, the Secretariat would share with other Members the response it might offer to Trinidad and Tobago.  The question had been precise and related to a subjected of interest to her delegation as well.  The answer might also contribute to information regarding the usefulness of the TA activities carried out on a regional- or capital-based basis.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that he wished to clarify what he had said regarding ad hoc activities.  He had distinguished between a procedural issue and a substantive issue.  With regard the substantive issue, he said that there might have been good reasons for having a large percentage of ad hoc activities in 2003.  However, the number in the 2003 TA Plan had been capped at 5 per cent of the total number of activities, while the figure of ad hoc activities actually undertaken in 2003 amounted to 36 per cent.  That posed a problem, and that problem should have been pointed out.  That was the reason why his delegation had raised the issue, even if it recognised that there were good reasons for scheduling a number of unplanned activities in 2003.  However, attempts should be made to reduce the number of ad hoc activities in the future.  He suggested that that could be achieved by improving the planning process.  He said that he realized that that was something that might not be achieved immediately.  A gradual process of reduction might be required, while a certain level of flexibility still had to be kept.  His delegation was therefore not advocating a zero tolerance for ad hoc activities.  With regard to the Secretariat's attendance at international conferences, he said that that problem seemed to have been resolved as the 2004 TA Plan indicated that those activities were covered by the regular budget.
&& The Committee took note of the three reports as well as of all the statements made.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES 
&& -	Communication from Switzerland (WT/COMTD/W/129)
&& -	Communication from Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda (WT/COMTD/W/130)
&& The Chairman said that the Committee had two submissions before it:  one from Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda contained in document WT/COMTD/W/130, and one from Switzerland contained in document WT/COMTD/W/129.
&& The representative of Kenya introduced the additional submission, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/130, made on behalf of the delegations of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania.  That submission highlighted which commodity issues should be handled by other working groups and negotiating bodies.  She said that the submission began by highlighting that the proposal to find solutions to the commodity issue, as suggested by the three delegations in the CTD, was nothing new, since in the GATT years, rules adopted for negotiations had provided for the establishment of separate procedures or mechanisms aimed at ensuring that adequate and priority attention was paid to the liberalization of trade in tropical products.  That was reflected in the preamble of the Agreement on Agriculture.  However, that idea seemed to have been neglected in the latter years leading to the crisis situation that had motivated the three delegations to make their initial submission on the commodities issue in the CTD.  She said that the three authors of the proposal believed that Members acknowledged that solutions needed to be found to the commodity crisis.  That was also the reason why paragraph 28 had been included in the draft Ministerial text transmitted to Ministers at the Cancún Ministerial Conference for consideration.  She said that although she was aware that the draft Cancún Ministerial text as a whole had not formally been adopted, her delegation believed that there was general support that the CTD, within its mandate, could continue with its work on the commodity issue in co-operation with other relevant international organizations.  The draft paragraph 28 further recognized that various trade-related aspects of the issues could be addressed in the ongoing negotiations.
She went on to say that, after that background information, the submission built on the illustrative list of issues, identified on pages 9 to 10 of the initial submission, and proposed that in the first instance, the responsibility for consideration of the issues listed should be shared between the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture, the Negotiating Group on Non-Agricultural Market Access and the CTD.  She said that she would concentrate on the CTD as the work of the CTD was the responsibility of the Members convened.  The CTD should continue to be the main body in the WTO responsible for discussing the various dimensions of the commodity issue, and it should continue to be the forum for intellectual discussions on the commodity issue.  The CTD should therefore provide the needed space to collect, present and review existing and ongoing research on commodities trade.  The submission identified some of the issues that needed further work and where work in the CTD could commence.  Those included the adverse impact of internal liberalization of trade, including the abolition of marketing boards by producing countries and the role of private sector mechanisms in commodity risk-management in stabilizing prices.
She further said that the submission proposed that, depending on the outcome of the initial discussion in the CTD, the Committee would transmit certain issues to other competent WTO bodies such as the Working Group on Trade, Debt and Finance and the Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology for more focused discussion.  The issues included the impact of declining commodity prices on the debt liabilities of commodity exporting countries, and the provision of technical and financial assistance to those countries for the development of processing industries and for the promotion of value-added products.  Finally, she said that the authors of the submission had the intention to submit detailed proposals to the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture and the Negotiating Group on Non-Agricultural Market Access, respectively, regarding the issues identified for work in those two bodies.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that primary commodities had been on the agenda of the CTD for some time.  A thorough discussion had, however, not taken place yet.  The difficulties experienced in the commodities market went beyond the narrow trade frame and could not be solved exclusively by the WTO.  Trade-related aspects did nevertheless play a role.  He said that his delegation's view therefore was that the WTO needed to take a closer look at the issue.  International action was required both from a development and from a trade perspective.  Commodities was an area where coherence between various policies and between various international institutions could be put in practice.  The bodies best placed to tackle the problems in the commodity sectors from a trade perspective were the negotiating groups in the WTO.  He said that his delegation was hopeful that the negotiations would improve market conditions for many commodities.  However, the negotiating groups were, by their very nature, not the bodies which would deal in depth with the substance.  It was nevertheless essential that the negotiating groups were well informed about the technical, economic, and commercial factors that influenced commodity price decline and volatility.  That would allow for a sound analysis and choice of instruments in the negotiations.
He continued by saying that his delegation's submission suggested a procedural framework to get a structured discussion started under the auspices of the CTD.  The objective of the discussion would be to further raise awareness of the problems surrounding trade in commodities, and to prepare the ground for the delegations concerned to bring in substantial proposals in the relevant negotiating bodies.  The objective would not be to try to agree on any recommendations because, in his delegation's view, that was better dealt with in the negotiating process.  He said that, although the approach suggested by his delegation might not appear ambitious, his delegation hoped that it was practical and might therefore yield a more sustainable outcome of the negotiations.  His delegation wished to avoid a stalemate as had occasionally happened, for instance in the in the Working Groups on Trade and Transfer of Technology and Trade, Debt and Finance.  In order to focus on the substance and to avoid discussions on whether the sessions were to be named "special", or "dedicated" or something else, his delegation simply proposed an informal working procedure under the CTD, for instance of workshop style.  The proposal was to give a mandate to the Secretariat to organize a first meeting before the summer break, if possible, and with specific sub-themes on commodities as the sole item.  Such a meeting would serve to analyse, in a horizontal way, the reasons and factors which led to the current situation for commodities, and to review the reforms and instruments in the trade area which had the potential to reverse the negative long-term price trends.  A number of instruments which could be considered at such a meeting had been added to the paper for illustrative reasons.  He went on to say that, without prejudice to ongoing discussions on observer status in the WTO, it would be important to invite experts and the relevant international institutions to attend and take an active part in such meetings, including the Common Fund for Commodities and others.  In light of the discussion at that first meeting, and in consultation with interested delegations, the CTD could then switch to a product-by-product approach, and select commodities for case studies for subsequent meetings.
He further pointed to some parallels with and differences between his delegation's submission and that by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda.  He also thanked those delegations for their contribution.  First, the motivation seemed to be similar in both submissions, i.e. that primary commodities were important in both the development and the trade context.  Market conditions were likely to be altered by the Doha Development Agenda negotiations and the authors of the two submissions wished to assure that those alterations were as development-friendly as possible.  Second, there were some differences in the approach, but they were not fundamental.  His delegation agreed with the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda that every delegation had the right to submit concrete proposals in the negotiating groups.  What was stressed in his delegation's submission was that, in addition, an informed discussion could help in elaborating such proposals, and might also prepare the grounds for better acceptance of such proposals.  The issues proposed for further discussion in the CTD in paragraph 12 of the submission by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda were likely to also be addressed if the CTD followed the illustrative list of instruments in the annex to his delegation's submission.  Finally, his delegation agreed with the view that it was a task for the CTD to review progress in the negotiating groups, indeed, Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration provided a mandate to do so.  His delegation did, however, put more emphasis on a fundamental discussion in the CTD, and proposed a mechanism to get such a discussion started.  He said that his delegation would be interested to hear the views of other delegations on its proposal, and was ready to accept other ideas which could bring the issue forward.
&& The Chairman said that Members had two substantial submissions before them which largely dealt with how the CTD could move the vital issue related to commodity prices forward.  As had been mentioned, the views expressed in the two submissions were not far apart, and he said that he hoped that some consensus at the level of the CTD could be reached.    
&& The representative of Zimbabwe said that the issue of commodities had been on the agenda of the CTD for some time and that important elements had been identified.  It was appropriate for the CTD to have the item as a standing item on the agenda to permit Members to get feed-back from the negotiating groups on their work with respect to commodities.  The commodity item should receive as much attention as possible as it affected the livelihood of people and was linked to trade and development.  Inputs should therefore be sought from all negotiating groups and the item should be taken up at the next session of the CTD.
&& The representative of Venezuela thanked the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda and the delegation of Switzerland for their important submissions.  As the Chairman had pointed out, the positions taken in the submissions were quite close.  He said that he found the proposals to be good.  The CTD was the appropriate WTO body to consider progress on the commodity issue.  However, the CTD should not only undertake a theoretical discussion.  It was important that the discussion led to decisions being taken.  Members had already engaged sufficiently in theoretical discussions, and decisions were needed.  Other international intergovernmental organizations, such as UNCTAD, had been working for more than 20 years on trade in commodities, in particular on their declining terms of trade.  In addition, the Common Fund for Commodities had been created to ensure a balanced trade in primary commodities, and that related to the item of observers.  There was a need for active participation in all the discussions taking place within the CTD.  Without such participation and co-operation, Members would be throwing out the coherence concept that had been raised in the WTO and that Members always had to keep in mind.
&& The representative of the United States welcomed the two submissions before the Committee.  She said that her delegation remained open to ideas that would enrich the CTD discussions of the commodity issue, without duplicating the ongoing work of negotiating bodies or mandates.  She said that her delegation recognized, as had been stated by the representative of Kenya, that proposals had been made prior to the Cancún Ministerial Conference and that the draft Ministerial text had been produced in that context.  Her delegation looked forward to hearing more, as Members proceeded into July 2004, about what would happen with the various pieces of unfinished business.  In the meantime, her delegation encouraged others to raise issues in other WTO bodies, and she said that her delegation welcomed that the delegation of Kenya had indicated that the three sponsors would be making proposals or presentations in the context of the agriculture negotiations and elsewhere.  Her delegation was engaged in the discussion and the draft text for the Cancún Ministerial Conference reflected the fact that Ministers would have supported continuing the discussions that Members had initiated in the CTD.  She said that the submission by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda made some interesting suggestions for other possible work in the CTD aimed at ensuring that, as other areas developed, Members would have the intellectual analysis available to them in the CTD.  She said that her delegation hoped to be able to come back to the agenda item and have a further discussion of the specific papers.  She said that she wished to highlight that, while commodities, or tropical products, were not explicit elements of the ministerial mandate for the Doha Development Agenda, her delegation believed that their trade liberalization dimension would be addressed as part of the comprehensive reform within the three pillars of the agricultural negotiations or in the NAMA negotiations.  Concerning the reference made by the delegation of Kenya to paragraph 12 of the submission, she said that her delegation felt that TA for diversification and private sector mechanisms for price-risk management fell within the expertise of other institutions such as the FAO, the World Bank and UNCTAD.  It was nevertheless useful, in terms of coherence, to identify those interests and possibly receive information from those institutions about their work.  She said that her delegation therefore agreed with similar comments made by the delegation of Kenya, and to some extent by Venezuela.
She went on to say that the submission by the delegation of Switzerland was rich with suggestions, including suggestions concerning instruments in an annex.  She said that her delegation had concerns regarding some of the instruments listed, in particular with respect to geographical indications and a number of overlapping agendas concerning geographical indications.  She sought clarification from the delegation of Switzerland regarding the rationale behind the various instruments proposed.  That information could be provided during discussions to enhance Members' understanding.  She said that her delegation was not prepared, at that meeting, to take on board a specific structure on how to proceed since Members had before them two submissions which proposed different ways of proceeding.  However, there was work that the CTD could continue to do within its mandate and her delegation looked forward to future discussions and further analysis of the proposals in the submissions.  She suggested that the CTD should avoid duplicating work being done in other bodies, such as in the context of the negotiating bodies.  She said that her delegation supported the notion of discussions in an intellectual manner, as stated by the representative of Kenya.  A next step in enriching the CTD discussion, in addition to the step taken at that meeting, could be to allow the World Bank, the FAO and UNCTAD to share information on recent activities, including the conference held on commodities in Rome.  The CTD could benefit from enhancing its understanding of the work conducted by other organizations.  However, if Members ended up engaging in too much of a debate on procedure under the commodity item, the CTD might get stuck in that debate.  If the CTD could acknowledge the statements and submissions made by the relevant delegations, and take on board the idea of hearing from other organizations which also had responsibility in the area, it would remain in a mode of discussing substance.  At the same time, if the Chairman so wished, he could undertake consultations with interested delegations on how to structure the discussions, in terms of process and substance, especially in light of the work between May and July 2004.  Members did have a draft text concerning commodities which might end up in the mix for a July 2004 outcome.
&& The representative of Japan welcomed the submission by the delegation of Switzerland as well as the one by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda.  He said that, although his Government needed more time to comment on the submissions, his preliminary reaction was that the proposal by the delegation of Switzerland was constructive and contained a comprehensive roadmap for future discussions, and he fully supported the proposal.  As his delegation had continuously been pointing out, in order to deepen the discussion related to the various issues identified in both submissions, it would be useful to invite the relevant international organizations to discuss in an informal manner.  He therefore supported the idea put forward in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the submission by the delegation of Switzerland.  His delegation also appreciated the proposal that the discussion be undertaken through a horizontal approach, and on a step-by-step basis.  As the CTD was a focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO, it was important for it to analyse the factors and the instruments best suited for solving the problems.  After having identified the problems and ways and means to resolve them, Members should engage in a discussion on their relations with the Doha Work Programme.  In order to move forward, his delegation asked the Secretariat to present a work programme based on the proposal by the delegation of Switzerland.  With regard to the submission by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, he said that his delegation could not accept the sector approach indicated in the paragraph 9 of that submission, although it might have been the approach of the GATT years.
&& The representative of Chile welcomed the two submissions on the important issue of commodities.  As other delegations had mentioned, the issue had been on the agenda of the CTD for some time, and the submissions were complementary in many aspects.  The submission by the delegation of Switzerland had the advantage of being a focused and pragmatic document.  The oral presentation made by the representative of Kenya had indicated that work was being done on more concrete proposals.  The important issue was to consider how the discussions in the CTD could contribute to the negotiations on agriculture and market access.  Consequently, the procedures suggested in paragraphs 9 and 10 of the submission by the delegation of Switzerland were appropriate.  The horizontal focus was also appropriate.  However, it was not clear to her delegation whether the analysis would be carried out through the instruments mentioned, and her delegation was concerned as it did not consider all instruments listed in the annex as appropriate.  She said that she agreed with the comments made by the representative of the United States regarding geographical indications.  Geographical indications was not an instrument to be analyzed in the CTD in the context of commodities.
 && The representative of Australia thanked the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda and Switzerland for their submissions on the important issue of commodities.  The details of the submissions were still under consideration by her Government.  She said that she nevertheless agreed with others who had suggested that there would be a need for more discussions of those submissions at future meetings of the CTD.  She noted that the submission by the delegation of Switzerland included issues which had little bearing on the issue of primary commodities.  That was the case for geographical indications as had already been mentioned by the representatives of the United States and Chile.  Discussions on an issue like that in the context of commodities in the CTD might take Members away from the question at hand and towards another developed country agenda.  In a broader sense, Members were at an interesting time as regards the negotiations.  A lot was going on, including some important meetings later that week.  There were also attempts by UNCTAD to set up a task force on commodities as part of the preparations for the UNCTAD XI Conference.  It was therefore difficult for CTD Members to divorce their discussions from external developments and her delegation did not wish to rush the CTD into making commitments, the consideration of which benefit from those broader views.  However, that did not mean that her delegation did not consider the issue of commodities important.  The commodity issue was clearly an important one which merited further discussion.
&& The representative of Canada welcomed the two submissions.  She said that her delegation supported the comments made by the representatives of United States, Chile and Australia regarding both submissions and supported the approach put forward in the submission by the delegation of Switzerland as a practical means of providing a process whereby Members could come to an informed discussion.  She also supported the inclusion of other relevant organizations as speakers in that process, although her delegation believed that it was premature to focus on any suggested instruments, as suggested in the Annex to the submission by the Swiss delegation.  Efforts were better directed to a focused discussion which allowed the Members of the CTD to look at the issue from a wider perspective.  In addition, her delegation was concerned about the inclusion of instruments in that Annex which were not appropriate to the discussion.  She said that, as far as the good submission by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda was concerned, it was clear that the approach proposed by the delegation of Switzerland might be beneficial, in that Members would first have a discussion in the CTD, before making decisions as to which bodies the particular issues would be sent.  
&& The representative of the European Communities thanked the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and Switzerland for their submissions and the presentations they had made.  Those submissions were still being studied in the capitals and his remarks were therefore preliminary.  He said that the commodity issue and the problems faced by commodity-dependent countries, particularly in the developing world, were important and it was timely for WTO Members to address them.  However, they had to be addressed in a way which ensured added value in terms of the mandate of the WTO vis-à-vis other organizations, and added value in terms of the mandate of the CTD.  He acknowledged that proposals relating to commodities could be raised in the ongoing work of the negotiating bodies.  The CTD should focus on what it could add, and part of that was a horizontal overview, as had already been mentioned.  It was for those reasons that his delegation was able to react positively to the procedural idea raised by the delegation of Switzerland of setting up an informal workshop-type discussion to consider the set of issues concerning commodities.  That process could lead towards a decision that Members should be able to make in terms of which issues Members should focus on in the CTD.  It would also be a useful process in terms of clarifying the information base that Members would work from.  He said that he agreed with other representatives who had mentioned the value of inviting other relevant organizations to present their work and their research.  He recalled the potential quarry of information that was available in the inventory compiled by the Secretariat at the end of last year which contained a listing of recent relevant research (WT/COMTD/W/121).  If Members were to decide to focus their attention on one given area they should not forget that they already had some reference points to look at in terms of a description of the situation and the challenges faced by commodity-dependent countries.
He said that he had wished to limit himself to those essentially procedural remarks.  Nonetheless, given the fact that a number of previous speakers had alluded to the question of possible instruments to be considered by the CTD he said that, while he agreed that the CTD should not rule anything in, nor rule anything out, in terms of what Members might wish to consider, it would be difficult for Members to agree to any given list of instruments to focus on.  For those delegations which had criticized the mention of geographical indications in one of the submissions, he said that his delegation considered geographical indications as one potential avenue for commodity exporters from the developing world to give their export products added differentiation which might contribute to additional revenue as a result of the product recognition which came from association with a geographical indication.  Another possible route towards promoting competitiveness and diversification and other appropriate responses to the challenges of the commodity market which Members should not loose sight of and might wish to explore in the future, was building capacity at the regional level.  Given that Members had recently been discussing some of the same instruments as those mentioned in the submissions to the CTD in the preparations for the UNCTAD XI Conference as being appropriate areas for UNCTAD to focus its future work, it was clear that Members had to address questions of coherence and complementarity of what could be done in the WTO and in the CTD and what could be done elsewhere, whether in UNCTAD, the World Bank, the FAO or in other international organizations.
&& The Chairman said that, it seemed to him that the proposal that the CTD convened an informal meeting to progress the matter was the best way to proceed.
&& The representative of the Solomon Islands welcomed the two submissions on which his delegation would provide comments at a later date.  On a related matter, he informed Members that limited number of copies of a draft study by UNCTAD and the Commonwealth Secretariat entitled "Commodity prices, Aid and Debt:  Implications for LDCs, Small Vulnerable States and HIPCs" was available with him.
&& The representative of India thanked the co-sponsors of submission WT/COMTD/W/130 and the delegation of Switzerland for its submission in WT/COMTD/W/129 on which he would give his delegation's preliminary comments.  Both submissions clearly recognised the importance of addressing the issue of declining terms of trade for primary commodities and its implications to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries.  Both submissions also recognised the role of the CTD in dealing with that issue, although the procedural approach suggested differed somewhat.  The delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda suggested a parallel approach by which some issues were to be taken up in the negotiating groups while other relevant issues were to be dealt with in the CTD, with CTD playing a nodal role.  The delegation of Switzerland suggested a more sequential or horizontal approach, annexing to its submission an illustrative list of items to be considered in the CTD.  He said that, while his delegation was not in a position to comment on substantive issues, it broadly concurred with the views expressed in both the submissions as well as the statements made by many delegations that the Committee would benefit from co-operation with other international organizations such as UNCTAD.  The issue of commodities was an important one.  He said that his delegation was flexible in terms of possible approaches for organizing the CTD's work, as long as it was organized in an efficient manner.
&& The representative of China welcomed the initiative of the authors of the two submissions.  The submissions were being studied by his authorities.  His delegation attached importance to the problems faced by primary commodity producing countries and believed that those difficulties should be addressed, both in the WTO and in other international organizations.  His delegation supported the proposal to organize informal discussions specifically devoted to the issue of commodities.
&& The representative of Nigeria supported the submission made by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, especially the proposal to refer certain aspects to the negotiating groups on Agriculture and Market Access.  He said that his Government was studying the submission made by the delegation of Switzerland.  However, simply studying the commodity issue would not help the process.  It should rather be referred to the negotiating bodies which had the expertise in the area.  He said that, with respect to geographical indications, his delegation was of the view that it should be discussed within the context of the TRIPS negotiations.
&& The representative of Kenya thanked all the delegations which had agreed that there was a need to address the commodity problem in the WTO.  She said that her delegation thanked the delegation of Switzerland for its submission, and that her delegation realized that a lot of thought and effort had gone into preparing it.  However, as had been mentioned by the representative of India, that submission actually removed the commodity issue from the negotiations into a mere discussion in the CTD.  That approach gave rise to concern to her delegation.  The suggestion that there should be in depth discussions on the commodity issue in the CTD before pursuing discussions in the negotiating bodies ignored the fact that much work had been carried out at the international level, particularly in UNCTAD and FAO.  WTO Members should take advantage of the work that had already been done in the area.  The issues listed in the Annex to the submission by the delegation of Switzerland excluded discussions on supply management arrangements.  She said that her delegation deemed supply management arrangements to be important pursuant to GATT Article XXXVIII which clearly recognized that Members might take joint action to negotiate international arrangements for stabilisation of prices of commodities at remunerative levels.  She said that her delegation also was uncomfortable with the proposal that a possible conclusion could be drawn, after discussions in the CTD, on the Chairman's own responsibility, given that the WTO was a Member-driven organization.  
She went on to comment on what other delegations had raised in their interventions and said that, regarding the concern about the CTD duplicating work of the negotiating bodies, particularly the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture, her delegation's desire was not to interfere with the ongoing horizontal negotiations in the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture, but rather to create a complementary procedure which would permit negotiations on commodities to be held on a product-by-product basis.  The current horizontal approach, based on the three pillars, might not be able to achieve that objective.  She said that, regarding the concern that the submission by her delegation and the delegations of Tanzania and Uganda seemed to propose sectoral initiatives for NAMA, it was clear that her delegation had been opposed to any sectoral initiative in the NAMA negotiations.  What was proposed in the submission were special procedures for securing tariff treatments for processed products which were more favourable and responsive to the needs of individual developing countries and LDCs, than those which would result from the application of the modalities under discussion.  Her delegation was not referring to a sectoral initiative.  Regarding the relationship between the Doha Work Programme and the issue of commodities, she said the two were closely related as they both dealt with development and the alleviation of poverty.  With respect to the convening of an informal meeting, she suggested that there should be no link between her delegation's submissions to the negotiating groups and the outcome of such an informal meeting of the CTD.  As proposed by the representative of India, the CTD should convene informally to deliberate further.
&& The representative of Switzerland thanked all delegations for their constructive comments.  On the positive side, the feedback was that all agreed that the issue deserved further detailed discussion.  He said that there also was agreement that the CTD had a role to play and that the procedure proposed by his delegation was feasible.  In addition, Members seemed to agree that the CTD should not lose time by getting stuck in a procedural discussion.  However, a number of reservations had been made.  First, some delegations were afraid that the CTD might duplicate work done elsewhere.  One possibility was a duplication of the work of some negotiating bodies.  His delegation's proposal aimed at clearly separating the tasks to be performed in the CTD and in the negotiations per se.  The CTD should be discussing the issue in a more academic way.  Delegations could then draw on those discussions to make interventions in the negotiating bodies.  The negotiating bodies would probably not go into depth and undertake any detailed discussion of the commodity issue.  There should therefore not be any duplication of work with the negotiating bodies.  His delegation did not propose any special sequence of work, or that discussions should begin in the CTD and that inputs could only later be made to the negotiating groups.  There was no difference between his delegation's submission and that of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda in that respect.  What his delegation proposed was a discussion in the CTD which would improve the basis for delegations to make proposals in the negotiating bodies.  However, nothing prevented delegations from discussing the matter in the negotiating groups.  Such discussions had in fact already begun in some negotiating bodies, such as the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture, and his delegation had no intention of stopping those discussions.  He went on to say that there was a second possibility of duplication of work and that was with ongoing activities outside the WTO.  His delegation was of the view that the CTD should be informed about discussions in UNCTAD and other international organizations.  The CTD should consider the results of those discussions for coherence purposes as it was important for the CTD to be aware of what other international organizations did in order to have a coherent approach in the WTO.  There was a clear separation of tasks at that level as well.  
He further said that a second reservation had been made with respect to the Annex of his delegation's submission.  He stressed that the Annex was not exhaustive and that it was possible that some instruments were missing.  The Annex had been added for purely illustrative reasons.  The idea was to provide the Secretariat with some guidance if Members wished to continue the discussion.  The Annex consisted of a compilation of instruments which had been mentioned in various reports.  Geographical indications had been mentioned as one possibility.  His delegation's position on geographical indications was clear.  However, there were also instruments regarding which his delegation might have a different view in the negotiations.  His delegation had attempted to compile a non-exhaustive, neutral and indicative list of instruments.  The third reservation made related to the appropriate timing for a decision on how to proceed.  His delegation was of the view that, if discussions in the CTD were not directly linked to the negotiations, and if they rather built a basis for inputs into the negotiation groups, there would be no interference with their work.  Members also had to consider that, when preparations began for an informal meeting, there would be a time-lag and it might therefore be better to begin immediately rather than awaiting the September 2004 meeting of the CTD to take a decision on how to proceed.  Time was used more effectively if Members could take a decision at the 49th Session.  There seemed to be two options following the comments made by Members.  One was to continue in informal consultations on how to proceed with the two submissions.  The second option was that the Committee instruct the Secretariat to begin to organize a meeting, including a possible agenda and a list of other institutions to invite.  The CTD could then come back in informal mode to discuss if that was a feasible way to proceed.  That procedure would also enable the delegations which had not been able to get a feed-back from their authorities to take a position.  He said that his delegation would prefer the second option as it believed that it was timely to begin discussions immediately as Members would need time to prepare their inputs for the negotiating bodies.
&& The Chairman said that it seemed as though the Committee could follow both options.  The idea of having the Secretariat prepare for an informal meeting and contacting other international organizations, keeping in mind the work already done through the submissions made, should not prevent any delegation from raising the issue in the negotiations on agriculture or NAMA.  It would only give the CTD the opportunity to have a meaningful discussion on an issue of importance to developing countries, with the objective of continuing to support a desirable outcome of the commodity issue in the negotiations.  
&& The Committee took note of the statements made and the two submissions.
&& The Chairman suggested that the Committee hold informal consultations and that, in the meantime, the Secretariat be asked to do the preparatory work and to contact other international organizations.  He would arrange for the Committee to meet within the upcoming two weeks to clarify the remaining issues.  
&& The representative of Kenya asked for clarification on the proposal by the Chairman and said that her delegation needed to consult the other co-authors of the submission.  Her understanding was that the Chairman would hold informal consultations to decide whether to hold a special meeting devoted to the commodity issue.
&& The Secretariat said that it assumed that the Chairman proposed to consult informally in order to consider how to proceed.  However, the Secretariat might, in the meantime, consider some of the issues that might be taken up at an informal discussion on commodities.  The informal meeting suggested by the delegation of Switzerland would not take place before Members so decided.
It was so agreed.
REPORT ON THE 37TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG/(XXXVII)/200)
&& The Chairman said that the Joint Advisory Group on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (JAG) had held its thirty seventh session from 26 to 30 April 2004 and that the report of that meeting was contained in ITC document ITC/AG/(XXXVII)/200.  The Committee had the pleasure of having with it, both Ambassador Henrik Rée Iversen of Denmark who had chaired the thirty seventh session of the JAG, and ITC Executive Director, Mr. Denis Bélisle.
&& The Chairman of the thirty seventh session of the JAG said that there had not been any difficulties during the thirty seventh session of the JAG.  The Secretary-General of the United Nations had sent his greetings as it was the 40th anniversary of the International Trade Centre (ITC).  WTO Deputy Director-General Dr. Kipkorir Aly Azad Rana and the Officer-in-Charge of UNCTAD had made introductory statements.  The Senior Adviser to the President of the African Development Bank Group, Mr. Ablassé Ouedraogo, had been invited as a special guest.  The main item had been the report introduced by ITC Executive Director, Mr. Denis Bélisle, in which he had informed members that the ITC had increased its delivery of TA to developing and transition economies by 19 per cent during 2003.  He had also introduced his new idea of an International Trade Fellowship Programme for developing country graduates in international business.  The Fellowship would be conducted with the "International Organization for Students in Economics and Commerce" AISEC, and the first fellowship would be sponsored by Hewlett-Packard.  He said that those introductory statements had been followed by statements by members in which, as a general pattern, developing country members asked for more of the good assistance provided by the ITC, and the developed country members expressed their satisfaction with ITC's work, but warned not to overheat the process.  Members had left it to the ITC to find a balance between those wishes in 2004, and the ITC had promised a double‑digit increase in its delivery of TA to developing and transition economies.  There had also been a short discussion on the ongoing, joint evaluation of the ITC and Members had taken note of it.  In addition, as was customary, the JAG had in the end requested donors to be as forthcoming as possible and he thanked the Governments of Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, India, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States for their contributions.  The donations had provided the ITC with about the same budget as it had had in 2003 and he said that he hoped that the disbursements would be made on time as delays had earlier been a problem.  In short, the thirty seventh session of the JAG had been a successful meeting giving proof of the high quality and professionalism of the ITC.  That was important for the WTO.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation supported the activities of the ITC and wished the organization well with continued progress with the activities and tools it offered developing countries.  Her delegation had once mentioned at a JAG meeting that it wished to see the ITC facilitate WTO negotiations, in addition to ITC's other work to assist developing countries implement and utilize the WTO rules, and benefit from and promote their exports.  The ITC had consistently invented creative tools, including trade maps, market access maps, and the pilot scheme which had gained momentum in services trade.  She said that her delegation hoped that that would provide an extra impetus to help developing countries integrate better into the multilateral trading system and participate in the negotiations.  Her delegation hoped to come forward with more financial support to the ITC than the contributions already announced, in order for ITCs projects to multiply.
&& The representative of Pakistan expressed his delegation's thanks to the ITC and its appreciation for ITC's work.  He thanked Ambassador Henrik Rée Iversen of Denmark for having chaired the 37th Session of the JAG, and ITC Executive Director, Mr. Denis Bélisle, under whose dynamic leadership the ITC had progressed and turned to practical, trade-related TA and capacity building for developing countries.  He said that he was pleased to note that the ITC had increased its TA with 19 per cent in 2003.  His delegation shared the appreciation of the ITC as being a high quality organization because of its professionalism.  The ITC had become a more focused organization over time.  Representing a beneficiary country member, he said that he wished to thank the donors for their generosity had hoped that they would keep supporting the ITC with even larger sums in the future.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation lent its support to the ITC and acknowledged the good work it had done.  It was worthwhile mentioning that in the WTO, as the WTO was one of its parent organizations, and she said that her delegation believed that it was a privilege to be an ITC partner.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that his delegation was aware of the work undertaken by the ITC during the last forty years.  What was negotiated in the WTO would not be translated into tangible results unless quality development training programmes stemmed from organizations such as the ITC.  He said that his delegation particularly noted that the ITC, in the past ten years, had developed a business-like approach to its TA programmes which had helped businessmen in countries like his own to understand what was negotiated in the WTO, and how to translate the outcome of those discussions in the WTO into tangible results.  He thanked ITC Executive Director, Mr. Denis Bélisle, for having transformed the ITC into that type of an organization, and said that, although businessmen in Sri Lanka had only to a limited extent been able to benefit from ITC's programmes, they had benefited from the large amount of publications produced by the ITC.  He also thanked the donors for their generous contributions and hoped that such contributions would continue in the future.
&& The Committee took note of the 2004 JAG report and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption.  
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& The Chairman said that several views had been expressed during the informal consultation on the matter he had held one week earlier.  As Members who were present at that meeting would recall, the suggestion had been made that the Secretariat be invited to make a presentation on the work of the Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology.  However, a number of Members had said that merely asking the Secretariat to make presentations did not add value.  The CTD did not wish to duplicate the work undertaken by the Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology.  Nevertheless, if there were matters in that area which fell within Paragraph 51 or anywhere within the mandate of the CTD, the Committee could extract that issue or those issues and bring them to the CTD with the proper focus and objective.  Nevertheless, he said that he would not resist any discussion on the work of the Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology if Members so desired.  He said that he was trying to focus Members' attention on what they wished to do and how they wished to do it.  If it could be done by attending the meetings of the Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology, then Members should rather do that than duplicate the efforts of that body in the CTD.  There had also been a proposal for the CTD to undertake a technical analysis of the issues related to the constraints to trade liberalization, such as the erosion of preferences and the loss of tariff revenue for developing countries.  There had been general agreement that Members could make more effective use of the time under the agenda item relating to Paragraph 51.  As Members had had more time to think about the CTD's mandate under Paragraph 51, he said that he sought Members guidance.  He also pointed out that he had inserted a footnote to the draft Work Programme for 2004 to assist Members' thinking.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation felt that the exercise foreseen under Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration was an important one for the CTD as well as for the Committee on Trade and Environment in keeping track of both developmental and environmental aspects of the negotiations under the broad heading of sustainable development.  The CTD had so far been following an approach of requesting presentations by the Secretariat of elements under negotiation, followed by a general debate amongst Members on aspects that could be considered developmental.  He said that his impression was that those discussions had become more interactive and useful with time, although he admitted that they had consisted of an exchange of views, based on the presentation made by the Secretariat's relevant experts for the negotiations concerned, rather than leading Members to a common view or any conclusions.  That was, however, not surprising at that stage of the process.  He suggested that the CTD continue the process by covering other issues that Members had not already considered.  The proposal had been made to request a presentation on the work of the Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology.  There was also the idea of a more horizontal discussion on issues such as preferences and fiscal revenue questions.  In addition, there were other elements of the negotiations that had not been mentioned, such as in the rules area where Members, for example, could consider anti-dumping, subsidies and regional trade agreements.  There had been proposals in the preceding weeks concerning developmental aspects in the area of the Information Technology Agreement.  While the areas of anti-dumping and subsidies were technical areas in which he said he would not feel comfortable venturing into any detailed discussion, a broader overview discussion of the developmental aspects and the application of a rules-based framework to support developmental objectives might be a useful exercise.  
He further said that, in addition to considering each subject area one by one, there might also, at an appropriate time, be an opportunity to return to some of the issues Members had already debated, although not in any depth.  That might be the case with some of the market access aspects.  The CTD was not the forum to make progress in terms of finalizing issues that were outstanding in the negotiating groups.  However, the CTD had the opportunity to take a step back and discuss some of the more horizontal aspects of the ongoing negotiations.  There should be time to bring relevant considerations back.  He said that he was not particularly worried about the suggestion that the CTD simply exchange information and debate rather than draw conclusions, as individual Members always could draw their own conclusions and take the elements discussed into account in the negotiating proposals they made as individual participants in the negotiations.  That might be a more realistic scenario than expecting all CTD Members to agree on a particular analysis of what was at stake in a particular area of the negotiations, as each delegation would consider such an analysis from a perspective that would reflect individual negotiating priorities and concerns.  However, Members should use the capacity and ability of the Secretariat to act as a neutral source of information on the ongoing negotiations, the issues at stake, as well as pointing to some of the external research done with a developmental focus.  Bringing such information to the CTD would serve the purpose of informing all delegations individually and would be beneficial for the conduct of the negotiations.  A discussion with a slight degree of distance from total engagement in the negotiations might help clarify some of the developmental issues at stake, particularly the developmental aspects of the negotiations and the contribution that a successful outcome in all areas could make to supporting the objective of the WTO in general and the one mentioned in Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration in particular.  He said that his delegation supported work in the CTD in line with Paragraph 51, even if the interest from the floor varied in terms of seeking to drive the exercise forward.
&& The Chairman said that it was precisely the interest from the floor that gave rise to some concern.  The CTD had received a mandate in Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration and it was for Members to decide what to do with that mandate, why, with what objective and with what time-frame.  Such targets would help Members focus on what they wished to achieve.
&& The representative of Barbados said that her delegation estimated that, at the open-ended informal consultation, both developing and developed country Members had expressed an interest in a deeper consideration of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  Members might therefore wish to consider both a deeper as well as a more cross-cutting discussion of those aspects.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that he shared the concerns expressed by the representative of the European Communities.  He said that he agreed with the Chairman that Members had to be practical and decide on specific subjects to discuss.  At the same time, experience from the past year had shown that it was not possible to hold discussions in relation to Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration if Members did not all agree on how those discussions should be conducted.  The Secretariat had in the past prepared background documentation which did not go as far as Members' knowledge about the negotiations as the Secretariat did not wish to take a position.  That signalled the problem that the CTD should not repeat the negotiations taking place in other WTO bodies, although Members should consider important negotiating issues.  However, that had to be done in a way which aimed to consider the developmental impact of certain options being discussed and what the effects in the real world would be.  That could only be done detached from the negotiations, without having to take positions, or having the interventions considered as possible positions of governments in the negotiations.  If Members could not agree on a process in which that type of discussion was possible, and gave themselves the means to carry it out, then it would not be worthwhile to consider specific subjects to discuss.  The Secretariat was not well placed to help Members with that.  He said that he believed that it was correct to say that those discussions should be somewhat of an academic nature and detached from the negotiating realities, and Members should seek outside support for those discussions.  The aim could be for Members to have before them two or three concise and relevant papers on the poverty effects of a certain policy option which could be used as background documentation for the discussions.  If Members could agree on that format, it would be easier to decide which subjects to consider.  Members had to ensure that no delegation wished to create a second type of negotiation on issues which were being negotiated elsewhere.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that his delegation was interested in the item and agreed with the representative of Switzerland that there was a need to engage in an academic type of debate.  To decide which topic to discuss when was secondary.  His delegation also agreed with the analysis by the representative of Switzerland that it was not a question of taking negotiating positions.  The CTD had its own peculiar mandate.  
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman said that, during the informal consultations he had held, he had also raised the issue of electronic commerce (e-commerce) and proposed that it be temporarily suspended from the Committee's agenda, unless any delegation had any specific useful work to recommend.  He had made his proposal as the Committee hardly had undertaken any activity on the subject since its 37th Session.  At the informal consultation, some Members had still expressed a wish for the item to remain on the agenda.  He said that he had no difficulty keeping the item on the agenda.  He asked if Members had exhausted their discussion on e-commerce for the time being and if it therefore should be left to be taken up at a future meeting, or if Members had any particular issue related to e-commerce that Members wished to consider in the CTD at the next session.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that, with a view to provide the Committee with some ideas for activities to undertake, his delegation had considered some of the work and research done by other international organizations.  E‑commerce was an important subject with direct social and economic implications for the economies of developed countries, developing countries and LDCs.  He said that e-commerce provided both development opportunities and challenges to developing countries. There were complex interlinkages of issues, policy requirements and options, and actions required at national and international levels. Several of those related to the multilateral trading system.  Hence, the discussions in the CTD should continue to better understand the issues and interlinkages between e‑commerce and development, and to identify actions that could be taken in the WTO to employ e‑commerce to promote development.  Regarding a global framework for e‑commerce, he said that a number of individual governments and intergovernmental organizations had taken steps to address the policy issues relating to the establishment of a global framework for e‑commerce.  However, those proposals contained little on the role of developing countries in designing, establishing and implementing such a framework.  He said that that was contrary to the concept of democratic global governance of a global network and the lack of developing country involvement would represent a collective loss to the objective of a global economy.  Therefore, it was necessary to develop mechanisms to ensure effective developing country participation in the establishment of a global framework for e‑commerce.  He said that his delegation believed that the CTD could hold discussions on that issue.  With respect to the control of the Internet, he said that who controlled the Internet was relevant both for the world as a whole and developing countries in particular as the Internet provided the backbone of e‑commerce.  He said that the Internet operated on a telecommunications ramp which had been built on technologies mostly developed in the West.  Not only was that structure extremely capital intensive, it was on the technological edge of emerging possibilities that required high-cost research and a strong financial base for long-term and sometimes risky initiatives that might become redundant and obsolete overnight.  Most developing countries had neither the financial nor the human resources to match those requirements, and could not be expected to or could not judge whether the standards and the set-up of e‑commerce would be fair and equitable, transparent or non-trade restrictive.  In that context, he said that the discussions on e‑commerce in the CTD could identify possible means to address some of those issues.  
He went on to say that his delegation believed that access to technology was a key issue for the growth of e‑commerce in developing countries.  It could not be presumed that the development of e‑commerce on its own would lead to the transfer of technology from developed to developing countries.  That was likely to be a complex process involving questions of among others, investment; expertise; government policies and market access.  The multilateral trade regime could contribute to better mechanisms for the transfer of technology.  That was another issue for more focused discussions in the CTD.  With respect to taxation and revenue losses, he said that though domestic taxation and customs tariffs were separate issues, the fact and possibility of levying a charge on a digital e‑commerce transaction needed to be considered as taxation issues had a bearing on the very foundations and growth potential of any economic idea.  He said that in the case of e‑commerce, the ramifications were global and affected the very concept and development of e‑commerce, as well as the policy that each developing country would need to adopt regarding its foreign trade and internal taxation.  He said that for most developing countries, domestic taxes and import and export duties continued to be a primary source of revenue.  That required an in-depth study and analysis in the CTD where initial discussions could be held to clarify as well as contribute to reaching convergence on some basic principles on addressing that.  That was notwithstanding the fact that that issue was being discussed in the Dedicated Session on E‑commerce.  With respect to classification, another issue that needed to be addressed was that of characterization.  E‑commerce could be characterized as trade in goods, trade in services, or as something different from either of those.  In addressing that issue key, differences between the GATT and GATS needed to be borne in mind as that would affect the policy and distinction between goods and services.  Hence, despite the many positive points, e‑commerce raised a basic difficulty for international trade where during e‑commerce transactions the distinction between a good and a service was not always clear.  That mattered because WTO rules treated goods and services differently.  Goods tended to be subject to tariffs whereas services were not and trade in services was limited by restrictions on "national treatment" or quantitative controls on access to foreign markets.  Therefore, the rules that would be devised for e‑commerce might affect the choice between physical and digital methods of trade.  He said that since that was a cross-cutting issue, the CTD would be an appropriate forum to discuss classification issues and their implications for international trade and development.  He said that the Council for Trade in Goods (CTG) and the Council for Trade in Services (CTS), within their focused and respective mandates to deal with trade in goods and trade in services only, could not adequately perform that role and, therefore, in that respect, the CTD could play a supplementary role.
He continued by saying that his delegation believed that e‑commerce had a catalytic effect.  It served to accelerate and diffuse more widely changes that were already under way in the economy, such as the reform of regulations, the establishment of electronic links between businesses (EDI), the globalization of economic activity and the demand for higher skilled workers.  With respect to policy flexibility and capacity building, his delegation believed that many of the issues related to e‑commerce and development pointed to the need for policy flexibility and capacity building of developing countries to enable them to take advantage of the opportunities offered by e‑commerce.  Those policy and capacity-building issues could also be discussed in the CTD.  With respect to the importance of e‑commerce for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), something his delegation considered pertinent, he said that the new trade-related information flows which were facilitated by information technology, both enhanced export opportunities for SMEs and lowered barriers to entry in overseas markets by enabling a virtual presence through the Internet.  Within that context, e‑commerce had been identified as offering developing countries, and SMEs within them, the opportunity to overcome some of the traditional constraints in international trade.  Such constraints included the distance factor and the lack of information about foreign market opportunities.  E‑commerce led to increased choices, lower prices, better quality goods and services, and faster delivery.  Reduced reliance on middlemen also enabled electronic traders to increase their profits.  Further added competition of foreign companies encouraged increased efficiency in production and additionally, e‑commerce had the potential to stimulate other sectors of the economy.  However, he said that while information and communication technologies provided a means to transmit and process information and documents quickly and effectively, many developing countries were constrained by limited telecommunication systems and high access costs.  Furthermore, there were wide disparities among and within developing countries in their levels of development and readiness for e‑commerce.  He gave examples of the challenges faced by developing countries relating to inadequate transport, communication and energy infrastructure, limited availability of and knowledge about computers and Internet access.  He said that while those points were of particular relevance to governments and the private sector, it was also important that they be discussed in the WTO as they were critical to issues relating to market access and rules for both goods and services.  Additionally, those points needed to be understood within the context of differing levels of development of developing countries and with the appreciation for the necessity of preserving their policy space in order for them to facilitate their national development goals.  Governments needed the relevant expertise and TA and time to review and adapt national laws and regulations in order to create the proper regulatory environment to facilitate e‑commerce.  He said that some governments might need to adopt administrative regulations and practices, and change others, for example customs procedures to facilitate e‑commerce and related services such as transport and delivery.  He said that developing countries required the human and financial resources, the TA and the time to design and implement national and regional ICT strategies for development.  E‑commerce business opportunities varied significantly from sector to sector and country to country, and depended on among others, the composition of trade, the number of Internet users in the local market and the banking system.  He said that SMEs tended to engage in trade at the local as well as at the international level.  Expansion into foreign markets through electronic channels required substantial changes in a company’s approach to doing business, specifically in terms of its marketing and delivery strategies, its research and development and the management of customer relations.  A dilemma for SMEs in developing countries was that they generally did not possess the resources to cope with changes to all aspects of their business.  Governments would therefore, to the extent possible, need to provide SME's with the necessary resources that would enable them to engage in e‑commerce locally and internationally.
He concluded by saying that although primarily an e‑commerce phenomenon characterized by the globalization of markets, there was a shift towards an economy based on knowledge and information and a growing prominence of all forms of technology in everyday life.  Those major societal transformations were under way and would probably continue into the foreseeable future.  As both a product and manifestation of such transformations, e‑commerce would increasingly shape modern society and those societal factors would merit attention from a public policy standpoint in order to ensure realization of its full benefits globally.  He said that other international organizations such as UNCTAD and OECD had done a good job in raising the developmental aspects of e‑commerce and his delegation believed that the CTD had not exhausted its deliberations on that important aspect.  Some thought provoking was required and it had been due to the Chairman's prompting that his delegation had begun to consider the issue again and try to come up with some ideas for the Committee's consideration in an attempt to provide some impetus to the discussions on e‑commerce.  He said that he hoped that Members would give favourable consideration to his delegation's proposal.  
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation appreciated the research that had been carried out by the delegation of Pakistan.  She said that it was her delegation who had in the past held the helm for a work programme on e‑commerce in the CTD and had attempted to convince developing country Members of the developmental benefits of e‑commerce.  She recalled that the agenda item on e‑commerce was being dealt with in the CTD as a result of a broader work programme on e‑commerce and presumably Members would, at some point, revisit that work programme.  However, it would be helpful for Members to discuss the developmental aspects of e‑commerce in the CTD notwithstanding the nature of the overall work programme on e‑commerce which was under the remit of the General Council as well as in other WTO bodies that had been commissioned to conduct certain aspects of the work programme.  
&& The Chairman said that the representative of Pakistan had gone to great length to explain the importance of e‑commerce and its relevance to trade and development.  He asked the representative of Pakistan to restate his proposals so as to give guidance to the Secretariat on how to deal with e‑commerce at the next meeting of the CTD.  
&& The representative of Pakistan said that he had, in his statement, raised a number questions to the CTD on various e‑commerce related issues including those relating to global governance, control of the Internet, access to technology, taxation matters, classification issues, issues relating to policy flexibility and capacity building and the role of SMEs.  His delegation believed that those were issues on which Members needed to further reflect.  Those were points for discussion and although the arguments in favour of that categorisation of issues might not be exhaustive they would lead to further discussions.  He said that Members were free to deal with any of those deliberations.  He said that his last proposal related to inviting other intergovernmental organizations to make presentations.  The UNCTAD Secretariat for example, had a section that dealt solely with e‑commerce issues which had prepared various annual reports and publications.  In that context, he had gone through the e‑commerce reports that UNCTAD had prepared in 2002 and 2003 as well as a report prepared by the OECD Secretariat for the purpose of that meeting.  He said that Members had not engaged in discussions on e‑commerce for a long time and in order to reactivate their discussions and to get ideas from the specialized agencies, his delegation felt that it would be relevant for the work of the CTD to invite the different intergovernmental organizations to give presentations on the different developmental aspects of e‑commerce.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that, during the informal consultations, the Chairman had suggested that the item on e‑commerce be temporarily suspended from the agenda and the representative of Pakistan had given reasons why it should not be suspended.  He said that it was useful to discuss e‑commerce in the Committee.  However, he was also aware that e‑commerce was an issue that UNCTAD had been working on for the past ten years.  He said that the United Nations had also recently appointed an Executive Director for a new ad hoc agency dealing with e‑commerce governance, and that work was being undertaken in other organizations on the broader perspective of e‑commerce.  He said that what the CTD needed to focus on was how the negotiations related to e‑commerce and what the developmental aspects of it were.  He gave an example of when he was involved in developing an electronic user system for textile exports in the Unites States.  Originally when that was proposed, experiences of other countries that had adopted the system were given, in terms of whether a country like Sri Lanka could afford to set up an electronic user system.  However when his Government had entered into the system at a low-cost level, it found that it was not extremely expensive.  E‑commerce was not always costly and developmentally challenged due to the costs.  He said that the CTD needed to consider the experiences of various countries, how e‑commerce added to their development needs and the needs in their foreign trade sector.  It also needed to consider the implications and development dimension of e‑commerce in the services negotiations and in trade facilitation, should Members decide to launch negotiations on that.  The CTD had a role to play and that role needed to be limited to areas where there were WTO implications and not duplicate but rather learn from the work that had been carried out by other international organizations.  
&& The Chairman said that the item on e‑commerce would remain on the agenda and that work would include presentations from other relevant organizations.  He said that Members would do justice to the issue as they moved ahead.  
&& The Committee took note of the statements made.  
GRADUATION OF THE MALDIVES FROM LDC STATUS (WT/COMTD/W/128)
&& The Chairman said that Members had been given the background to the issue of the graduation of the Maldives from LDC status at the informal consultations that he had held.  The item had been put on the agenda at the request of the delegation of the Maldives which had made a submission on the matter contained in document WT/COMTD/W/128.
&& The representative of the Maldives said that his Government was concerned about the possible consequences of graduation of the Maldives from LDC status as the Maldives had a narrow economic base and limited supply capacity which made it vulnerable to external shocks.  He said that graduation could also lead to the decline in special and differential treatment (S&D) with increased obligations.  His delegation had already raised the issue in the General Council and was now submitting document WT/COMTD/W/128 to the CTD.  He said that his delegation appreciated the support given by other delegations on the matter and looked forward to them showing understanding for his Government's efforts to secure a mechanism which would make the graduation process smooth and not too burdensome.  
&& The representative of Benin said that the arguments put forward in the submission made by the delegation of the Maldives, as well as the remarks that the representative of the Maldives had just made, led his delegation to request that the graduation from LDC to developing country status be made with the necessary flexibility and adjustments to ensure that there was a proper transition rather than an abrupt rupture.  That would prevent other graduating countries from fearing the loss of advantages such as preferences, S&D, technical and financial assistance and other support given.  His delegation therefore supported the request by the delegation of the Maldives for WTO Members to consider mechanisms and approaches that would facilitate the graduation process and offer the necessary flexibility.  
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation appreciated the submission made by the delegation of the Maldives on its graduation from LDC status.  She said that her delegation looked forward to working with that and other delegations to establish a workable process that would facilitate a smooth graduation from LDC status for the Maldives in the WTO.  Her delegation believed that discussing such a process might alleviate some of the concerns the Government of the Maldives had.  She said that her delegation wished to hear from other Members, but also offer some ideas of its own.  For example, the Government of the Maldives had completed a Trade Policy Review (TPR) in March 2003 which she suggested the Government of Maldives and the Secretariat could update.  That would give the Government of the Maldives and other Members the opportunity to review its trade regime and consider specific areas where WTO-related transitional mechanisms were needed, and develop a plan for the implementation of its commitments in light of the graduation.  Her delegation was open to discussing, where necessary, what an appropriate phase‑out of LDC status would be from the specific S&D provisions that provided exemptions for LDCs.  That would be made on the understanding that the Government of the Maldives provide Members with an action plan and that the result would be specific to the Maldives.  She added that the discussion in the CTD concerning how to assist the Government of the Maldives with a smooth phase-out from LDC status was not a precondition for discussions in other fora concerning the decision on graduation.  She said that her delegation looked forward to an expeditious presentation from the delegation of the Maldives on a WTO-specific action plan and to the final announcement of the graduation of the Maldives.  
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that he first wished to congratulate the Government of the Maldives on the economic success of that country.  He said that his delegation nevertheless understood the concerns of the Government of the Maldives regarding the adverse trade implications that graduation from LDC status would have.  The situation was further aggravated by the fact that there was hardly any precedence with regard to graduation from LDC status.  The limited experience available was not relevant to the case of the Maldives because it's economy was largely dependent on tourism.  The loss of market access in products with high preference margins would therefore have adverse implications.  He said that his delegation understood the concerns of the delegation of the Maldives and supported its request for smooth transition from LDC to developing country status.  He said that he also agreed with the proposal by the representative of the United States that WTO Members should consider what the WTO implications of the graduation of the Maldives would be and then design a reasonable and smooth transitional process. 
&& The representative of India said that the concerns and difficulties that the delegation of the Maldives had raised were real and his delegation hoped that, as the debate developed, Members would collectively recognize the valid nature of those concerns and the need to develop a smooth transitional process from LDC to developing country status for the Maldives.  He said that, as the case of the Maldives to his knowledge was the first case of such a graduation, Members needed to realize that the transition process would have precedent-setting implications.  Members needed to approach graduation in the WTO as a process rather than an event, and it should be made as smooth as possible.  He said that, during the informal consultations that had been held on the issue of the graduation of the Maldives, there had been a proposal for the WTO Secretariat to prepare a paper on the WTO implications of graduation from LDC status.  He said that such a paper would be a helpful input into the Committee's work, as would keeping track of the debate on graduation in other fora.  He said that he was not suggesting any sequencing or laying down of preconditions.  There were other fora which were debating the issue and those were the fora which had conceived the LDC category.  Since development was a broader concept than trade competence alone, work in the CTD would be assisted by keeping track of what was happening in other fora with respect to the issue.  
&& The representative of Pakistan said that, although the Maldives were to be congratulated for their change of status from LDC to developing country status, his delegation fully understood and was sympathetic to the dilemma that the Government of the Maldives faced as a result of that graduation.  He said that the issues highlighted in the submission were self explanatory and gave a clear picture as to the type of problem that it was facing.  He said that, while his delegation remained sympathetic to the request made by the delegation of the Maldives, he agreed with the delegations that had pointed out that it would be necessary for the Secretariat to study the implications of such a mechanism and how such a mechanism could be developed both within and outside the WTO.  He said that, although it was not completely clear what the representative of the United States had meant when she suggested an update of the TPR on the Maldives, he believed that there was merit in carrying out that exercise.  
&& The representative of Norway congratulated the Government of the Maldives for being in the process of graduating from LDC status.  It was a positive development which should be commended.  As had been pointed out by other delegations, graduation was a new issue that had implications, not only for the Maldives, but also for other LDCs which her delegation hoped would eventually graduate out of LDC status.  Her delegation believed that when a country had graduated into a higher economic and social level of development it needed to step out of the LDC group.  The LDC definition would become irrelevant if it was not taken seriously and that would have implications for other LDCs which had not come as far as the Maldives.  On the other hand, she said that her delegation believed that countries that were in the process of graduating had to be met by a flexible attitude in order to ensure that they did not have a social and economic recess as a consequence of losses of preferential arrangements which had been established for LDCs.  Members should therefore be open to consider ways of making the graduation a smooth process that was beneficial to both the graduating LDC and remaining LDCs.  How that could be achieved was not clear.  However, her delegation was interested in a paper by the Secretariat on the WTO implications of graduation.  When considering graduation, Members should not only consider it in terms of the graduation of the Maldives but from a more systemic point of view as a general issue for all LDCs.  She said that it also would be useful, as pointed out by the representative of India, to take account of the deliberations taking place in other relevant fora such as in the United Nations (UN) and the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).
&& The representative of Canada congratulated the Government of the Maldives on the economic success of the Maldives.  She pointed out that the issue of graduation of the Maldives was on the agenda for a substantive session of ECOSOC to be held in July 2004 and that that was the appropriate forum to discuss the matter.  However, she said that her delegation was sensitive to the issues that had been raised.  The Government of Canada had its own legal issues to consider as it had a market access initiative for LDCs.  Her Government was still studying the issue.  A paper by the Secretariat on the WTO implications of graduation would help Members in that respect.  She said that her delegation welcomed the thoughtful suggestions put forward in the submission by the Government of the Maldives.
&& The representative of the European Communities thanked the delegation of the Maldives for their submission and congratulated them upon their imminent graduation from LDC status.  He said that his delegation hoped that other LDCs would graduate in the near future.  He said that he agreed with other delegations that the objective that Members should aim for was to support graduation through some appropriately phased transitional arrangements in the WTO.  He said that he agreed with the three broad issues identified by the delegation of the Maldives as the ones on which Members should concentrate, namely WTO rules, preferential trade arrangements, and questions relating to TA.  He said that his delegation looked forward to engage in consultations on the issue of graduation in order to take it forward.  
&& The representative of the Solomon Islands said that his delegation supported the proposal made by the delegation of the Maldives for the setting up of a mechanism that would allow a smooth and less burdensome transition from LDC to developing country status.  He said that he feared that, without such a mechanism, LDCs graduating to developing status might slide back into LDC status.  The transitional mechanism was required to provide graduating LDCs with some breathing space.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that his delegation supported the request made by the delegation of the Maldives for the establishment of a smooth transitional mechanism for graduating LDCs.  He said that his delegation agreed with a two-staged approach.  The first stage would be the consideration of a paper elaborated by the Secretariat treating the issue in a broad and systemic manner to determine what the necessary adjustments were for a graduating LDC to comply with the WTO provisions.  The second stage would be the preparation of an action plan by the Government of the Maldives in which it indicated where it needed special treatment.  He reverted to the question he had raised at the informal consultations as to when the UN envisaged to graduate the Maldives from LDC status and whether there would be a transition phase in the UN decision that would relieve some of the problems faced in the WTO.  
&& The representative of China said that the situation of the Maldives was a dilemma because, on the one hand the Government of the Maldives was to be congratulated for graduating from LDC status, and on the other hand his delegation had sympathy with the graduating country as it might slip back into LDC status when it was deprived of preferences.  Such a situation had to be avoided.  He said that, at that time, his delegation had no clear position but was interested in the issue and in taking part in any consultations that might follow.  
&& The Chairman said that, during the informal consultations he had held, a number of proposals had been made.  One was that the Committee ask the relevant UN body to provide it with a background note on the UN process of designating and graduating LDCs, its history, previous cases, procedures and processes and also including some specific information on the cases of the Maldives and Cape Verde which to his understanding was also due to graduate soon.  The second suggestion was that the Committee ask the Secretariat to prepare a note on the WTO implications of graduation from LDC status.
&& The representative of the United States said that, at that stage, her delegation was only prepared to support work involving revising the information provided in the TPR of the Maldives, which could involve the Government of the Maldives working with the Secretariat, and to further discuss how Members might proceed with the issue of graduation in a way which would enable them to move expeditiously to support the Maldives smooth graduation with respect to the possible WTO implications.  In that light, the delegation of the Maldives could provide Members with an action plan on what they believed was necessary.  An outline of an action plan already existed in the submission by the Government of the Maldives.  She said that what her delegation wished to see was what transitional mechanisms the Government of the Maldives believed was necessary in light of the areas of concern that it had raised.  Her delegation was hesitant to agree to an overall process which might inhibit Members from addressing the issue at hand which the Government of the Maldives was facing.  Cape Verde was not yet a WTO Member.  WTO Members were yet to hear when the actual decision would be taken in ECOSOC.  She reiterated that her delegation was not prepared to merge the discussions Members were having in the CTD with the ongoing process at ECOSOC.  She said that her delegation looked forward to the Chairman's guidance through consultations with Members on how they could proceed expeditiously and efficiently.  
&& The Chairman said that he had suggested that background information be sought from the UN on the UN process for LDC designation and graduation, and the status of the Maldives in that respect.  The history would enable Members to understand the process and would provide a clearer understanding on what was likely to happen to the Maldives when it graduated.  
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation would welcome a consultation with the Chairman.  She said that her delegation wished to see the case of the graduation of the Maldives handled smoothly and expeditiously, gathering whatever information was needed regarding that case.  She said that her delegation therefore was willing to receive a status report.  However, it was not necessary for Members to wait for a study that would examine the broad issue of LDC graduation from LDC status to address the specific concerns raised in the submission made by the delegation of the Maldives.  That submission related to the specific situation of the Maldives.  The CTD had not received a submission suggesting it to proceed in a systemic manner.  She said that her delegation was limited with respect to how far it could take the current discussion.  It was nevertheless willing to receive a status report from the Secretariat who was communicating with the UN.  The Secretariat might obtain a status report from the relevant UN entity and then inform the Members.  However, her delegation was not interested in merging the processes.
&& The representative of UNCTAD said that, if Members so wished, UNCTAD would be willing to provide up-to-date documentation which would clarify the complex issue of graduation.  He drew Members' attention to the fact that, even if it looked probable, the graduation of the Maldives had not yet taken place.  A decision was imminent and might even be taken before the substantive session of ECOSOC in July 2004.  The decision would relate to the possible graduation of the Maldives and Cape Verde.  However, the decision would not be based on the latest report from April 2004 of the Committee of experts who were competent on the matter, but on the 2003 report which observed that both the Maldives and Cape Verde satisfied the criteria for graduation.  The 2003 report did nevertheless not recommend the graduation of those countries.  The situation had evolved since then as the Committee for Development Policy had again considered the matter in April 2004 and gone a step further by recommending that the two countries be graduated.  However, before taking action on the 2004 report, ECOSOC needed to take action on the 2003 report.  That should have been done in 2003, but due to the complex nature of the matter ECOSOC was yet to make a decision.  
He further recalled that there were two schools of thought within ECOSOC on the matter.  The first, which might currently be the dominant one, considered that once the Committee for Development Policy estimated that a country satisfied the criteria for graduation, it needed to graduate.  The development partners needed, at the same time, to be presented with the fact that a country was graduating in order for them to adopt measures which would ensure a smooth transition.  The other school of thought in the ECOSOC, which was almost as important, represented the opposite view.  That school of thought considered that the impact of graduation would be negative, and that that was a problem.  Therefore, before taking the decision to graduate a country, it was important to consider how to ensure a smooth transition.  The development partners had to be asked, especially within the multilateral trading system, how that country would be treated if it graduated.  The second school of thought thus implied the suspension of the idea of graduation in order to advance the idea of a smooth transition.  In reality, that meant that the ball would be placed in the court of the development partners, i.e. WTO and the donor countries who sponsored development.  Those two schools of thought were currently opposing each other, and it was probably because that confrontation was difficult that the decision had been delayed.  He said that the current situation was that a decision was imminent.  However, it was premature to predict the outcome, and it was therefore important not to skip any stages.  In light of the complexity of the subject, it was possible that the UN might suspend the decision to graduate the Maldives to an undetermined date in order to ensure a smooth transition.
&& The representative of Canada suggested that, since the ECOSOC, which was the appropriate forum to take a decision on the graduation of the Maldives, had not decided whether the Maldives would graduate, the CTD should suspend its discussion on the matter until the next meeting when Members would have a better understanding of the situation.  
&& The representative of the United States agreed with the representative of Canada and reiterated the remarks her delegation had made.  As part of a Member-driven organization she said that it was important for the Chairman to hold consultations before the next meeting to ensure that he was aware of what Members were prepared to do under the item.  Her delegation did not support a precondition that the WTO attempt to decide on the criteria which another institution used to make its decisions.  Members in the WTO would act according to their mandate to assist trading partners undergo what was necessary in the WTO.  There was no linkage between the WTO and the decisions that needed to be taken in other institutions, and her delegation would not agree to any attempt to make such a linkage.
&& The Chairman said that, since the decision on the graduation of the Maldives had not yet been taken in ECOSOC, there was still time to revert to the matter at the next meeting of the CTD.  In the meantime, he would consult with interested delegations in order to be better informed about how Members wished to proceed in the CTD. 
&& The Committee took note of the submission and the statements made.
WORK PROGRAMME FOR 2004
&& The Chairman said that a draft 2004 CTD Work Programme had been sent to Members, and  he hoped Members could adopt it.  
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation could adopt the 2004 Work Programme.  
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation wished to add an item to the agenda of the CTD meeting to be held in September 2004.  It was a sub-item to the one dealing with technical co-operation and training and concerned the conclusions of the mid-term review that Members, in November 2003, had decided to hold in the first half of 2004.  His delegation was willing to adopt the draft 2004 Work Programme with the addition of that bullet-point under technical co-operation and training.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation had no major difficulty with the draft 2004 CTD Work Programme.  However, with respect to footnote 4 which referred to Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, he said that his delegation preferred to have Paragraph 51 reflected as it was.  Members had earlier discussed what Paragraph 51 meant, and since the Committee's Work Programme was a formal document, his delegation preferred to see the actual language of Paragraph 51 reflected in the footnote.
The 2004 CTD Work Programme was adopted as amended.  
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation had made available to Members, at the meeting, a notification containing an addendum to the Government of Canada's General Preferential Tariff (GPT) and Least-Developed Country Tariff (LDCT).  That notification informed Members that the Government of Canada had extended the GPT and LDCT by ten years until 30 June 2014 and had changed the list of beneficiaries.  As of 30 May 2002, Senegal had been designated a beneficiary of the LDCT, effective 24 July 2003 Mongolia had been designated a beneficiary of the GPT, and effective 1 May 2004 the Government of Canada had withdrawn the entitlement to the GPT from the ten countries which had acceded to the European Union. 
&& The Chairman suggested that the Committee took note of the notification and, as far as it related to LDCs, the Committee referred it to the Sub-Committee on LDCs for substantive consideration and reporting back, according to the reporting procedures agreed to at the 32nd Session of the CTD.
It was so agreed.

__________
 Contained in Annex 3 to WT/L/161.
 Contained in document WT/COMTD/W/113.

WT/COMTD/M/49 Page  PAGE 36



	WT/COMTD/M/49 	Page  PAGE 27













