
WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/42
12 November 2002

(02-6208)

Committee on Trade and Development
Forty-second Session


NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 8 AND 9 OCTOBER 2002

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Toufiq Ali (Bangladesh)


 TOC \O "1-6" A.	ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA	 PAGEREF _TOC24537063 \H 2
B.	OBSERVERS	 PAGEREF _TOC24537064 \H 2
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc24537065 \h 2
(ii)	Further consideration of request for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc24537066 \h 2
C.	TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING	 PAGEREF _TOC24537067 \H 2
(i)	Process for the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan – Information by the Secretariat	 PAGEREF _Toc24537068 \h 2
(ii)	Features of requests/inputs by Members and Observers to the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan – Information by the Secretariat	 PAGEREF _Toc24537069 \h 2
(iii)	Presentation of the WTO 2003 Technical Assistance Plan – Information by the Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/104 – WT/COMTD/W/104/Add.1 – WT/COMTD/43)	 PAGEREF _Toc24537070 \h 3
(iv)	Overview of the training activities of the WTO Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/105)	 PAGEREF _Toc24537071 \h 31
(v)	WTO Training Institute – Planned activities in 2003 (WT/COMTD/W/103)	 PAGEREF _Toc24537072 \h 31
D.	NOTIFICATION UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE	 PAGEREF _TOC24537073 \H 33
	- Notification from India and Sri Lanka (WT/COMTD/N/16)	 PAGEREF _Toc24537074 \h 33
E.	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES	 PAGEREF _TOC24537075 \H 34
(i)	Notification by Japan (WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.11)	 PAGEREF _Toc24537076 \h 34
(ii)	Notification by Switzerland (WT/COMTD/N/7/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc24537077 \h 34
F.	PARTICIPATION OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN WORLD TRADE	 PAGEREF _TOC24537078 \H 34
	(WT/COMTD/W/100 and Add.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc24537079 \h 34
G.	PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED	 PAGEREF _TOC24537080 \H 35
H.	CONSIDERATION OF ARTICLE XVIII AS MANDATED BY PARAGRAPH 12 OF THE DOHA MINISTERIAL DECLARATION (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1), THE DECISION ON IMPLEMENTATION-RELATED ISSUES AND CONCERNS (WT/MIN(01)/17), AND IN CONJUNCTION WITH TIRET 3 OF JOB(01)/152/REV.1 OF 27 OCTOBER 2001	 PAGEREF _TOC24537081 \H 36
I.	ELECTRONIC COMMERCE	 PAGEREF _TOC24537082 \H 38
J.	DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT	 PAGEREF _TOC24537083 \H 39
K.	OTHER BUSINESS	 PAGEREF _TOC24537084 \H 39

ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in Airgram WTO/AIR/1908/Rev.1 of 7 October 2002.  He suggested that items A to C be taken up at that day's meeting and items D to K at the following day's meeting.  
&& The representative of Croatia said that his delegation wished to add an item under "other business" regarding the Ministerial Meeting held in Zagreb, Croatia in June 2002.
The agenda was adopted as amended.

OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, in previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc meeting-by-meeting basis.  Those were the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the Organisation of African Unity (OAU);  the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the South Pacific Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).  He proposed that, in accordance with the CTD procedures, those Organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the Committee.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of request for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings the Committee had had before it a number of outstanding requests for observer status.  Those came from the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie and the Common Fund for Commodities.  The positions of delegations were well known and on the record.  He proposed that, unless there had been any recent change of position, Members revert to those requests at the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.

TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Process for the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan – Information by the Secretariat
Features of requests/inputs by Members and Observers to the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan – Information by the Secretariat
Presentation of the WTO 2003 Technical Assistance Plan – Information by the Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/104 – WT/COMTD/W/104/Add.1 – WT/COMTD/43)
&& The Chairman welcomed Director-General Dr. Supachai to the meeting.  He said that in his statements to the General Council, and in other fora including at the High Level Segment Meeting of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) Trade and Development Board, the Director-General had emphasized that technical assistance and capacity building was one of the four priority areas of his administration.  His presence in the CTD meeting was an illustration of the importance that he attached to technical assistance within the framework of the WTO.  The Chairman also welcomed Deputy Director-General (DDG) Dr. Rana to whom the Director-General had assigned the responsibility for the broad horizontal theme of developing more effective and targeted WTO technical assistance and capacity building.  In addition, he welcomed DDG, Mr. Abbott whom, within his thematic responsibility of strengthening the WTO as a Secretariat and as an institution, was responsible for budgetary matters.  
&& The Chairman went on to say that there were four sub-items under agenda item C.  Dr. Supachai would offer overall introductory comments on the subject of WTO Technical Assistance.  Thereafter, the Director of Technical Cooperation, Mr. Osakwe, would inform the CTD of the process of drawing up the 2003 Technical Assistance (TA) Plan, explain the main features of the requests received and, briefly highlight key details of the Plan.  DDG Mr. Abbott, would then make a statement on the financial implications of the 2003 TA Plan.  Sub-items (i), (ii) and (iii) of the agenda item would thus be covered together and sub-items (iv) and (v) relating to training would be covered after the conclusion of the discussions on the 2003 TA Plan.
&& The Director-General, Dr. Supachai, said that technical assistance was important and was one of the four pillars that he had established for his work as Director-General of the WTO.  He had taken that decision knowing the vital importance that effective trade-related technical assistance (TRTA) and capacity building played in trade development.  DDG Dr. Rana would supervise the area of technical assistance and capacity building.  However he, as Director-General, would personally continue to stay in touch with the topic and conduct his own consultations and deliberations on it.  The 2003 TA Plan was a key element in his evolving thoughts on the subject of technical assistance and capacity building and it was based in part on consultations with Members on how WTO technical assistance could be better structured to meet present priorities and future challenges.  He said he would share several points influencing his thoughts on technical assistance after which the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division, Mr. Osakwe would present the details of the Plan.  First, what Members needed to develop up front was a clear strategic sense of the areas of WTO's technical assistance and capacity building.  One question was where WTO's comparative advantage could best be applied.  The Secretariat could not perform its duties in areas where it did not possess the full expertise or lacked the resources to do so.  He believed that the skills of the Secretariat staff would be best utilised in delivering technical assistance to build effective capacity for trade negotiations.  However, as that was not the totality of all technical assistance, there was a need to coordinate WTO's skills with those of other relevant multilateral agencies to deliver technical assistance for the understanding of the rules and their implementation.  In that regard, he placed high premium on collaboration with UNCTAD, the International Trade Centre (ITC), the UNDP, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Customs Organization (WCO), the International Standardizing Bodies, and others.  Another key element was technical assistance for the construction of commercial infrastructure, which would enable developing and least-developed countries (LDCs) to draw on the benefits of improved market access and the open, rules-based trading system.  After Members had agreed on certain market access measures it was not automatic that poor countries, especially the LDCs would be able to make use of the opportunities offered to them.  There was therefore a need to build commercial infrastructure.  The WTO had to seek coordination with other development institutions such as the World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) in that area.  The Secretariat would principally focus on what it did best, which was to provide technical assistance to build effective capacity for negotiations.  The Secretariat would continue to coordinate the various phases of technical assistance that went beyond the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) period of negotiations.
Second, he continued by saying that the LDCs would continue to receive focus in WTO's Technical Assistance Plans.  The 2003 TA Plan proposed several new products to take account of the LDC's needs.  At the same time, it had to be kept in mind that there were several regional challenges to which the WTO needed to respond.  Other countries in developing country regions had needs as critical as those of the LDCs.  Such regions included countries in Africa, South and Central Asia, and the Caribbean.  The Doha Ministerial Declaration established a Work Programme on Small Economies and there were capacity constrained missions in Central Asia and Eastern Europe and the transition economies.  Those were all challenges and priorities that the WTO had endeavoured to respond to in the 2003 TA Plan and the Secretariat would attempt to continue to improve its activities in those areas.  Third, to achieve universality of the organization, there was a need to attach priority attention to acceding countries.  The 2003 TA Plan addressed acceding country technical assistance priorities and it was in that context that the Secretariat would focus on the LDCs' Work Programme.  Mr. Molander, Ambassador of Sweden and Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs, was working hard in that regard and had the full support of the Secretariat.  Fourth, based on consultations that he had held, he realised that recipients of technical assistance attached great importance to systematic, cumulative and sustainable capacity building.  In that regard, a significant improvement had been made in the 2003 TA Plan.  New products had been designed to reflect Members' needs including intensive short trade policy courses, training of senior government officials on the areas of negotiations within the DDA stemming from the Doha Ministerial Conference, consolidation and extension of the internship system and training-of-trainers programmes.  The work of the Technical Cooperation Division, the Training Institute and the Trade Policy Review Division, which had a high technical assistance component, had been properly interfaced and he would continue to work on the improvement of that interfacing.  
His fifth point was that he agreed with Members that priority should be accorded to the quality, not the quantity, of the technical assistance activities.  Consequently, the number of discrete activities was being reduced to improve quality and increase the coverage of each.  There was a tighter linkage between national and regional activities.  Mr. Rolian, Director, Technical Cooperation Audit had developed new tools and processes for evaluating WTO technical assistance and training activities.  In the course of the implementation of the annual technical assistance plans, Mr. Rolian would provide periodic reports to the Membership.  The sixth point, and perhaps the greatest challenge was the demand for result-oriented coordination with other agencies, bilateral donors and coordination within recipient countries.  There was a need to proceed with coordination and coherence with a sense of urgency.  The process of building strategic partnerships and building synergies with agencies, donors and recipients needed to continue.  There had been modest progress, but more needed to be done.  The Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme (JITAP) review had yielded important insights.  That success should be built upon.  The Integrated Framework (IF) was the hope for medium to long-term trade development.  Modest successes had been achieved in countries like Cambodia.  In addition to the three pilot countries, the IF was being extended to 11 more LDCs.  That extension was being closely reviewed, and he was in consultation with several Members, such as H.E. Mr. Ould Mohamed Lemine, Ambassador of Mauritania, to examine current challenges and determine how best to address those challenges.  He said that concerns had been expressed with respect to the IF programme and he was doing his best to consult with both recipient and donor countries.  The Heads of IF Agencies had agreed to meet in 2003 to address several issues.  The speed of implementation of the IF needed to be accelerated if it was to remain relevant.  The  follow-up on the results of the diagnostic trade integration studies had to be taken more seriously and be based on clear procedures.  He said that he would report to the Membership on that in the near future.  The support of development agencies and bilateral donors was critical if the IF was to work as designed.  
He went on to assure Members that the Secretariat's technical assistance objectives were not only focused on the next WTO Ministerial Conference in Cancun.  His objective as Director-General was to establish an architecture of WTO technical assistance that would last beyond the Cancun Ministerial Conference and the DDA negotiations.  He believed that the process had begun well and with Members' support the objective would be achieved.  What the Secretariat needed to do was to consolidate and improve what it was doing, refine technical assistance and training materials, and achieve sustainability and cumulation.  He concluded by assuring Members that, together with senior management, he would work to ensure improved coordination within the Secretariat, using the Technical Assistance Management Committee, to address the incidence of problems such as ad hoc activities, and improve the implementation and delivery of technical assistance.  In that regard, the support of technical assistance recipients would be required.  His report, as mandated by Ministers under paragraph 41 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, would be circulated to the membership by mid-November.  Indications showed that the Secretariat was on track to effectively respond to the technical cooperation and capacity building commitments in the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  The remaining months would give the Secretariat time to catch up on the work.  He expressed his appreciation to the donors for establishing predictability in the WTO technical assistance funding.  He also thanked the recipient countries for the clarity of their priorities, which laid the basis for a significantly improved 2003 TA Plan.  He invited Mr. Osakwe, Director of the Technical Cooperation Division, to present the process for compiling the 2003 TA Plan, the main features of the requests and the key elements of the 2003 TA Plan. 
&& Mr. Osakwe, Director, Technical Cooperation Division, began by apologising for the late circulation of the 2003 TA Plan.  He said that what he would cover, would build on the over-arching points made by the Director-General.  First, he would discuss the process of the 2003 TA Plan, the features of Members' requests and the design of the 2003 TA Plan.  He would then go on to mention the lessons drawn from the delivery of the 2002 TA Plan as well as the principles applied to the 2003 TA Plan which had been slightly modified from those applied in previous years.  Finally, he would deal with the issue of internal Secretariat co-ordination.  He said that the Secretariat had paid attention to process because there had been criticism that the Secretariat was insensitive, that it did not pay enough attention to the priorities communicated by Members and that WTO technical assistance was Secretariat supply-side driven.  To address that problem, the Secretariat had entered into formal communication with Members over a five-month period to obtain prioritised requests of individual discrete TA activities.  He recalled that the Secretariat had made the first call for inputs for the 2003 TA Plan in the CTD in April.  That initial call had been followed by several reminders through Committee Chairpersons.  In addition, the Director-General had issued a letter on 28 June 2002 to all trade ministers with a copy to all development ministers requesting their communication of TA priorities.  Every request received had been acknowledged and the Secretariat had contacted all of the 118 Members and Observers that had communicated requests.  1038 requests had been received from 118 Members and Observers.  Of those requests, 613 were from 66 developing countries, 227 were from 25 LDCs and 198 of them were from 27 acceding countries.  All the requests had been filed in a database which was open to verification by Members.  The greatest demand for technical assistance related to the Singapore issues followed by capacity building issues.  The capacity building issues encompassed one-week short trade policy courses at the national level, regional short trade policy courses of a two week duration, internships within the WTO Secretariat and other elements.  Other areas in which TA was highly demanded included services, rules and agriculture. 
He went on to say that the 2003 TA Plan focused on three objectives.  One was that the Secretariat sought to deliver technical assistance to build capacity for effective participation in negotiations.  That was an area in which the WTO Secretariat had competence and he was confident that it could deliver that assistance.  New products had been designed and arrangements had been set up which would be confirmed in the Director-General's report required by paragraph 41 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  The second objective was technical assistance to build capacity for implementing WTO agreements.  It was an area where the WTO would be delivering technical assistance in cooperation with others.  For instance, in the area of standards the WTO would collaborate with international standardising bodies and in the area of customs valuation and trade facilitation with the World Customs Organisation, UNCTAD and the International Trade Centre (ITC).  The third objective was technical assistance for trade integration and commercial infrastructure an area where the Secretariat felt unable to deliver technical assistance.  However, as had been mentioned by the Director-General, the WTO would pursue co-ordination with development agencies, such as the UNDP, the World Bank, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), UNCTAD and several other organisations.  The Secretariat would deliver 441 activities of which 251 would be national activities directly linked to 190 specialized regional activities within the 2003 TA Plan.  Where Members had made requests but the Secretariat was unable to organize national activities due to a variety of reasons they would be able to benefit from regional programmes.  When considering the 2003 TA Plan he urged Members to look at the national activities from which they would also benefit, in conjunction with the regional activities from which they would benefit.  They were inseparable.  The second axis of the Plan was that a formal channel of communication had been established with the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the OECD to relate to several bilateral donors who had set aside resources and made logistic arrangements to deliver technical assistance complimentary to that of the WTO.  Many bilateral donors were in contact with the Secretariat in order to reinforce the Secretariat's work by filling the gaps with regard to the priorities communicated by Members.  That was integral to the 2003 TA Plan.  There was inter-agency coordination following consultations the WTO Secretariat had had with the World Bank.  The World Bank lead the process in coherence and co-ordination with other agencies.  The WTO Secretariat had established a first understanding with regional development banks which in many respects were twice as large as the WTO Secretariat and possessed more resources.  The regional development banks had confirmed co-sharing arrangements by which they would be financing and providing logistic support for a lot of the technical assistance that was to be delivered.  The WTO Secretariat was grateful to the six major regional development banks and was beginning to benefit from its cooperation with them.  A key part which would add value to the 2003 TA Plan was the idea of trade clinics that had been introduced by the Director-General.  The Director-General had been concerned that a plan might be unable to relate and respond rapidly to Members that had difficulties in a variety of areas, for instance in implementing their obligations within transitional time frames, with respect to institutional capacity-building, and domestic legislation.  The trade clinics involved specialised teams of WTO resource persons responding quickly to specific trade-related problems of beneficiary countries.  That would help to decrease acute implementation related problems for example.  Finally, there was the Doha Development Agenda Management Database, which would be critical to the management of the range of demands coming from Members in relation to what the Secretariat could deliver alone and with regard to assistance that the Secretariat needed to deliver in co-ordination and coherence with other agencies.  
He continued by saying that the Training Institute, the Technical Cooperation Division and the Statistics Division had developed a comprehensive tool kit for trade negotiators.  The Secretariat hoped to present it before the end of October 2002.  The tool kit would enable Members to manipulate tariffs in the Integrated Database and the Consolidated Tariffs Schedule (CTS).  Members would also be able to perform their own analyses of textural proposals that other Members had put forward.  That had been achieved through funding assistance from the Department for International Development (DFID) of the United Kingdom and in cooperation with the Inter-American Development Bank and the Secretariat for Economic Integration of Central America (SIECA) that had done previous work in the area.  The Secretariat had finally realised how to structure internships.  Internships were high quality and high cost capacity building.  There were four types of internships.  The first was the regular internships where interns were recruited directly by Divisions.  The second was the "Dutch internship system" where the intern was employed as WTO staff for a two-year period but was prevented from staying on to work in the Secretariat beyond that period.  The intern had to return and support the administration in their country.  The third and new internship programme, which would begin in January 2003, was the system of interns for regional co-ordinators.  The intern would be designated by the regional group and paid by the Secretariat.  There would be seven "regional" interns on a six-month rotating basis.  The intern would be based with their missions in Geneva and would cover WTO meetings.  The final type of internship followed the regional co-ordinators internship model.  Several donors including Japan and the United Kingdom had offered resources to enable the Secretariat to offer internships to about 14 Members over the following months.  They included capacity constrained developing countries, LDCs as well as low income transition economies.  There was a DDA global training course.  Another vital TA product for 2003, which would be subject to a separate presentation to Members, was the regional seminars which the Secretariat would conduct configured around the more than 120 existing reference centers which were the most successful of the WTO's technical assistance activities.  Those seminars would include the training of representatives from both collaborating academic institutions, and finance and commerce ministries in order to continue to seek the mainstreaming objective.  The programme would be circulated to Members for comments before being implemented in March 2003.  He continued by saying that in the previous week, the Director-General of the WTO and the President of the World Bank, Mr. Wolfensohn had launched a standards trade development facility to which the World Bank had already contributed US$300 000 out of its development grant facility, which would be increased in 2003.  The Secretariat was proposing, in the 2003 TA Plan, that the WTO make a complimentary contribution of CHF 100 000.  It would be a joint World Bank and WTO facility in collaboration with the three major standardising institutions to address the significant problem with regard to the export quality and standards of products exported from developing and least-developed countries.  Mr. Wolter, Director of the Agriculture and Commodities Division, and Mrs. Gretchen Stanton were to speak on that at a meeting to be arranged.  That was the  sum of the new products.  
He further spoke about a point that had been made clear in the priorities communicated by Members, and that was the need for a higher training component in the technical assistance activities.  When communicating their training priorities, many Members had pointed out that they preferred training courses of a one to three-week duration rather than longer courses because of the limited human resources some ministries possessed.  In order to respond to the need for institutional capacity building with the focus on courses of short-term duration, the Secretariat had included 77 training courses of short-term duration for 2003.  That was the largest number ever included in a technical assistance plan.  The two 12-week regional trade policy courses in Nairobi and Casablanca were being evaluated by the WTO TA Audit.  The Secretariat would issue a report concerning its future policy and funding proposals in that area after the completion of the evaluation.  He concluded by mentioning the lessons learnt when drawing up the 2003 TA Plan.  Demand was greater than supply.  The Secretariat therefore had a duty to sort and rationalise the requests.  Recipient countries were calling for more emphasis on trade integration, referring to the type of technical assistance that had been mentioned by the Director-General, that was TA to build infrastructure.  The Secretariat had learnt that all activities would come to nothing in the recipient countries if technical assistance was not an integral part of the overall development strategy's of the country or of its Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSP) as appropriate.  The former lesson that co-ordination challenges remained acute had been reinforced.  The Director-General had recommitted himself to that and it would be tackled in co-ordination with recipients and donors.  Strategic partnerships and synergies were indispensable and the Director-General would pursue them both within the JITAP, a key area of synergy, and the IF.  The Bretton Woods Institutions, the World Bank and the IMF, were important and without them little would be achieved. He reiterated the point made by the Director-General that there were principle challenges in Africa, South and Central Asia, the Caribbean, LDCs and acceding countries.  There was a need to accelerate the implementation of the IF and Members needed to be aware that the Secretariat was dealing with the issue of ad hoc activities.  He said that Members had asked the Secretariat to ensure that technical assistance and market access were complimentary, not substitutes.  With respect to principles, he reconfirmed that the 2003 TA Plan had been designed on the basis of recipient-determined priorities.  The Secretariat had sorted and rationalised the requests to something manageable.  It had not proceeded on a strictly demand driven path, because if it had there would be 1038 activities in the 2003 TA Plan.
&& The Chairman invited DDG Mr. Abbot to make a statement on the financial implications of the 2003 TA Plan.
DDG Mr. Abbot said that he had been asked to provide an overview of the Secretariat's cost estimates for the proposed WTO technical assistance and training activities for 2003.  He made it clear that he was not making any judgement as to whether Members should be spending more or less money on technical assistance.  Members had the right to accept, reject or modify the 2003 TA Plan according to their wishes.  His mission was to tell Members what the 2003 TA Plan would cost.  Adjustments to the cost estimates would have to be made if Members made changes to the 2003 TA Plan.  In other words, he would provide information as to what a pledging conference would have to deliver if the Secretariat was to execute the draft 2003 TA Plan.  He hoped that the figures he was going to present to Members, taken together with the details provided in the documents related to the Coordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan for 2003 (WT/COMTD/W/104, WT/COMTD/W/104/Add.1) and to the activities of the WTO Training Institute in 2003 (WT/COMTD/W/103) would provide Members with the basic information they required to prepare their authorities' positions in advance of a pledging conference for the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF) that might be held later in 2002.  The problems associated with the creation of the DDAGTF in the previous year were an element of the past.  The Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration (BFA) would take the results of the discussions in the CTD into consideration later in the year.  Adjustments would be made to the financing, if necessary, and the Committee on BFA would then make a recommendation to the General Council on a target amount for the 2003 DDAGTF.  
He further said that the cost estimates he was going to present to Members would be fully adjusted to reflect the results of Members' discussions.  Members had received document CRP(02)/3 containing the financial implications of the 2003 TA Plan.  For costing purposes, the 441 activities covered by the 2003 TA Plan had been regrouped into three categories:  the Geneva-based activities, regional activities and national activities.  Geneva-based activities were held at the WTO headquarters and would involve either Geneva-based delegates or a mixture of Geneva‑based and capital-based officials, as well as some outside speakers. Geneva-based activities for capital-based delegates were something the Secretariat wished to do more of, but they were costly as participants travelling costs had to be financed.  Regional activities involved several WTO Members or observers and also involved the financing, travelling and subsistence costs for the participants.  The national activities took place in a given country and required the financing of WTO staff members’ travel.  Globally, the Secretariat had arrived at a figure for those 2003 activities of between CHF 30 and 31 million.  The total comprised of three elements.  First, the total estimate for activities was CHF 35,571,750.  Second, a reduction on that expected from cost sharing arrangements with individual countries and other organisations was expected to amount to CHF 5,073,755.  That resulted in a net total of between CHF 30 and 31 million.  In arriving at those figures, the Secretariat had applied standard cost methodologies assigning different standard costs for a one day activity for one person depending upon whether the event was classed as a national activity (CHF 1,850), a regional activity (CHF 1,150), or an activity in Geneva headquarters (CHF 2,700).  Some of the figures had increased and others decreased from the previous year, and he would explain the reasons.  Three additional elements had been identified and their costs had been estimated in order to arrive at the total cost of the package.  The first was the future activities of the WTO Training Institute that were not covered by the regular budget.  Those amounted to CHF 180,000, which was less than in 2002.  The second element was the project posts funded through extra budgetary funds, also known as "L posts".  Those were not financed by the Programme Support Fund.  The "L posts" were temporary assistance posts, which did not tend to be temporary.  Financing them amounted to CHF 2,475,470.  The third element related to the overheads, which was a standard way of covering administration costs and was a function of the total.  Those overheads were 13% of all direct costs and amounted to CHF 4,309,950.  The consolidated total was CHF 37,463,415.  However, Members were expected to contribute CHF 36,500,00 as there were some funds left over from the previous year.  
He continued by saying that the planned volume of technical assistance in 2003 was more or less the same as in 2002, and the number of planned regional activities would also remain approximately the same.  However, the cost estimates were significantly higher than the estimated cost of the WTO technical assistance and training activities planned for 2002.  There were several reasons for that.  First, the 2003 TA Plan included a significant number of activities to be held at WTO headquarters to which more capital-based officials would be invited.  In 2002, such activities had been restricted for the most part to Geneva-based delegates.  Inviting capital-based officials had the benefit of spreading information and enhancing capacity in the national administrations in capitals after the end of the activity.  Including overheads, that accounted for approximately CHF 10 million of the increase to the cost estimates.  In 2002, it had initially been proposed that the "L posts" be financed out of the Programme Support Fund, and some of them had been financed in that way.  However, two-thirds of them had to be financed through the Global Trust Fund.  2002 was not a full year because the staff had to be recruited and had only taken up their posts in the second part of 2002.  Having a full year in 2003, the costs of the same posts would be larger than in 2002.  Airfares had increased significantly in 2002 following the 11 September 2001 events while the estimates for 2002 had been based on 2001 average costs before 11 September.  The Secretariat often had to organise activities in upper-market hotels, in the absence of decent cheaper alternatives to ensure adequate conference facilities.  Those hotels would regularly charge more for a night than the total UN per diem for the country hosting the activity.  As customers the WTO could not control those elements.  The anticipated average number of participants in regional activities was expected to be 20 per cent higher in 2003 compared to 2002.  While it was clear that WTO Members could not influence all elements of the increased costs, any adjustment to the 2003 TA Plan which might result from the discussions in the CTD would influence the cost estimates.  The cost estimates presented did not contain any provision for the repetition of the courses held in Casablanca and Nairobi, pending the evaluation of those first two pilot three-month trade policy courses.  If the evaluation was positive and the courses were to be repeated, then the Secretariat would make the necessary cost estimates and provide them as an addendum.  Those courses might then not only be repeated, but as requested by the Director-General, they might include a greater number of participants.  Members' views with respect to those courses were welcome.  He concluded by saying that, at the first pledging conference held on 11 March 2002, Members had pledged CHF 5 million for 2003.  The Secretariat anticipated that the DDAGTF would show a positive balance at the end of the year.  The actual size of the surplus would depend on the receipt of the remaining contributions pledged for 2002.  The Secretariat hoped that pledges to the DDAGTF for 2003 would amount to CHF 36.5 million, from which should be subtracted the pledges that had been made and any balance left from 2002.  Although the figure was high, technical assistance was crucial to the DDA and many Members attached high importance to it.
&& The representative of Kenya said that, on behalf of the African Group he was pleased to hear that technical assistance was one of the four priority areas that the Director-General had identified in his administration, and that WTO comparative advantage would be applied in building the required technical assistance.  The African group was also pleased that the Director-General would seek increased collaboration with other inter-governmental organisations and bilateral donors.  He noted with appreciation that there was going to be a focus on commercial infrastructure, which would address the issue of supply-side constraints.  The African Group looked forward to studying the new products introduced to the 2003 TA Plan in the attempt of addressing the DDA.  He agreed that Members needed to focus on the quality rather than the quantity of technical assistance.  That would ensure that the Members received the right products to meet their needs.  The JITAP could be one of the programmes that could be emulated and extended to other African countries.  His delegation needed time to study the document in order to see how it related to the needs of African countries.  However, it seemed to address some of the areas that his delegation had requested and he welcomed the new products proposed.  He disagreed with the Secretariat with respect to the duration of courses.  Shorter courses had proved to be more expensive than the longer ones and the long courses were more comprehensive and addressed the actual needs of the beneficiary countries.  He was pleased to hear that the regional courses held in Nairobi and Casablanca were undergoing evaluation.  His delegation believed that those two courses had proved their usefulness, and many of the participants interviewed in Nairobi had confirmed that that was the type of technical assistance that addressed their Governments' needs.  He hoped that the Secretariat would view those courses from that angle. Those courses should have been included in the list of activities for 2003 for planning purposes.  It was easier to strike off figures than to add the same figures after the budget process was completed.
&& The representative of Lesotho said that his delegation shared the views that had been expressed by the Director-General.  There was an urgent need for enhanced cooperation between UNCTAD and the WTO, in implementing the mandate emanating from the Doha Ministerial Conference.  When considering the concentration of requests to the WTO for technical assistance, it appeared that there was a significant focus on the Singapore issues.  That was where his delegation wished to see enhanced cooperation between the two institutions due to the unique experience that UNCTAD possessed in that area.  He agreed with the Director-General that enhanced market access did not necessarily lead to enhanced productive and export capacity in developing and least-developed countries.  There was therefore a need to focus, perhaps more than in the past, on addressing supply‑side issues.  He was pleased with the Director-General's referral to the need for enhanced participation of agencies such as UNIDO, which might have a comparative advantage in certain areas.  He encouraged such coordination to be undertaken as soon as possible as other organisations could effectively contribute to the WTO TA programme.  He said that the issue of accession was of great importance.  Over the past four years the issue of accession had been on the agenda of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs as well as on the agenda of the Ministerial Conferences that had been held during that time.  What had been lacking were concrete steps to make the TA programmes for acceding countries effective.  His delegation hoped to see a more focused and concrete approach to addressing the concerns of acceding countries, particularly LDCs.  His delegation was prepared to work with the Secretariat in formulating practical approaches to that issue.  He concurred with the Director-General that there was a need to improve the quality of the TA programmes undertaken by the WTO.  Over the past four years his Government had been receiving technical assistance and capacity building.  However, there was little difference in the content of the courses between then and at present and that pointed to a need to concentrate on the quality of the courses.  The capacity in Members and observers requesting assistance was improving and there had to be a parallel process to enhance the quality of the assistance provided.  The WTO had to appreciate that countries had moved forward from where they were four years ago.  Rehearsing trade policy principles was not in line with the unfolding agenda that Members were faced with in the WTO.  There had to be a process of continuously upgrading the content of the courses.  He agreed with the Director-General that strategic partnerships were critical, and his delegation encouraged the Secretariat to work towards establishing more strategic partnerships with regional institutions and other multilateral agencies as a way of ensuring that Members programmes were fully supported and in line with processes in other institutions.  He concluded by saying that his delegation was of the view that the 2003 TA Plan should not be directed towards the Cancun Ministerial Conference but should be a long-term plan that was sustainable and that delivered long lasting results.  The 2003 TA Plan needed to take into account and support other dynamics that were taking place at the national and regional levels in order to be effective.  His delegation needed more time to consider the 2003 TA Plan as well as the figures that had been presented by DDG Abbot to see whether those figures would be supportive of what his delegation felt was a priority in the 2003 TA Plan.  
&& The representative of Mauritius said that his delegation supported the statement made by the representative of Kenya on behalf of the African Group.  He was pleased, as coordinator of the small and vulnerable economies Group in Geneva, to hear the comments that the Director-General had made with respect to small economies.  The Director-General had said that, "we need to be aware that there are several regional challenges to which we need to respond.  Countries in these regions have needs as critical as those of the LDCs.  These include countries in Africa, South and Central Asia, the Caribbean, and others."  He thanked the Director-General for recognising that the small and vulnerable economies had problems.  He was pleased that the three requests that his Government had made on customs valuation, services and the Singapore issues had been included.  His delegation would need more time to consider the 2003 TA Plan before commenting in detail on it.  He highlighted that no mention had been made of small and vulnerable economies in the Secretariat's presentation of the "lessons from 2002 implementation", and he hoped that that would be considered.
&& The representative of Haiti said that he agreed with the Director-General that technical assistance and integration into the multilateral trading system was of great importance.  The 2003 TA Plan presented a list of activities to assist developing and least-developed countries to integrate further into the multilateral trading system.  The Director-General had referred to issues of particular importance to his delegation, for instance quality over quantity in technical assistance delivery and the importance to be accorded to acceding countries.  Haiti had been a Member of the WTO since the GATT but the Committee on Trade and Development had to attach importance to the countries in accession.  It was important for the credibility of the WTO to enable the accession of LDCs.  Coherence with other institutions was also important.  The WTO could offer technical assistance in the form of internships, institutional capacity building, and reference centers.  However, such assistance was by itself not sufficient.  Supply capacities needed to be strengthened and new infrastructures were required.  The WTO could not offer that service which was why coordination with other organisations such as the World Bank, IMF and regional banks was essential.  He agreed with the representative of Lesotho that Members needed to do their utmost for UNIDO to participate in the discussions.  He was aware that a memorandum of understanding was being elaborated between the WTO and UNIDO and he hoped that that cooperation would soon be established.  The non-exhaustive list of agencies to cooperate with the WTO had to include the International Telecommunications Union (ITU).  Telecommunication was important, and the ITU, which was preparing its World Summit on the Information Society, had to work hand in hand with the WTO to offer developing countries the possibility to derive benefits from the technology that was proliferating throughout the world.  His delegation also wished to see the WTO establish links with the International Agency for Atomic Energy (IAEA) as it could assist in strengthening developing and least-developed country infrastructure.  It could assist in strengthening those countries' capacities to use energy resources, for instance water, solar, nuclear and wind energy which were needed for those countries to develop.  The Common Fund for Commodities, which had requested observer status in the CTD was another organisation of importance to Members.  Members' capacities required to be strengthened to become self-sufficient in food.  The Common Fund for Commodities could strengthen the WTO's position in agriculture.  He said that the discussion on internships was still open and Members would see how they could use technical assistance to make progress.  He was certain that many members would make contributions at the pledging conference and he thanked those members who had contributed more than expected.
&& The representative of Venezuela said that WTO's work was high priority for her Government.  The presence of the Director-General at the meeting was a sign of WTO's intention to give priority to its technical assistance and training activities.  Her delegation had followed the development of technical cooperation and training programmes conducted by the WTO and it had made suggestions with a view to improving those programmes and achieving efficiency.  She said that her delegation was pleased that a new impulse had been given to those programmes.  She commended the Secretariat for its efforts in drawing up the 2003 TA Plan.  She said that the Secretariat had contacted her delegation in order to establish priorities for technical assistance and had taken on board her delegations suggestions.  She noted that progress had been made with respect to collaboration with other Geneva-based organisations and hoped that it would continue.  Despite those efforts there were still weaknesses in terms of implementation and efficiency in enforcing the provisions of WTO's TA programme.  There was a lack of the necessary human resources as well as the fact that the Technical Cooperation Division had other internal priorities.  Delegations had made efforts of communicating their priorities to the Secretariat as well as consulting with their capitals and the Technical Cooperation Division.  The divisions in charge had continued to inform Members that it took long to prepare documents and that they were not in a position to carry out the activities requested by Members.  That had been a bitter experience for her delegation.  Her Government had spared no effort in communicating its requests.  However, it had so far not received any response.  Any response that would be made was bound to be negative.  Efforts made towards improving the TA programme had to go hand in hand with a greater awareness in the technical divisions.  The better people in her country were trained the better they would cooperate with the WTO and comply with their duties as instructed by Ministers at the Doha Ministerial Conference.  The quality of TA programmes was improving.  However, her delegation was concerned with the fact that approximately 30 activities in Latin America and the Caribbean had been forfeited.  On the other had, she was pleased to note that the activities conducted and planned for 2003 by the Training Institute emphasized the training of trainers programmes.  She hoped that it would be possible to connect that programme with university networks.  She encouraged the Secretariat to continue efforts in that direction and to improve coordination with academic institutions.  Her delegation hoped that sufficient means would be given to the Training Institute in order to coordinate with other institutions as part of a high level academic network.  The new programme implied new challenges and her Government had applied for 18 activities.  Her delegation felt that the number of participants in each course should be increased and that pilot courses be conducted in the Latin American region.  She echoed the point made by the Director-General at the High Level Segment of the UNCTAD Trade and Development Board Meeting, that technical assistance was key to improve the understanding of processes, in particular to the understanding of the consequences of negotiations for developing country Members.
&& The representative of South Africa said that the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan showed that WTO TA was moving in the right direction.  He expressed his appreciation for the Director-General's interest in the issue of technical assistance because it was one of the pillars of the current negotiations.  He said that he would begin by making some broad contextual points before commenting in detail on the 2003 TA Plan and on some of the remarks that the Director-General had made.  With respect to the broader context, he said that it was important for Members to recognise that both market access and TRTA and capacity building were among the key issues that Ministers had put on the agenda of many global conferences and committed themselves to supporting as they were critical to the development process.  Those conferences included the International Conference on Financing for Development, the World Food Summit and the World Summit for Sustainable Development (WSSD).  The WSSD had reaffirmed the commitment of all the leaders who were present, to the DDA with the emphasis on development.  The leaders had also committed themselves to increased technical assistance and capacity building, particularly during the negotiations.  While discussing the issue of capacity building, Members needed to be aware that genuine, meaningful and substantial technical assistance and capacity building was most effectively provided by genuine market access for developing countries. Genuine market access required significant and substantive changes in the trade policies of developed countries.  Although those issues were being discussed in other fora of the WTO, he reminded delegations that the key issues involved were domestic support and export subsidies, some of the rules that increase protection such as trade remedies, and a number of the regulatory issues including Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) and Technical Barriers to Trade (TBTs) which could have and had had the effect of increasing protection and increasing the barriers to developed country markets.  Recent studies had highlighted the fact that those policies of developed countries had had and continued to have a negative developmental effect on developing countries and estimates of losses ranged anywhere between US$50 billion to US$100 billion per annum.  That had to be kept in mind when the 2003 TA Plan was discussed.
He continued by saying that the DDA contained a commitment to include technical assistance and capacity building as a term of the agreement to launch the new round of negotiations.  Therefore, it was a significant negotiating issue that Ministers would pay a lot of attention to at the next Ministerial Conference.  He said that special and differential treatment (S&D) was a key issue as developing countries had not benefited as much as they should have from the processes of globalization and because the benefits had accrued mainly to developed countries.  The need for adjustment by developing countries as they continued with the process of integration was something that would cause increased burdens on already marginalized and vulnerable economies.  The process by which those economies liberalised and integrated into the world economy had to be managed cautiously.  It had to be carried out in a customized and properly sequenced manner.  S&D was therefore important, and the way in which capacity building was managed for beneficiaries of S&D required careful discussion.  He agreed with the Director-General's broad categorisation of technical assistance and capacity building.  The three categories that the Director-General had suggested that Members focus on were the need to assist countries to negotiate effectively, the need to build capacity for countries to implement rules, and the need to build commercial infrastructure including supply-side support.  With respect to the need to negotiate effectively, he said that while the WTO had an important role to play, it was not competent to provide the support that developing countries required.  Members required assistance in three broad areas in order to negotiate effectively.  First, developing countries needed to develop appropriate trade policies and strategies so that their negotiating strategy was part of a broader set of development and economic policies.  Second, Members needed to develop appropriate trade and market access strategies and think about how their bilateral and regional strategies were synchronized with their multilateral strategies.  He did not think that the WTO could provide the necessary assistance in that particular area.  Third, a more sustainable way of developing the capacity of Members to negotiate was to build appropriate institutions to develop intra‑Government cohesion and for consultations and consensus building with other stakeholders - including the private sector and NGOs.  That area required more attention and competence than was available within the current mandate and portfolio of resources in the WTO.  He would make some proposals regarding how to deal with those issues.  He went on to say that there was a need for the WTO to take into account the need to work with other institutions on negotiating skills, on issues relating to implementation and compliance, and to commercial infrastructure and supply-side support.  There had to be coherence with other multilateral institutions such as UNCTAD, ITC, and the World Bank, not only in the form of general coordination but also in terms of policy content and substance.  One of the questions raised in discussions during the previous months was how Members without capacity would identify their own interests and make demands on the Secretariat.  What was required was needs assessments.  A deeper process was required in order to establish what developing countries needs were.  He said that while the WTO Secretariat was doing a good job with its limited resources, it needed to draw on experiences gained over the years in capacity building, trade negotiations and trade policy development.  He referred to the experiences of the more developed developing countries, which were not utilised in the development and implementation of WTO technical assistance programmes.  He said that there was a need for some kind of advisory structure to the current WTO Secretariat on technical assistance and capacity building.  Another question he wished to raise was how the WTO meaningfully could contribute to the process of implementation of WTO agreements in developing countries, particularly in those that required S&D.  He asked how it could be ensured that the development objectives and strategies of those countries were in alignment with the implementation requirements of the WTO agreements and with the implementation difficulties that those countries faced.  Proposals to create a monitoring mechanism had been made in that regard.  A monitoring mechanism would develop appropriate capacity building programmes which would be in alignment with the implementation problems and development strategies of developing countries.  
He further said that he had made those points because he had been asked to chair an informal group of Members which had met over the past few months and were concerned about those issues.  He had chaired three out of four meetings held.  The origins of that informal group went back to the discussion that had taken place with the Canadian delegation.  The group consisted of all the major developed country donors and a number of beneficiary developing countries.  The WTO Secretariat had participated in a number of the discussions.  The group had been seized with the need to improve the efficiency and quality of the technical assistance and capacity building programmes that had been implemented and were being implemented.  The group had been concerned with the need to ensure that the 2003 TA Plan took into account the lessons and experiences of the previous years.  The group had identified four issues for further discussion and with regard to which it hoped to make contributions.  The first issue was how the quality of the current technical assistance programmes could be improved and how it could be ensured that the 2003 TA Plan did not suffer from the same difficulties and criticisms that the 2002 TA Plan had.  The second issue was how to ensure that a simple and quick needs analysis was carried out.  It did not have to be as complex as the IF diagnostic analysis but would still establish which were the needs at the country level.  The third issue was how to ensure that there was real coherence notably between the multilateral agencies but also between the bilateral donors and the multilateral institutions.  There had been a number of difficulties in the field where bilateral donors had tended to influence the programmes in the direction of their own polices and strategies.  That was a common concern and there was a desire to reduce that tendency and to make the WTO programme a true multilateral one, but one that still included the contribution of multilateral agencies.  The fourth issue related to the need for overall guidance for the WTO TA.  He said that the group was keen to discuss with the Director-General how to go forward on that issue.  He concluded by saying that the next meeting of developing countries participating in the informal group was going to be coordinated by the delegation of Colombia.  Both the delegations of South Africa and Canada were available to discuss any of the issues in more details with any other delegations who were interested in participating in the group.
&& The representative of Zambia said that he would not make any substantive comments on the 2003 TA Plan.  He would also defer any detailed comments in his capacity as coordinator of the LDC Group for a later date.  He thanked the Director-General for his policy statement which had given Members the feeling that Members and the Secretariat were moving toward some sort of policy convergence in the area of technical assistance and capacity building.  He believed that stating policy objectives in advance of doing something always clarified matters.  His delegation had always stated that there were parts of TRTA and capacity building that the WTO Secretariat was most suited to deliver and other parts that it was not.  It was good that that had been reflected in the documents.  Most of the LDCs preferred a certain type of technical assistance.  That was the long-term technical assistance and capacity building such as supply-side assistance, trade infrastructure creation and institution building.  He recalled that there had been demand for increased cooperation between the WTO and institutions such as UNCTAD.  There had also been a request for UNCTAD to be included in the sharing of resources so that it could deliver the assistance that developing countries needed and that the WTO could not supply.  He sought clarification with respect to the statement in bullet point 6 on page 5, in document WT/COMTD/W/104 which read "sixth, recipient countries have shifted priorities in their TA/CB requests ".  He said that that was inaccurate as Members priorities had remained consistent.  What Members had done was to reclarify their priorities with the realisation of what the WTO could offer.  Another statement in bullet point 6 on page 5, read "As an agency, the WTO cannot deliver, in this regard, except through co-ordinated arrangements with development agencies and bilateral donors, and the recipient countries themselves".  He compared that with the statement in paragraph 6 on page 6, of WT/COMTD/W/104, that read "The challenge of the 2003 WTO Annual Plan for TA/CB is to build capacity in the beneficiary countries for effective negotiations, legal implementation of WTO Agreements, and trade integration."  He said that the first mentioned quotation stated that the WTO could not deliver "trade integration" and yet it was included in paragraph 6.  He therefore sought clarification with respect to how the WTO Secretariat would deal with trade integration.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that the 2003 TA Plan mainly focused on seminars and workshops.  His delegation had repeatedly mentioned that those types of activities were neither helpful to his Government, nor LDCs in general.  Only Members with expertise in WTO agreements could benefit from seminars and workshops by developing their expertise and updating their knowledge.  His Government had identified its capacity building needs and realised that there was a need to develop institutional capacity.  His Government could not participate effectively in WTO negotiations unless it could develop domestic institutions.  It had therefore submitted technical assistance requests to the WTO with the objective of developing endogenous capacity to analyse WTO related issues.  With that in mind his Government had proposed the selection of one private university and one government-owned training institute to develop capacity to run training programmes on WTO trade-related issues of interest to his Government.  Those training programmes would be directed to government officials, private sector and civil society representatives.  They would include the findings of recent research and analysis of WTO-related issues, particularly in areas with a bearing on ongoing negotiations and where negotiations might be required.  When requested by either the government or the private sector the institutions would provide policy advice on WTO‑related matters to assist the Government and the private sector representatives to implement the WTO agreements.  Such assistance would include advice in the submission of periodic notifications and reports and in observing standards.  As part of the 2003 TA programme, his delegation had requested assistance from the WTO to build capacity of such institutions.  That included the provision of facilities such as library and a database on WTO related material, the equipment required for teaching and running courses, teaching aids and training modules on subjects of specific interests to LDCs, training of faculty and other resource personnel to fulfil the objective mentioned in paragraph 34 a-d in document WT/COMTD/W/104, i.e. training of trainers and to associate the institutions with seminars and workshops run by the WTO in Geneva, Bangladesh or its region.  His delegation had requested the increased participation of candidates from Bangladesh in the Geneva‑based training programmes as well as the organisation of regional seminars and workshops in Bangladesh with the participation of LDCs, in the areas of market access for agricultural and non agricultural products, services negotiations and in the area of trade and environment.  His delegation had also requested the organisation of national workshops on TRIPS, WTO rules, and agriculture in association with his Government.  He said that most of the needs expressed by his Government had unfortunately not been taken into account in the 2003 TA Plan.  Although in the 2003 TA Plan there were three national courses for Bangladesh, as for the other LDCs, the key need of institutional building had not been included in the 2003 TA Plan.  He hoped that due consideration would be given to the capacity building needs of his Government in the revised 2003 TA Plan.  
&& The representative of Jamaica said that his delegation welcomed the 2003 TA Plan which listed the range of activities to be conducted at the national and regional levels.  The 2003 TA Plan was presented in two separate documents.  Document WT/COMTD/W/104 gave an overview of the challenges faced and the Secretariat's thinking in developing the 2003 TA Plan, and document WT/COMTD/W/104/Add.1 contained the activities to be implemented.  He noted from section 5 of WT/COMTD/W/104 that 118 countries had submitted a total of 1038 requests with the Singapore issues, capacity building and services being the top three priority areas.  The document also stated that there had been a shift in Members' technical assistance requests to greater emphasis being placed on capacity building for trade integration and the need to address supply-side constraints.  However, the focus remained on capacity building in the area of the WTO negotiations and understanding and implementing the WTO agreements.  His delegation supported the increased emphasis on building what had been described as commercial infrastructure.  He noted from document WT/COMTD/W/104 that while the Secretariat acknowledged that that was outside the ambit of the WTO, it would be making greater efforts to enhance coordination between the WTO and other international organisations such as the World Bank, UNIDO and UNDP with a view to meeting Members requirements in that area.  His delegation had always held the view that technical assistance should not only be restricted to increase Members' awareness about the rules, but should also consider supply-side constraints which hindered production and Members' ability to compete in the global market-place.  While it was obvious that the WTO would increase its efforts in that regard, it was still not clear how, operationally, the greater inter-agency co-ordination and implementation envisaged in the 2003 TA Plan would be achieved.  In that context, his delegation hoped that the scope of the standards trade development facility, which Members had been informed about, would be broad enough to encompass not only the traditional technical assistance relating to the WTO agreements but to go beyond that.  
On the issue of the nature of the requests submitted by Members he went on to say that it was not surprising to note that, in addition to the requests for the more conventional modes of technical assistance, there was at present a shift towards more resource intensive activities such as internships and national short trade policy courses in an effort to build capacity.  As the work programme and the negotiations launched at the Doha Ministerial Conference intensified, Members requests for technical assistance in newer areas would increase as there was greater value added to be gained from such programmes.  His delegation was able to speak of the benefits of such programmes as it had been a beneficiary of the WTO mission internship programme which had been introduced on a pilot basis by the WTO in 2001.  He noted that in response, the Secretariat had undertaken to develop various modes of technical assistance such as seminars, workshops, training activities, training of trainers, and distance learning programmes.  He also noted the development of the two new modes of technical assistance, namely the trade clinics and the use of the WTO references centres as a point for establishing training of trainer programmes.  Those new modes were interesting and his delegation wished to receive further information on them.  He said that section IX of document WT/COMTD/W/104 acknowledged that there were certain regions, including the Caribbean, that were in urgent need of enhanced technical assistance and capacity building to adjust to a more open trading environment and to compete and participate more effectively in the multilateral trading system.  His delegation appreciated that the Caribbean region had been accorded priority by the WTO and that it would obtain greater levels of assistance from the WTO in cooperation with other regional and international organisations.  He hoped that funding for the regional three month trade policy courses would be forthcoming and sustained so that that particular programme could continue and be extended to other regions.  He admitted that it was difficult to narrow his Government's requests for technical assistance in 2003 to the required limit, given his country's numerous technical assistance requirements.  However, his delegation looked forward to working with the WTO and the relevant regional bodies in staging the activities that had been approved.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation was pleased to receive the 2003 TA Plan three months before the end of the year.  That gave Members time to consider and comment on it.  His delegation would discuss it with all member states of the European Communities.  They were the major donors of the Trust Fund.  Technical assistance was a crucial part of the DDA and it was encouraging that developing country Members had identified needs related to the negotiating agenda, including the Singapore issues, trade policy development, trade and services, rules, agriculture, market access and TRIPS implementation as a matter of priority.  His delegation agreed with the three stage approach presented by the Director-General.  Those three stages included technical assistance for negotiations, technical assistance for institutional capacity building and implementation, and technical assistance for trade integration and commercial infrastructure.  That approach related closely to the European Commissions' objective identified in its recent communication to the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament.  The European Commission had, in that communication spelt out how it intended to go about following up on the DDA, the Monterrey Conference on Financing for Development and the WSSD in Johannesburg.  It laid down a doctrine for trade and development for the next five years which coincided with the three stage approach.  It was important to acknowledge that the WTO could not do everything on its own as it was neither a full time training institute nor a development agency.  The work on technical assistance and capacity building was important and related to the DDA but should not be to the detriment of the core work, which was negotiating new rules within a short time period.  His delegation felt that some improvements could be made with respect to the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan.  He would provide some observations and would further liase with the Secretariat.  His delegation welcomed the needs based approach on which the 2003 TA Plan was based.  However, he asked for more detailed information regarding the identification of those needs by developing countries and by the Secretariat.  His delegation had the impression that the theoretical basis for imbedding technical assistance in the national development policies and in the PRSPs was not necessarily backed by reality and his delegation wished to hear more about the practical implementation of the process.  His delegation welcomed the cooperation with the Bretton Woods institutions and the regional development banks and he asked for a detailed explanation as to what the practical arrangements for that cooperation were.  He knew that the Director-General was keen to have close cooperation with other agencies.  He requested that the Secretariat indicate how far it was responding to the technical assistance needs identified in the diagnostic trade integration studies undertaken by the IF.  With respect to regional coverage, he stressed the importance of focusing on LDCs and low-income countries.  He said that an issue that needed to be discussed in more detail was the evaluation of the implementation of the 2002 TA Plan.  He understood that implementation was behind schedule and that by the end of 2002, a good part of the 2002 TA Plan would not have been implemented.  He asked whether the non-implemented activities would be taken up in the following year in parallel with the 2003 TA Plan or whether they would be dropped.  It was important to analyse in depth the financial side of the implementation of the 2002 TA Plan, for instance in terms of what had been spent, how procurement had been done and how much was left.  That was crucial information to both the Members and the donors.  It was important for donors to be able to make an assessment of the financial implications of the 2002 TA Plan before committing themselves to new pledges.  It was a question of accountability towards their constituencies and taxpayers.  
He went on to say that he had been surprised by the costing of the 2003 TA Plan.  The figures were three times higher than those for the 2002 TA Plan and a lot of the 2002 activities had not yet been implemented.  He said that it was ambitious to triple the total amount without having been able to implement the planned activities for 2002.  Members would have to consider both the financial side of the implementation of the 2002 activities and the implications of the estimated costs for 2003. When pledging for the 2003 TA Plan Members needed to be certain that the capacity was available to implement a meaningful and operational plan, which would help Members in their endeavours to achieve the objectives of the DDA.  Until that was clear a pledging exercise would be difficult and donor fatigue could be expected.  He concluded by raising the issue of the Secretariat's capacity to deliver 450 individual activities.  When considering the three stage approach presented by the Director-General he acknowledged that the Secretariat had said that the third stage was not core WTO business.  The development of infrastructure was more a question for other development cooperation partners.  He also acknowledged that in the second stage there would be an attempt to outsource a lot of the activities to specialised development agencies.  He said that he was still concerned that the WTO Secretariat alone would deliver the first stage.  If it had to deliver 450 activities it was likely that Secretariat staff would spend more time flying around the globe than assisting the negotiating groups with the priority work before the Cancun Ministerial Conference and between the Cancun Ministerial Conference and the end of the negotiating round.  He therefore urged the Secretariat to consider whether it would be possible to outsource some of those activities, either to regional public management institutions, university institutes or consultants, or by the way of tendering which would ensure the best value for money.  Attempting to do everything on its own would over-stretch the limited human resources that the Secretariat possessed.  Carrying out regional activities was also better as it was closer to the source where the capacity should be increased.  It should therefore be done by local public or private organisations as far as possible.  He said that the European Union had had a good experience in outsourcing those kinds of activities.  His delegation looked forward to an in-depth discussion which should result in an effective 2003 TA Plan:  a 2003 TA Plan which could be served by the limited resources, which was well-founded, which could be implemented during 2003, which was well linked to the priorities of the DDA and which remained within the reasonable limits of what could be pledged by the donor community in the WTO.  
&& The representative of Thailand said that her delegation was pleased that the Director-General had identified TA as one of his four priority areas.  She also supported the focus on the quality of technical assistance.  Importance therefore had to be attached to the evaluation system.  She agreed with the Director-General that technical assistance should not only focus on the Fifth Ministerial Conference to be held in Cancun but that it should go beyond the Doha Ministerial Conference negotiations.  In that regard she echoed the statement made by the representative of South Africa regarding the problems faced by developing countries with respect to non-tariff measures.  Her delegation felt that that was a priority issue and it was Members' task to streamline that issue in their technical assistance and capacity building requests so that benefits could accrue to them through the technical assistance programmes.  She thanked the Secretariat for the two national seminars on regional trade agreements and on investment granted to her country in 2002.  Her delegation did not only attach importance to those negotiation issues but also to human resource development.  She said that her delegation found the regional trade policy courses in Nairobi and Casablanca interesting.  It would be useful to expand that kind of activity to other regions by making use of the existing facilities in each region.  She gave the example of the ESCAP facility and the UNCTAD Trade Related Training Institute.  Her delegation looked forward to working closely with the Secretariat on that issue. 
&& The representative of Uruguay said that her delegation acknowledged the Secretariat's effort and attention paid to the priorities suggested by Member delegations.  Her Government had requested three national activities to be conducted in the areas of trade and the environment, dispute settlement and trade and investment.  She noted that only one of those requests, that on trade and environment, had been included in the 2003 TA Plan.  The requests her Government had made were of high priority as they were important components of the technical assistance that her country required.  She hoped that due attention would be paid to those requests.  
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation realised that when preparing the 2003 TA Plan it was difficult to accommodate the unlimited demands with the constrained ability to deliver.  Her delegation appreciated that the 2003 TA Plan was available three months before the end of the year as that enabled delegations to work collectively, comment and have it approved, costed and funded for delivery in January 2003.  She cited the informal network chaired by the delegation of South Africa, that had been created to discuss TA and said that it was open to all delegations that wished to participate in it.  With respect to the 2003 TA Plan, she said that the Secretariat was attempting to do too much itself.  More effort needed to be made to collaborate with bilateral donors, multilateral agencies and the larger developing countries that had indicated their willingness and ability to mentor.  Her delegation wished to see a detailed, costed report of what had been accomplished during 2002 with the funds provided for the 2002 TA Plan.  That report should also contain information regarding what had not been done due to the ad hoc activities undertaken.  That would enable Members to consider what could be delivered in 2003.  The 2003 TA Plan was an ambitious plan and considering what had been delivered of the 2002 TA Plan it seemed impossible that all of the activities in the 2003 TA Plan would be delivered.  She said that her delegation was surprised by the costing because figures that had been presented at the Committee on BFA meeting were different.  Her delegation had concluded from those figures that it would be difficult to spend CHF 25 million during the remainder of the year if only 11 million had been spent in the first nine months of 2002 on the 2002 TA Plan.  CHF 5 million had already been committed for the 2003 TA Plan.  Her delegation looked forward to the joint discussions of the Committee on BFA and the CTD on the costing of the 2003 TA Plan.  Her delegation wished to see a closer relationship between the categories used in the 2003 TA Plan and the database that was being created for tracking all TRTA.  That would enable Members to better analyse their collective progress as well as the progress of the WTO TA delivery.
&& The representative of Mexico said that technical assistance was a fundamental element to promote the development of developing countries and help them integrate into the multilateral trading system.  He said that technical assistance should be directed towards assisting Members to utilise the rights conferred upon them in the multilateral agreements and in that respect assist them to comply with their obligations.  A few Members like his own were both donors and recipients of technical assistance and had been able to gain experience on the effects of technical assistance.  He said that the Director-General's fourth and fifth point in his introductory comments were fundamental.  It was important to build technical capacity in Members.  The quality of the various technical assistance programmes was also important. He agreed that quality should be given priority over quantity.  A point that had been recently raised was the need to analyse the durability of the effects of technical assistance.  What often occurred was that technical assistance to strengthening human capacities had diminishing returns with time.  When human resources received training from various organisations, their knowledge became attractive for the private sector and in many instances the Government could not compete with salaries from the private sector.  All the technical assistance granted towards human resources and human capacity building did not remain in the institutions.  Members needed to focus on that if they wished to avail themselves of the various rights in the agreements.  His delegation would be presenting a proposal on technical assistance with respect to TBT.  That was an example of how Members could focus more on assistance to institutions rather than assistance to individuals.  It was not that human capacity was not important, but institutions represented an essential element for the implementation of WTO agreements.  His Government's TBT proposal would seek to ensure that technical assistance was directed to offices on rules, providing documentation and offering quality management services.  Regardless of the operations involved, there would be a guide indicating the  rights and obligations that existed in the framework of the TBT Agreement.  By that example, his delegation felt that it was providing something that could be useful in other fora because institutions would be strengthened more than human capacities.
He continued by saying that the representative of Bangladesh had mentioned that many Members focused on holding seminars and workshops without having the capacity to implement provisions.  It would be an advantage to optimise technical assistance resources by having a common objective and not delivering 50 courses on the same subject.  He said that resources should be geared towards a concrete objective.  His delegation's proposal could facilitate for Members to benefit from each other's experiences and optimise resources in Members which might not have the same level of experience in that area.  He said that his delegation would soon present that document to the Secretariat.  Strengthening the capacities of institutions rather than humans was something that should be taken into account.  That would make the allocation of technical assistance resources more effective.
&& The representative of Morocco said that his delegation supported the statement made by the representative of Kenya on behalf of the African Group.  The 2003 TA Plan would be of crucial importance for developing and least-developed countries in the present negotiating context of the WTO.  The creation of a real development round as decided at the Doha Ministerial Conference would depend on the technical assistance and capacity building provided in the period before the Cancun Ministerial Conference keeping in mind that important decisions would have to be taken, for example with respect to the Singapore issues.  The issue remained complex for developing countries.  Only a real strengthening of negotiating techniques would assist developing and least-developed countries to fully integrate into the multilateral trading system.  His delegation endorsed the approach presented by the Director-General making negotiating techniques and capacity building a priority.  He recalled his delegation's thoughts presented at the high level meeting on technical assistance held in July 2002.  The first related to specialisation.  In a negotiating context, such as that post-Doha, it was indispensable to focus on the deepening of the WTO agreements rather than for Members to restrict themselves to consider the articles at face value.  Such an approach required the identification of well‑targeted themes for a specialized audience.  Second, such activities should be included in a regional context.  That would respond to the dual objective of rationalizing the cost of the training by including more participants and permitting greater interaction between participants with different backgrounds.  Third, he agreed with the representative of Kenya that the technical assistance activities should be held over longer periods.  Experience had shown that beneficiaries initially required more time to understand certain complex issues.  Fourth, the theoretical courses should be complemented by practical experience.  Training could be given in the form of internships in the administrations of Members with more developed structures for dealing with WTO issues.  That kind of partnership between administrations should enable the recipients to deepen their practical knowledge by working with concrete cases experienced by the host administration.  With respect to the 2003 TA Plan, he noted with satisfaction that three activities were foreseen for Morocco relating to investment, SPS and a technical mission to assist in the preparations for the trade policy review for Morocco scheduled for June 2003.   His Government had indicated other priority areas such as transparency in government procurement and the upholding of other commercial matters.  He said his delegation would revert to the trade policy course held in Casablanca at a later stage.  A national evaluation of that course was being undertaken, keeping in mind that it was a pilot project. 
&& The representative of Cuba said that her delegation would study the documents in order to comment on the substance at the following meeting.  She said that technical assistance provided by the WTO had to have two fundamental objectives to become an effective tool for the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system.  Those were facilitating the effective participation of developing countries in negotiations and helping to facilitate increased market access.  With respect to the participation of developing countries in negotiations, important contributions were made by the seminars, workshops and various courses included in the 2003 TA Plan.  However, human infrastructure was not sufficient for the exporters of developing and least-developed countries to become competitive in the international market and have access to their principle market.  Material infrastructure was necessary to support national efforts to implement the rules conditioning the packaging, labeling and other technical regulations required by industrialized countries or to comply with SPS and environmental measures governing imports in the main markets and to get access to new technological developments that were already part of the new conditions in international trade.  Document WT/COMTD/W/100 contained an interesting characteristic of the growth of world exports, namely its correlation with the level of technology.  That was missing from the 2003 TA Plan.  If Members did not wish developing countries to be condemned to be exporters of commodities whose prices declined by the day it was necessary for WTO's technical assistance to be closely coordinated with that of other institutions.  She agreed with the representative of the European Commission that the WTO could not do everything alone.  There were other international organisations which had comparative advantages in that respect, for instance the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), the United Nations Conference of Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), and the Common Fund for Commodities.  In that connection she drew Members' attention to an ICC project connected to poverty alleviation through exports.   That was an example of what other institutions were doing and what could be achieved by working in a coordinated fashion.  The technical assistance that her Government country had received from the WTO had contributed to improving the awareness of the public and private sectors in her country but it was not sufficient.  It was for that reason that her Government had presented its priorities for 2003.  Taking into account that the document on the 2003 TA Plan had been recently distributed, she suggested that the item be kept on the agenda for the following meeting of the Committee so that delegations could analyse priorities bilaterally with the Secretariat.  Technical assistance and capacity building was a matter that had been given priority by Ministers at the Doha Ministerial Conference and by the Director-General in his statements.  Technical assistance together with market access were necessary for Members like Cuba that had an open economy with high export dependency. 
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that her delegation was pleased to note that the Director‑General had identified technical assistance and capacity building as one of the four pillars that he intended to pursue during his term at the WTO.  He had provided a broader definition of technical assistance by including programmes pertaining to building trade integration and commercial infrastructure in developing countries.  Her delegation shared the comments made by most delegations, particularly those made by the representatives of Kenya and Mauritius on the proposed 2003 TA Plan.  She welcomed the Director-General's new initiative that the WTO Secretariat through its 2003 TA Plan intended to respond to the needs of regions such as Africa, South and Central Asia and the Caribbean.  Her delegation was pleased to note that priority would also be given to countries in the South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation (SAARC) region.  The region consisted of three developing countries and four LDCs, two of which had not yet acceded to the WTO.  It was therefore a region with special challenges that required enhanced technical assistance.  She said that her delegation was sympathetic towards the Secretariat's situation with respect to delivering the technical assistance and capacity building programmes.  As had been stated, the 2003 TA Plan had been designed on the basis of refined requests received from developing countries.  The requests varied because of the different levels of development among requesting Members.  In that sense, a programme identified by one member might be inadequate from another Member's point of view.  She said that her delegation did not agree with what had been said by the representative of Mexico as some developing countries needed human resource development just as much as institutional building.  It was not possible for one single programme to suit every developing country.  In that regard, her delegation was grateful that the document containing the 2003 TA Plan captured the varying degrees of technical assistance and capacity building needs of developing countries.  She believed that Members would be able to approve the proposed 2003 TA Plan which represented the minimal list of technical assistance requirements of developing countries.  She had heard other delegations' concerns with respect to having to prioritise their requests and not having all of them included in the 2003 TA Plan.  Her delegation shared the views stated by the representative of Uruguay and her Government had also had to prioritise its requests to meet a minimal list of needs.  She hoped that the funds necessary to implement the 2003 TA Plan would be secured.
&& The representative of Senegal said that it was unnecessary to recall how important technical assistance was for developing countries in general and LDCs in particular.  He commended the Director-General for his outlook on technical assistance and on the priority areas he had set.  He said that he was pleased to see that the Secretariat had begun work on the 2003 TA Plan earlier than in the previous year as it had taken some time for the CTD to consider the 2002 TA Plan.  Although the many national technical assistance requests could not be met, some of them could be met at the regional level.  His delegation believed that Member's requests should be approved on an indicative basis as it would be good if some ad hoc requests could be met as well as long as they remained within the overall budget.  He said that it was appropriate, as the Director-General had pointed out, that technical assistance be considered for a period extending beyond the Fifth Ministerial Meeting. That was important for the LDCs within the IF.  It was a matter of having clear objectives for WTO TA.  The third type of technical assistance mentioned, i.e. for commercial infrastructure, was important for the LDCs as, second to market access, it was a question of having effective access.  That could only be achieved if supply capacity was improved.  However, it was not for the WTO to carry out all assistance alone.  Some of it was within the mandate of other international organisations.  Nevertheless, the WTO provided the framework for a broad overview of all trade-related questions.  The Secretariat could still assist Members on demanding TA not related to its specific area of competence.  He mentioned that the technical assistance programme in the TBT and SPS area had to be provided in cooperation with standard setting organisations for developing countries to really benefit.  He concluded by saying that his delegation supported the statement made by the representative of Kenya.  
&& The representative of Mauritania said that his delegation associated itself with the statements made by the representative of Kenya on behalf of the African Group and the representative of Zambia on behalf of the LDCs.  He said that he was pleased to hear the Director-General confirm that technical assistance would be one of the four pillars of his mandate.  The priorities he had set out were clear and consistent with what had already been achieved in the spirit of the DDA.  The Director‑General had said that the key to successful capacity building was for it to be cumulative, sustainable and of high quality.  He hoped that that would provide a new momentum to technical assistance which would be beneficial to developing countries and LDCs.  His delegation commended the Director-General for having begun consultations regarding the IF.  Before considering the substance of the proposed 2003 TA Plan, he agreed that the basis of the 2003 TA Plan should be the needs of beneficiary countries.  In that regard, his delegation was grateful for the activities planned in Mauritania in the areas of capacity building and implementation of agreements.  His delegation would cooperate with the Secretariat to achieve the aims that had been set out in the ambitious 2003 TA Plan.  
&& The representative of Australia said that, like other delegations, her delegation recognised the importance of technical assistance for developing and least-developed countries as a core element of the WTO's work.  In that regard her delegation appreciated the comments made by the Director‑General.  Her delegation welcomed the Secretariat's efforts to draw on lessons from the 2002 TA Plan and recognised that while much work was being done to address issues of concern, Members had ongoing responsibilities to improve the 2003 TA Plan whenever possible.  Recent discussions had highlighted the large number of requests for assistance received by the Secretariat.  That raised concerns relating to the capacity of the Secretariat to respond to them.  Her delegation welcomed efforts to address those issues by the provision of a more focused, sequenced and sustainable programme of assistance.  Her delegation also wondered whether a stronger effort to integrate trade into development strategies would allow beneficiary countries to divert some types of requests to alternative responsible agencies, thereby allowing international organisations and donors to collaborate more effectively.  Her Government was keen to ensure that the technical assistance mandates from the Doha Ministerial Declaration were met.  Her Government supported an increased focus and responsibility for TRTA in other committees and working groups and was working to ensuring that its bilateral assistance was complimentary to the Secretariat's activities.  Her delegation recognised the need to work together to analyse the needs of developing country members and the need to consider ways of mainstreaming trade into national and regional development strategies.  The shared goal was the delivery of effective, high quality assistance to Members.  With respect to the Global Trust Fund, her Government was considering issues relating to further contributions and would need to study the document provided on the financial impact of the 2003 technical assistance training activities (CRP(02)/3).  Being a donor, her Government had clear requirements for evaluations of activities and monitoring of the expenditures.  She said that her delegation appreciated the Secretariat's efforts to ensure transparency in its reporting and evaluation work.  Nevertheless, she asked the Secretariat to provide further information on the quality and effectiveness of the activities delivered under the 2002 TA Plan. 
&& The representative of Uganda said that his delegation associated itself with the statement made by the representative of Kenya on behalf of the African Group, and the statement made by the representative of Zambia on behalf of the LDCs.  His delegation had not had the time to study the 2003 TA Plan and would provide detailed comments on it at a later stage.  However, his delegation was in a position to comment on the vision, objectives and approach of the 2003 TA Plan.  He thanked the Director-General for having emphasised that technical assistance should be cumulative, sustainable and result in long term benefits.  His delegation shared the view that, apart from the day-to-day training programmes, there was a need for the construction of trade infrastructure, which was not within the WTO's competence.  However, the WTO had the leverage to coordinate with other organisations such as the World Bank, UNDP, and UNIDO to ensure that activities were sequenced in order to have maximum impact.  The issue of collaboration with other institutions was important in implementing the 2003 TA Plan.  His delegation had repeatedly said that the WTO was able to explain the rules, the consequences of not complying with them and give advice on how to comply.  However, the WTO did not have the competence in all areas of interest to developing countries and there was a need for it to collaborate with other organisations.  In some areas, such as the participation in negotiations, it was difficult for the Secretariat to give developing countries negotiating positions, as the WTO was a rule making body and as the Secretariat was servicing the negotiations.  The WTO was not completely irrelevant in that respect, but cooperation with other relevant organisations would have positive impact.  That was also true for capacity building for the effective participation of developing countries in trade.  He said that the 2003 TA Plan should remain principally demand driven in that the beneficiary countries should define the needs.  Any attempt to devise other means of needs identification would be a step in the wrong direction.  In its PRSP programme, the World Bank emphasised consultation with the stakeholders.  He did not know why the question of how to identify the needs had been raised.  The needs had to be left to the Members to identify.  The demand on the WTO to carry out a number of TA activities and at the same time to service negotiations was a dilemma for the WTO.  On the one hand, Members needed technical assistance which involved the participation of a large part of the Secretariat.  That might lead to difficulties in servicing the negotiations.  On the other hand, without technical assistance, negotiations would be held with unprepared developing country delegations.  Developing country Members would then sign agreements which they would not be able to implement because of a lack of capacity to do so.  A balance between staff time spent on technical assistance and servicing negotiations was needed if Members were to move forward.  The proposal made by the delegation of Canada with respect to the building of partnerships with other organisations was a possible solution.
&& The representative of Barbados said that the presence of the Director-General and the DDGs' at the meeting served to highlight the importance given to technical assistance in the WTO.  Her delegation thought that the strategic direction being adopted by the Secretariat in the elaboration of the 2003 Plan seemed well thought out.  The strategic focus, in conjunction with the guiding principles that had been outlined, provided a framework within which the delivery of WTO technical assistance might be effectively carried out.  She said that she wished to highlight a few issues which her delegation felt were of specific importance.  The first was the question of the sustainability of the WTO's technical assistance and capacity building activities.  There was no need to recall the importance of ensuring that TRTA and capacity building activities mandated at the Fourth Ministerial Conference received full implementation and follow through.  With respect to the warning made not to allow a situation of donor fatigue to develop, she said that there was no space in the undertaking for donor fatigue.  Second, her Government attached importance to coordination between agencies, donors and beneficiaries in the delivery of technical assistance.  The aim of such coordination was to ensure that needs were identified and met and that no critical issue remained outside the jurisdiction of one institution or the other.  It had to be ensured that nothing fell through the cracks.  She had raised that point because the Secretariat had rightly identified what it could not do.  Some donors in other fora had indicated the types of assistance that they would prefer to fund, either bilaterally or through other multilateral agencies.  Members therefore needed to ensure that no type of assistance became left out in the process such as the issue of the development of commercial infrastructure.  On the question of national versus regional activities, she said that while she agreed with the need to seek quality over quantity, technical assistance needed to be properly focused in order to be effective.  Therefore, it was clear that a balance had to be struck between regional and national activities.  The goal should be that of effective technical assistance delivery rather than "the greater yield".
She went on to say that her delegation had taken note of the Secretariat's comments on the issue of "ad hocism" and looked forward to a continued flexible delivery of WTO technical assistance both in the remainder of 2002 and in the 2003 TA Plan.  She said that her delegation also welcomed the statement made by the Secretariat that technical assistance and market access were complementary not substitutes.  The representative of South Africa had mentioned the issue of S&D and she said that Members needed to avoid the tendency of reducing S&D to technical assistance because the two were not substitutes either.  She said that her delegation found it positive that the Secretariat recognised special challenges in some regions and welcomed that the Caribbean Community had been identified as a region facing significant trade policy and trade development challenges.  In addition to the sub-regional institutions mentioned by the Secretariat, the Caribbean Development Bank was also involved in the developmental efforts of the Caribbean countries.  Her delegation was pleased to see a commitment to continue "Geneva week".  Many Caribbean countries were non-residents and "Geneva week" was an important tool for those Members.  Her delegation also welcomed the new products in the 2003 TA Plan, which had been elaborated in the Secretariat largely by the Training Institute.  Those included the training-of-trainers programme, the training courses for trade negotiators and the internships.  Her delegation was interested in receiving more details on those new products.  Her delegation was pleased that the decentralised regional trade policy courses in Nairobi and Casablanca had gone well.  In those exercises Members could see not just the training of officials but the linkage between the WTO and academic institutions in the field, as well as the opportunity for the training of trainers.  Her delegation looked forward to the evaluation of those programmes and to their extension to other regions such as the Caribbean region.  
&& The representative of India said that in his introductory remarks, the Director-General had underscored the importance of quality over quantity in the delivery of technical assistance as well as the need to have cumulative, systemic, and sustainable capacity building.  Many delegations had underscored the importance of those elements in their interventions.  In that context, he reiterated that the technical assistance and capacity building efforts should not only be event-based, but lead to effective institutional and human resource development in the recipient countries.  The Secretariat had broadly classified technical assistance and capacity building into three categories.  Technical assistance for building effective capacity for trade negotiators, technical assistance for the understanding of the rules and their implementation, and technical assistance for the development of commercial infrastructure.  As alluded to by a number of delegations, technical assistance in all three categories would be important for many developing countries and LDCs.  His Government had submitted its requests for technical assistance and capacity building for 2003.  However, it had subsequently been requested to identify two priority national activities, which would be incorporated in the 2003 TA Plan.  Cutting down the requests had not been an easy task.  It was clear from the documents containing the 2003 TA Plan and the presentation which had been made by Mr. Osakwe, that there was a gap between demand and supply.  His delegation noted the new tools and activities included in the 2003 TA Plan such as outreach programmes and internship programmes for regional co-ordinators.  The Secretariat documents had been only recently received by delegations and his Government was still examining them.  His delegation would comment on their substance at a later stage.  While his delegation agreed that outreach programmes would be useful, it was not certain that the cost of those programmes should be financed from the technical assistance budget, which was meant for capacity building in developing countries.  His delegation welcomed the Director-General's statement that the Secretariat's technical assistance objectives were not only focussed on the next WTO Ministerial Conference but also on establishing an architecture for WTO technical assistance.  He said that there should not be a presumption that technical assistance and capacity building on certain issues would necessarily lead to some decisions at the Fifth Ministerial Conference.  The purpose was to enable developing country Governments to better evaluate the implications of closer multilateral cooperation for their development policies and objectives, for them to be able to make informed decisions at the Cancun Ministerial Meeting.
&& The representative of the Czech Republic said that he was aware of the complexity involved in drawing up the 2003 TA Plan, given the resource limits Members faced, the large number of requests for technical assistance and the core business of the WTO, which was that of being a negotiating forum.  His delegation was impressed by the number of activities proposed by the Secretariat as well as the ability of Members to identify their needs.  It was apparent from the 2003 TA Plan that improved coordination and coherence within the Secretariat and with multilateral agencies and donors was more important than ever before.  High quality technical assistance delivery and effective use of scarce resources should be the leading principles.  The Director-General and others had mentioned that and his delegation shared those sentiments.  It was important that technical assistance and capacity building remained focused on activities related to the implementation of the DDA.  Equally important was to strike a geographical balance in terms of the Members that benefited from those types of activities.  There was no doubt that priority attention would continue to be paid to developing and least-developed countries.  However there were other Members who had specific needs and they had every right to claim access to the programmes organized and financed through the 2003 TA Plan.  From that perspective, his delegation appreciated that the draft 2003 TA Plan attempted to respond to some of the needs of the countries in Central and Eastern Europe and to their interest in having continued access to the WTO technical assistance and capacity building activities.  He said that there was a need to further develop relations between the WTO Secretariat and other regional and multilateral agencies which delivered technical assistance.  His Government had experienced how beneficial such relations could be for all involved.  An example was the close cooperation between the WTO Secretariat and the Joint Vienna Institute, which was a common destination for his Government's officials who took part in various activities related to trade and WTO.
&& The representative of the Philippines said that she was pleased with the Director-General's policy statement, in particular that the WTO Secretariat would focus its technical assistance on what it did best, namely on technical assistance to build effective negotiation capacity, explaining the agreements, their implementation and the nuances of those agreements.  She agreed with the representative of Canada that the Secretariat should not take on more responsibilities than it could handle.  She said that there was a need for the Secretariat to coordinate with other institutions that were in a position to deliver the requested technical assistance.  Her delegation was pleased to hear that WTO's technical assistance was not only geared towards the Cancun Ministerial Conference, but beyond it.  That showed the commitment of the WTO to enable Members to become effective negotiators in the long run.  The policy statement by the Director-General also mentioned coordination, which all Members could agree with.  The Director-General had stated that the Secretariat would continue its coordination with other agencies and advocate the role technical assistance could play in the construction of commercial infrastructure if delivered in collaboration with development institutions and bilateral donors.  The focus should be on quality and not quantity of WTO's technical assistance activities.  She commended the Secretariat for the way in which it had accomplished the process of arriving at the 2003 TA Plan.  She said that her delegation could claim ownership of the 2003 TA Plan because it had worked closely with the Secretariat in drawing it up.  Like other delegations, her delegation had had to prioritise its requests.  She said that the transparency shown was important.  She had been surprised by the transparency shown in Annex 2 of document WT/COMTD/W/104/Add.1.  She said that taking on board the lessons that the Secretariat had learnt from the implementation of the 2002 TA Plan was a move in the right direction.  It was important to continue to learn from past experiences and find ways of improving TA delivery beyond the implementation of the 2002 TA Plan.  In that connection, page 3 of document WT/COMTD/W/104/Add.1 provided a good summary of where things stood.  She said that she had noticed that the number of national activities exceeded the number of regional activities.  She had identified two specific national activities for the Philippines.  The Secretariat should feel free to inquire from her delegation if it was prepared to convert those activities to regional activities that would enable more countries to benefit.  The multiplier affect of regional activities for WTO Members would be enhanced if the venues of those activities were as dispersed as possible.  With respect to the budget, she said that she sympathised with potential donors.  She agreed with the suggestion by the representatives of the European Communities and Canada that Members receive information on how much of the 2002 budget had been spent and how much of it could be carried over to 2003. 
&& The representative of Switzerland said that his delegation valued the efforts made by the Secretariat to enhance the quality and impact of its technical assistance in the face of increased requests from beneficiary countries.  He agreed with the Secretariat that it was necessary to provide a sharp strategic direction for WTO technical assistance.  His delegation welcomed the will to take account of the lessons drawn from the implementation of the 2002 Plan and of the suggestions made by the Membership at the High Level Meeting on Technical Cooperation in July 2002.  In that respect, his delegation was of the opinion that special attention should be given to the technical cooperation audit carried out earlier in the year (WT/COMTD/W/97).  The Audit had presented sound recommendations concerning inter alia objective setting for major groups of technical assistance projects and the need to give higher priority to the selection of participants of training activities.  He said that it had been a deception for his delegation to notice that, in spite of the Secretariat's objective to limit ad hoc activities to a minimum, their level in 2002 continued to undermine the rationality of WTO TA Plans.  Stricter and transparent measures had to be taken to bring those activities under control.  So far 1038 requests for technical assistance had been communicated to the Secretariat for 2003.  His delegation believed that that trend should be viewed positively since it showed a growing interest for TRTA among developing countries.  However, it highlighted the necessity of sorting and rationalizing those demands.  The idea proposed by the Secretariat to ensure that requests were linked to priorities identified by Members in their development plans and poverty reduction strategies was of utmost importance.  His delegation approved of the direction taken by the Secretariat on that matter.  At the same time, his delegation was aware that that would not be an easy task, since not all Members had plans that could help them identify the right priorities.  For the future, Members might wish to search for solutions that strengthened the link between national plans and the delivery of technical assistance.  The high number of demands forced Members to look for innovative solutions.  The proposals presented in the 2003 TA Plan were interesting, such as grouping national requests into a regional activity, systematic and cumulative capacity building, and developing partnerships with other multilateral institutions.  Partnerships with other multilateral institutions were necessary, especially in the fields beyond the direct competence of the WTO.  In that connection, he asked for more information regarding the partnerships the Secretariat intended to be build with bilateral donors.  He said that with respect to the delivery modes, his delegation feared that the trade clinics approach for special and immediate needs could end up increasing the number of ad-hoc activities.  He said that the three pillars for the 2003 TA Plan, namely capacity building for effective negotiations, the legal implementation of WTO Agreements, and trade integration seemed appropriate.  He agreed that the WTO needed to concentrate on its core competencies.  He concluded by saying that the costing that had been proposed for the 2003 TA Plan had surprised his delegation.  The 2003 TA Plan and its costing needed further consideration.  In that sense, his delegation supported the request by the representatives of the European Commission and Canada that the Secretariat provide a detailed report on the implementation and accomplishment of the 2002 TA Plan so that Members would have a better view of what was possible for 2003.  
&& The representative of Norway said that her delegation was pleased to see that the elements in the 2003 TA Plan had been closely linked to the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  That was the right way to move forward.  Her delegation found part II on the "Lessons from the Implementation of the 2002 Annual TA/CB Plan" on page 5 in document WT/COMTD/W/104 useful, as those lessons could provide useful input to further improving the Plan.  She said that bullet point 6 in paragraph 4 stated that recipient countries had expressed further needs for capacity building with a view to trade integration.  She agreed with && The representative of the European Commission and others that the WTO could not be expected to deliver such assistance, with the exception of coordinating cooperation with development organisations, bilateral donors and the recipient countries themselves.  She said that her delegation would appreciate information from the Secretariat on any such additional assistance offered which went beyond the scope of the current work within the IF.  It was necessary to anchor TRTA within the recipient countries, and integrate it with their PRSP's and their national development plans.  She said that, as mentioned by the representative of Switzerland, her delegation believed that it was important to consider the long term effects of the proposed trade clinics and how to anchor them within the recipient countries themselves to ensure sustainability.  Her delegation would appreciate the Secretariat's views as to whether those trade clinics would also cover ad‑hoc requests.  Concerning the requests for assistance from the 118 countries, her delegation had noted with interest that the Singapore issues ranked top of the list.  Page 8 of document WT/COMTD/W/104 contained references to new guidelines that the Secretariat had been following during the drafting of the 2003 TA Plan.  On page 19, in paragraph 48, the Secretariat had indicated the need for clearer guidelines with regard to how the DDAGTF might be used.  Her delegation would appreciate further information with respect to any problems related to the allocation of the funds, and the reasoning behind the request for clearer guidelines.  She concluded by underlining the need to give particular attention to the needs of the LDCs.  In that respect, it was appropriate that 47 per cent of the national activities, as mentioned in paragraph 34, would, if adopted, take place in an LDC.  Further follow-up of the IF for the TRTA delivered to LDCs would play a key part in the process of meeting the needs of LDCs.
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation shared many of the views expressed by the Director-General in his introductory remarks.  His delegation was aware that the Technical Cooperation Division had worked hard to reflect the lessons learnt from ongoing activities and would try to improve those activities in the 2003 TA Plan.  He said that the cost estimate had surprised his delegation.  His delegation believed, as mentioned by other delegations, that Members needed to be informed in detail of the 2002 activities before examining the cost of the 2003 TA Plan.  The 2003 TA Plan could not be endorsed in isolation from its financial implications.  Therefore, he agreed with the proposal made by the representative of Canada that there be a joint session between the CTD and the Committee on BFA.  The needs of LDCs, developing countries and economies in transition went far beyond the practical responses that could be given by the WTO.  His delegation had observed that TRTA was one of the areas where an excellent partnership among developed and developing countries had developed.  He said that he appreciated the initiative taken by the delegations of South Africa and Canada to hold constructive discussions on that issue.  His delegation was building further cooperative relations with Members on the issue of TRTA.  Such a practise should be strengthened through constructive discussions in the CTD, aiming at pragmatic and practical solutions. In that regard his delegation was encouraged by the statement made by the representative of the Philippines.  With respect to coordination with other agencies he said that his delegation understood that there were three pillars of activities.  He believed that the WTO could be an advocate of the third pillar of technical assistance for the construction of commercial infrastructure while not directly dealing with the issue.  Coordination with other international agencies was therefore important for developing countries to be integrated in the multilateral trading system.  The Secretariat needed to inform Members of the detailed arrangements of such coordination, including information regarding co-financing arrangements for the joint activities carried out in 2002.  During the discussions on the 2002 TA Plan his delegation had raised issues of flexibility.  Ad hoc activities should not be allowed to damage the TA Plan.  Flexibility had to be within acceptable margins of the 2003 TA Plan.  Some delegations had mentioned that bilateral donors had been considering extending their bilateral technical assistance in the field of trade.  However, due to the policy issues involved it was sometimes difficult for bilateral donors to implement that assistance alone.  His Government was one such donor that had been working hard to collaborate with the WTO to extend assistance based on its own bilateral scheme to TRTA.  That would be implemented with the cooperation of UNCTAD later in 2002.  In addition, some developing countries had raised the point that they were willing to host such TRTA activities in their regions and in some cases they had done so.  Considering those requests and the mood among the Members, his delegation believed that a certain amount of flexibility and a certain level of ad hoc activities might be permitted in order to respond to such positive action by Member countries.  He concluded by saying that his delegation was concerned with some of the proposals made by the Secretariat, including the cost estimates.  His delegation was ready to actively participate in the debate on TRTA in the CTD or in the Committee on BFA.
&& The representative of Hungary said that her delegation believed that the technical assistance activities provided by the WTO effectively responded to the needs that emerged from the Mandate in the Doha Ministerial Declaration in order to promote the process for the Fifth Ministerial Conference.  Her delegation was pleased that Central and Eastern European Countries were involved in some of the training programmes.  Her Government's experiences with the training programmes were positive and the participation of her Government's experts in those programmes had deepened their knowledge in specific matters relating to the WTO.  She hoped that similar participation would be possible in future WTO technical assistance activities.
&& The representative of the Slovak Republic said that the draft 2003 TA Plan was a good basis for further discussion.  He thanked the Director-General for his focus on the issue of technical assistance and capacity building for the implementation of the DDA and the training of negotiators in WTO matters.  He said that in the 2003 TA Plan priority attention had been paid to the developing and the least-developed countries;  however in that regard he pointed out that there were other countries with specific needs and interests resulting from difficult transformation processes and he hoped that the needs of economies in transition had been recognised in the preparation of the 2003 TA Plan.  There were some activities on the national and regional level which would take place in Central and Eastern Europe and the geographical balance in terms of benefitting from those activities was well known.  He thanked the Secretariat for the possibility of having continued access to WTO technical assistance and capacity building activities.  His Government's experience was positive and it showed how essential the national seminars, training courses and other regional activities were.  In that regard, he underlined the need for strengthening relations between the WTO Secretariat and agencies that delivered national and regional technical assistance activities.  One of his Government's positive experiences was connected with the cooperation between the WTO Secretariat and the Joint Vienna Institute.  He hoped that that would continue as both organisations would benefit from their efforts.  
&& The representative of Hong Kong, China said that his delegation found the new ideas in the draft 2003 TA Plan interesting.  Comments had been made on the concept of trade clinics.  His delegation wished to hear in more detail how the concept of trade clinics would be implemented in practice and especially what the mechanism would be for making requests and what type of assistance the clinics would provide.  His delegation appreciated the efforts to further cooperation with the international standard setting organisations on the issue of standards.  That initiative was particularly welcomed as it related to one of the implementation issues that developing countries were concerned about.  Some of them were of the view that technical standards could become an increasing barrier to trade when tariffs were lowered.  He requested more information on how the WTO intended to increase cooperation with international standard setting organisations.  His delegation welcomed the ideas of training trainers, involving academia and using WTO reference centres.  In that regard, his delegation requested the Secretariat to provide updated information on the WTO reference centres, so that Members would get a better idea of the people involved and whether involvement in the reference centres could be enhanced.  He said that he had noticed that the 2003 TA Plan covered many areas and that many of the requests submitted by Members might not be met.  The fact that the draft 2003 TA Plan had been produced in advance gave Members an overview of the global shape of it and enabled them to compare it with the overall objective of the DDA and to consider whether the 2003 TA Plan could fully meet the needs of developing countries.  He noticed that a range of activities were already organised in some negotiating areas.  However, in other areas relating to negotiations, such as trade facilitation, no global activity seemed to be planned.  He asked Members whether that suited their needs from a negotiations point of view.  His delegation agreed with the points raised by the representatives of the Philippines and Uganda regarding the supply side constraints of the Secretariat in providing technical assistance.  In that regard he echoed the delegations which had called for a review of the implementation of the 2002 TA Plan.  He said that it seemed that only a portion of the 2002 activities had been implemented.  That was a reflection of the fact that the number of technical assistance activities had increased since 2001 and that Members needed to review the situation in order to ensure that the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan would not put unrealistic demands on the Secretariat which also had to service the negotiations.  The Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) had recently stated that those negotiations were going to intensify.  
&& The representative of the United States said that her Government was pleased with the demonstrated commitment of the Director-General, the Secretariat staff and the Membership to the critical task of providing TRTA and capacity building.  She said that the development and the implementation of the 2002 TA Plan had been a challenge for the WTO.  Members had undertaken a complex process and difficult challenges lay ahead.  Her delegation was pleased that the Secretariat had noted Members concerns and had attempted to learn lessons from the experiences it had gained in 2002.  Her delegation believed that a strategic approach was critical as Members moved forward.  It was important that the Secretariat had chosen to focus its 2003 TA Plan on its areas of competence related to trade negotiations as well as implementation and long term integration.  It was particularly important that the Secretariat would be working with other institutions to improve the quality of the jointly delivered programmes.  The 2003 TA Plan represented an effort to rationalise Members' work.  The effort to blend bilateral and regional programmes was important as was the effort to reduce the number of ad hoc activities although Members knew that flexibility was required in the area of TRTA.  There was an attempt to have a range of shorter and longer-term projects to meet developing country needs and there was an effort to incorporate different approaches and new tools.  Her delegation shared the views of others that Members had to find a way to make progress on technical assistance and capacity building while not undermining WTO's central task.  There was a need to deliver real liberalisation for the whole trading system to benefit the global economy.  She agreed with other delegations that it was important to consider how the Secretariat might cooperate with other organisations to deliver projects even in its core areas of competence.  There was a lot of work to be done as technical assistance had to be delivered effectively while not undermining the servicing of negotiations.  
She went on to say that her delegation shared the concerns expressed by other donors regarding the costing of the 2003 TA Plan.  It was reasonable for Members to expect that the cost would have remained roughly the same for approximately the same number of projects.  The high estimated cost of the 2003 TA Plan presented donor delegations with a serious challenge to convince their budget authorities to be forthcoming.  Donors would, in that light have to carefully consider the 2003 TA Plan.  Her Government, like others would have to justify budgetary requests and demonstrate that money was spent effectively.  The amounts spent through September on the projects in the 2002 TA Plan seemed surprisingly low to her Government and that made it even more difficult to argue for an increase in the WTO budget.  Her delegation joined the delegation of Canada and others in calling for a full account of the spending on the 2002 TA Plan, including information on short term costs, long term projects and how to justify that some short term programmes were more expensive than long term ones.  That was particularly important when delegations approached their budgetary authorities with such a large increase in expenditures.  Her Government was a large bilateral donor in the area of trade-related  technical assistance and capacity building and had contributed approximately US$620 million in that area in fiscal year 2002.  It remained committed to trade-related technical assistance and capacity building and wished to keep contributing.  However, a demonstrated effective management of the funds contributed was critical in that respect.  Her delegation welcomed the effort on the part of Members to look into how future TRTA in the WTO could be made effective.  It also welcomed the opportunity to work with the delegation of South Africa and other interested Members to ensure that the quality of TRTA would be constantly improved.  Her delegation supported the proposal made by the representative of Canada that the 2003 TA Plan be reviewed in conjunction with the Committee on BFA.  
&& The representative of El Salvador said that she also spoke on behalf of the delegation of Guatemala.  She said that it was comforting to find a 2003 TA Plan that aimed to meet the specific needs of all countries in order to strengthen their negotiating capacity.  She understood that the work of compiling the requests had not been easy.  Her delegation had observed that amongst the activities scheduled for the Latin American region, there was no activity in the area of trade facilitation, which would help Latin American countries to remove the technical barriers that hampered trade.  Taking into account the above, she was aware that UNIDO had approached the Latin American region to provide support and had a programme aimed at meeting the needs of those countries in the area of trade facilitation.  She asked the Secretariat if the revised 2003 TA Plan would include the UNIDO programme or if there was another activity in conjunction with UNIDO that was in the process of being evaluated and that if for that reason had not been included in the programme.  As an example of the urgent need she cited the results of a study which showed that 50 per cent of the problems occurring in intra-regional trade were related to the issue of trade facilitation, such as procedures, customs valuation, and transparency.  She said that the Central American Vice-Presidents had attended a UNIDO Meeting in Vienna the previous week to support the programme that seemed to be generating increased competitiveness in the area.  She emphasised the fact that other programmes existed in other organisations such as the World Trade Net in the ITC which could also play a role in the negotiations of WTO agreements, such programmes could be a good compliment to the work carried out by the WTO.
&& The representative of Mexico said that following what had been said by the representative of Sri Lanka he wished to clarify that the comments that had been made by his delegation were intended for the Secretariat to review.  While he believed that institutional capacity was most important there were clearly situations where human capacity building was necessary as well.
&& The representative of China said that her delegation was aware that the drawing up of the 2003 TA Plan had involved a lot of work and that it had been necessary to take many elements into consideration to complete the effort.  She noted that the Plan had been improved by learning from experiences from the 2002 TA Plan and that the 2003 TA Plan therefore presented more practical and flexible TRTA in favour of developing countries.  As a newly acceded Member, her Government had conducted a series of seminars, workshops and training courses to improve the public awareness of the WTO and its rules.  Since there were numerous domestic demands in that regard, the technical assistance that had been delivered by the WTO had played an important role to contribute to institutional and legal capacity building in her Government.  An aspect worth highlighting was the delivery mode of technical assistance.   She agreed that it was the quality and not the quantity of TA that counted.  Her delegation regarded the content of the technical assistance delivered to be the critical issue.  Seminars which presented general ideas or broad WTO rules were normally ineffective since such knowledge was not easily put into practice in specific economic environments.  Therefore, her delegation suggested that future technical assistance activities be more focused.
&& The representative of Romania said that, as a developing country in Eastern Europe, her Government attached great importance to technical assistance as a tool for economic development through improved participation in the multilateral trading system.  The draft 2003 TA Plan was an important step in the direction of making technical assistance more focused and tailored to the needs of different groups of Members.  It appeared to be well structured and included the contribution of other institutions.  Her delegation found the 2003 TA Plan to be in accordance with the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  She was pleased that several technical assistance activities would benefit officials from her country even if not all the activities her delegation had requested had been included. Several delegations had mentioned that the cost of the 2003 TA Plan was too high.  She said that her delegation was of the view that no amount was too large when spent on that form of education if the overall budget so allowed.  At the same time, she said that her delegation supported the idea of having an accurate account of the cost of each technical assistance project.  When working with the Secretariat on technical assistance matters, her Government had supported the inclusion of a project proposal received from an academic institution in Romania for a network of regional WTO centres.  She asked for more information on that proposal.  Involving academia in all WTO matters was one of the best ways to ensure a stable country and region.  
&& The representative of Indonesia said that the Director-General had mentioned his commitment to make the 2003 TA Plan a success and to ensure that it would benefit the recipient countries, especially the developing and least-developed countries.  Technical assistance was a core element of the WTO's work to develop the capacity of developing and least-developed countries to participate in the global market.  That was one way of increasing the level playing field of developing and least‑developed countries vis à vis their developed training partners.  His Government was one of those that had received WTO technical assistance for capacity building.  However, bearing in mind the broad scope of the WTO agreements, his delegation was of the view that the WTO technical assistance programmes should not be limited to only a few agreements.  Due to the lack of capacity and a limited understanding of the costs and benefits of the current negotiations, it was difficult for developing country governments like his own to limit their requests for technical assistance.  He was aware of the Secretariat's limited human resources to meet Members' requests for technical assistance.  He highlighted the urgent need for increased collaboration between the WTO and other relevant international organisations and having bilateral donor countries working together with the Secretariat.  Such collaboration would be important in light of the limited resources that the Secretariat possessed.  It was his delegation's view that to increase the quality and effectiveness of the technical assistance plans, the Secretariat should evaluate the 2002 TA Plan and report to Members.    
&& The representative of Oman said that, as a recently acceded country with extensive market access commitments, her delegation was surprised to find that it had only been granted two technical assistance activities for 2003.  That would not assist her Government's efforts to implement the commitments that it had undertaken in its accession negotiations, especially as her Government had not been granted any transitional periods for implementing the WTO Agreements.  Her delegation believed that the assistance given to recently acceded Members should be increased.  Her Government would only be able to implement its commitments if the Secretariat increased the number of activities.  She was aware that some Members were concerned with the cost of the 2003 Plan and might try to reduce it.  However, that would also mean reducing Members' implementation efforts.
&& The representative of Ecuador said that the 2003 TA Plan was an improvement over the 2002 TA Plan.  He said that his delegation would appreciate if future agendas included the possibility of commenting on the 2003 TA Plan in light of the 2002 TA Plan.  That would ensure consistency and efficiency.  It would be beneficial if some flexibility was applied to the requests presented by Members.   
&& The representative of Zimbabwe said that her delegation supported the statement made by the representative of Kenya on behalf of the African Group.  Her delegation welcomed the initiatives that had been taken by the Director-General and the innovative new activities that had been highlighted by the staff of the Technical Cooperation Division.  Her delegation hoped for enhanced cooperation between the WTO and regional institutions in the African region.  She also hoped that supply side constraints would be addressed.  There should be some flexibility in addressing ad hoc requests for technical assistance.  
&& The Chairman said that the 2003 TA Plan submitted by the Technical Cooperation Division was in many ways unique.  It had been drafted well before its commencement date of January 2003.  He was aware that the drafting of the 2003 Ta Plan had not been an easy task.  Its early circulation gave Members time to review it.  He said that, keeping in mind that Members had not had sufficient time to study the 2003 TA Plan and that several changes had been proposed, he suggested that the Secretariat should revise the 2003 TA Plan according to the comments made.  The Committee would meet again to consider it.  He noted that several delegations had asked for an account of the performance of the 2002 TA Plan and he believed that a brief performance report could be provided.  He proposed that Members meet again on Monday, 11 November at 3 p.m. to discuss the 2003 TA Plan.  A suggestion had been made for the CTD and the Committee on BFA to meet jointly and that was something that would be taken up with the Committee on BFA.  There were some technical problems in having a joint meeting.  He said that he was aware that the Committee on BFA would be meeting on 11 and 12 November but he was not aware what the agenda contained and whether they would be willing to discuss the 2003 TA Plan.  An Airgram inviting Members to a meeting on 11 November would be circulated.
It was so agreed. 
Overview of the training activities of the WTO Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/105)
WTO Training Institute – Planned activities in 2003 (WT/COMTD/W/103)
&& The Chairman said that the two remaining sub-items under agenda item C related to the training activities of the WTO.  The Secretariat had prepared two notes, one containing an overview of the training activities of the WTO Secretariat contained in document WT/COMTD/W/105 and one on the planned activities of the WTO Training Institute in 2003 contained in document WT/COMTD/W/103.  Those two notes were self-explanatory so unless there was a request for it, he would not ask the Secretariat to make any general introduction to them.  He said that the Directors of the two divisions concerned, Mr. Chiedu Osakwe of the Technical Cooperation Division and Mr. Claude Mercier, Director of the Training Institute, were willing to respond to any queries Members might have or listen to any comments Members might wish to make.
&& The representative of Senegal said that his delegation had not had time to look at the documents.  He said that the activities were important to his Government and he suggested that Members revert to the documents at future meetings.  He also proposed that documents of that sort be made available to Members well in advance of the meeting at which they would be considered.  
&& The Chairman said that the issue of having documents issued well before the meetings was something that the Secretariat was taking seriously and all committees were concerned about.  He said that the documents had been made available and if there was something that delegations wished to take up then it would be considered.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation had some questions that it would raise when other delegations had had the chance to study the documents.  They related in particular to the courses in Nairobi and Casablanca that were currently under evaluation.  She said that many delegations had stated how important those courses had been for the training of their country officials and she asked when the evaluation would be completed.  She also asked which elements of that training programme were securely funded.  That was a question that also arose with respect to the budget that had been presented earlier which seemed to include elements that were traditionally funded out of the regular budget.  In addition, her delegation wondered which activities were to be funded from the Trust Fund and which were to be funded from the regular budget.  
Mr. Mercier, Director, Training Institute said that the Secretariat was aiming to have a final evaluation of the Nairobi and Casablanca courses by the end of October.  The two courses had just been completed.  Reports were being received from the resource people that had been used from both within and outside the Secretariat.  The Secretariat was awaiting reports from the two institutions with which the Secretariat had the partnership agreement.  The assessments the Secretariat had received from the participants were in the process of being reviewed.  It was an inter-divisional exercise which was being conducted under Mr. Rolian's Audit Unit.  The Director-General would provide observations in due course.  In response to the second question posed by the representative of Canada, he said that the Secretariat, in the annex to the document WT/COMTD/W/103, had attempted to identify where the funding was available, where there was no need for additional funds and where traditional activities of the Training Institute were normally financed by the regular budget.  He said that the 5th Specialized Course on Dispute Settlement shown in row 5 on page 4, was provided for in the costing estimate that had been provided by DDG Abbott.  That type of course was traditionally financed by other sources such as Trust Fund type of money, though it existed long before the Trust Fund came into being.  Such courses were mandated by the Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU) and did not constitute ad hoc requests.  They were addressed to all Members of the WTO, not just to the developing countries.  In each of those courses the participation of up to 10 participants from LDCs was financed.  The Secretariat did not fund the participation of other developing or developed country participants.  The induction days did not involve any costs as they were one-day activities.  The trade policy courses were part of the institutional mandate dating back to 1956.  The only caveat would be the courses that would be held in 2003.  Due to the Conference 'ITU Telecom World 2003', the Secretariat would not be able to deliver more than one course, if it could even carry out one.  That was due to the fact that there would be no rooms available in or around Geneva during the duration of that Conference.  Even the traditional lodgers could not be used for the participants because they could charge up to five times the price of a room charged to the WTO.  If the Secretariat could not arrange even one course, it would attempt to reallocate the money usually allocated for the three-month trade policy courses to the 2-3 week specialised courses carried out under the same mandate.  Those might deal with specialised topics or they could be trade negotiation skills seminars.  He said that what he had mentioned about the 5th Specialized Course on Dispute Settlement also applied for those courses.  Since the decision of the Committee on BFA in 2001, the two three-week courses for LDCs (one in French and one in English) that used to be financed out of Trust Fund money had become part of the regular budget due to the trade-off in the Budget 2002 exercise between symposia and those courses in terms of financing from the Trust Fund.  Where financing was lacking was for the training of trainers programme.  That was a separate programme having been put forward in the 2003 TA Plan.  The first phase of that programme in 2002 was financed from the Trust Fund. He said that that activity had been put under the regular budget requests for 2003.  If the Committee on BFA turned it down then it would have to be considered under the Trust Fund.  The distance learning was a continuation of the programme that was agreed in 2001 and the money had already been partly accounted for in the 2002 formulation of the budget over two years.  That left the university networking activity for which no funding was available in addition to the constrained human resources.  It was hard to develop a network with universities especially when they all wished to set up training institutes or required the WTO to provide other resources, including human resources.  In 2002 alone the Secretariat had received several requests for such activities but had not received any funds.  The Secretariat had therefore proposed a modest programme in the regular budget for 2003 in the hope that something could be developed, time and resources permitting.  The Secretariat had been asked to carry out 16 courses with the same amount of staff because only a few new posts had been provided in 2001 and the recruitment of new staff had not been finalised.  He encouraged Members to consider that programme as a best endeavour approach.  If the resources were made available, then the Secretariat would do its best to deliver, the programme would otherwise have to be curtailed.  He concluded by saying that the budget of the Training Institute was being discussed in detail in the Committee on BFA.  
&& The representative of Kenya asked whether adopting the documents would affect the African Group's proposal with respect to the Nairobi and Casablanca trade policy courses.  The Chairman had said that there would be changes to the documents.  He said that he therefore assumed that the changes would relate to all the documents so as to retain the equilibrium.  If the changes related to just one document, then his delegation would need to study all the documents before accepting them.  He asked how much it would cost to turn the three-day, one-week and three-week courses into compact three-month courses.  Some donors had questioned the budget so it was important to consider the most effective way of delivering the courses.  
&& The Chairman said that it was the Technical Cooperation Division's documents relating to the 2003 TA Plan that would be subject to modifications based on the discussions that had taken place and not the proposals that had been made in document WT/COMTD/W/103 and WT/COMTD/W/105.  However, the point made by && The representative of Kenya that the two documents had to be consistent was important and would be taken into account. 
&& The representative of Barbados reiterated her delegation's interest in some of the field-based activities such as the training of trainers programmes, the cooperation with academic communities and institutions which was being carried out through the Training Institute.  Her delegation found it interesting that the Training Institute had initiated many new activities.  Her delegation looked forward to further development of some of the other initiatives such as the distance learning, video conferencing, and Internet-based courses.  She said that the pilot projects for regional trade policy courses that had been held in Casablanca and Nairobi were important exercises, not only because of their capacity building aspects but also because of their linkage to the training of trainers and cooperation with the academic institutions.  Her delegation looked forward to considering those further.
&& The Committee took note of the documents and the statements made.  
D.	NOTIFICATION UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&&	- Notification from India and Sri Lanka (WT/COMTD/N/16)
&& The Chairman said that item D related to notifications under the Enabling Clause.  At the last meeting of the CTD, some delegations had requested more time to consider the notifications regarding the Free Trade Agreement between India and Sri Lanka contained in document WT/COMTD/N/16.  It was, therefore, agreed that the item be kept on the agenda.  There had also been a request for a clarification of the notification procedures regarding free trade agreements.  More specifically, information had been sought as to whether such notifications under the "Enabling Clause" also required notification in the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA).  He therefore asked the Secretariat to clarify the notification procedures.
Mr. Low, Director, Development and Economic Research Division, said that the situation, as far as the Secretariat understood, was that any regional trade agreement (RTA) had to be notified to the WTO.  Depending on the legal cover sought, Article XVIII, GATS Article V, or the Enabling Clause, the notifications would be sent to the Council for Trade in Goods, the Council for Trade in Services or the CTD.  A notification would never be sent directly to the CRTA.  The decision to refer the notification to the CRTA remained with the body which had received the notification, and it was up to them to set the terms of any examination by the CRTA.  The CRTA in practice only examined what had been referred to it.  There was thus no legal requirement to notify the CRTA as such.  What had happened in practice was that the process of referring agreements notified under Article XXIV to the CRTA for examination had become more or less automatic, it was a growing practice in the case of RTAs notified under Article V of the GATS, but it was rare for notifications of RTAs under the Enabling Clause to be referred to the CRTA.  In fact, the MERCOSUR Agreement was the only one that had been referred to the CRTA.
&& The Committee took note of the notification and clarification provided by the Secretariat.

E.	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES
&&  Notification by Japan (WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.11)
&& Notification by Switzerland (WT/COMTD/N/7/Add.1)
&& The Chairman said that, at the last meeting, the delegation of Japan had introduced a notification contained in document WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.11.  The delegation of Switzerland had also introduced a notification contained in document WT/COMTD/N/7/Add.1.  At that meeting, some delegations had posed questions that required detailed answers.  It had therefore been decided that the two items be kept on the agenda.  To the extent that the two notifications related to measures in favour of LDCs, they had been forwarded to the Sub-Committee on LDCs for substantive consideration and reporting back, according to the reporting procedures agreed to at the 32nd Session of the CTD.  However, it had been pointed out at the last meeting that the overall Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) Scheme to which the notifications referred was for the CTD to consider, so the notifications did not exclusively apply to the LDCs.  
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation appreciated the interest shown by other delegations in his Government's GSP scheme.  At the last meeting, his delegation had not been able to provide comprehensive responses to all questions made.  Document WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.11 containing the notification by the Government of Japan consisted of a couple of parts.  One related to LDC beneficiaries and the other to ceiling quotas for industrial products.  His delegation had understood the questions posed at the last meeting to relate to how the Government of Japan would manage the ceiling quotas for industrial products and to the relation between those quotas and the GSP scheme for the LDCs.  The answer was that the industrial products to which the Government of Japan applied the ceiling quotas would not be affected by its GSP scheme for LDCs.  As earlier explained, the GSP scheme for LDCs already included tariff and quota-free treatment for 99 per cent of the imports into Japan of industrial products from LDCs.  The GSP scheme for LDCs was a separate scheme which did not affect the ceiling quotas for industrial products.  With respect to the management of the ceiling quotas for industrial products, he said that the Government of Japan granted preferential tariffs on 81 industrial product groups.  The ceilings in the GSP scheme related to the total value or quantity of each product group and was provided at the beginning of each fiscal year.  The fiscal year in Japan began on 1 April.  The most-favoured nation rate of duty would apply after the ceilings had been exceeded.  The preferential treatment would also be suspended for a particular product group with reference to a particular preference receiving country if preferential imports originating in that country exceeded a maximum amount of 20 percent of the total value or quantity of the ceiling.  The Government of Japan determined the amount of imports from a particular country based on the customs statistics in Japan.  There might therefore be some differences between the reality and the statistics once the statistics were finalized.  However, the Government of Japan attempted to apply the maximum 20 per cent country amount as far as possible since it would allow more countries to enjoy the preferences.
&& The Committee took note of the clarifications made.

F.	PARTICIPATION OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN WORLD TRADE 
(WT/COMTD/W/100 and Add.1)
&& The Chairman said that agenda item F related to the participation of developing countries in world trade.  The CTD had the mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  In order to assist the Committee to fulfill that part of its Mandate, the Secretariat had produced a paper contained in document WT/COMTD/W/100.  The item had been kept on the agenda as some delegations had expressed the wish to have more time to study the paper.  A request had also been made at the last meeting for the Secretariat to provide country-specific information of the aggregated regional analysis presented in the paper.  Addendum 1 to the document (WT/COMTD/W/100/Add.1.) aimed to respond to that request.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation believed that the Addendum provided more detailed information on a country-by-country basis.  She noted that the well researched report mainly focussed on trade trends which her delegation believed to be an important piece of the picture.  However, her delegation wondered whether it would be possible to look into some of the other factors that assisted Members to increase their participation in trade, such as considering the trade-policy review mechanism and extract indicators which would assist Members to get a broader sense of the participation of developing countries in world trade.  She was not aware of how much work that would involve.  Nevertheless, to look at trends meant to only consider one part of the picture.  A broader focus would be of benefit to the Committee.
&& The representative of Paraguay said that his delegation had not had enough time to study the Addendum in detail.  However, he realized that it related to a disaggregation of the data that had been provided in the earlier document.  His delegation would comments on the paper at the next meeting of the Committee.
&& The Chairman said that he believed that the suggestion made by the representative of the United States to work with other processes within the WTO and to benefit from possible synergies was an excellent one.  He suggested that the Committee take note of that suggestion and attempted to do something about it.
It was so agreed.

G.	PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& The Chairman said that the Committee had decided to keep an item relating to Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration as a standing item on the agenda.  Paragraph 51 related to the identifying and debating developmental and environmental aspects of the negotiations in order to help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected.  The issue of sustainable development had also been the subject of the informal consultations held on 10 September 2002, shortly after the Johannesburg World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD).  At the informal consultation, it had been agreed that, at the CTD Meeting, the Committee might also consider the negotiated documents that emerged from the WSSD.  The documents had been circulated in multi-symbol document WT/COMTD/W/106 - WT/CTE/W/220, as the CTE also wished to consider them.  He hoped that delegations had been able to consider the contents.  One of the issues that the Committee might wish to consider was how the outcome of the WSSD should be treated in the context of the WTO in general, and the CTD in particular.  He urged delegations to address both the substantive elements of Paragraph 51 as well as the developmental aspects of the outcome of the WSSD, and to indicate how views that had been expressed in the latter might fit into the work of the CTD.  He said that he believed that Members would welcome any new suggestion that delegations might wish to offer.  As there were no requests for the floor, the Chairman said that it seemed clear that delegations still required time to consider all aspects of the topic.
&& The Committee decided to revert to the item at its next meeting.

H.	CONSIDERATION OF ARTICLE XVIII AS MANDATED BY PARAGRAPH 12 OF THE DOHA MINISTERIAL DECLARATION (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1), THE DECISION ON IMPLEMENTATION-RELATED ISSUES AND CONCERNS (WT/MIN(01)/17), AND IN CONJUNCTION WITH TIRET 3 OF JOB(01)/152/REV.1 OF 27 OCTOBER 2001
&& The Chairman invited Members to move on to address Agenda Item H relating to GATT Article XVIII as one of the outstanding implementation issues.  The Secretariat had been asked to produce background documents relating to how Article XVIII had been applied in the WTO and in the GATT.  The result of the Secretariat's analysis was contained in documents WT/COMTD/39 and its Addendum 1 (WT/COMTD/39/Add.1).  He said that he believed that the questions before the Committee were how it should deal with Article XVIII, excluding Section B, as an outstanding implementation issue, what delegations wished to get out of the consideration of it, and what the goal of the reporting in December should be.  At the informal meeting in September, the delegation of Sri Lanka had noted that the Secretariat documents had indicated that Sri Lanka had invoked Article XVIII in the past.  However, the records in the Mission of Sri Lanka did not indicate what difficulties the delegation had faced in invoking the Article.  The delegation, therefore, asked the Secretariat for information on traces in WTO records of any difficulties the Government of Sri Lanka might have encountered in invoking Article XVIII.
Mr. Low, Director, Development and Economic Research Division, said that the Secretariat had attempted to search for information with respect to the invocation of the Government of Sri Lanka of Article XVIII.  It seemed that Article XVIII had been invoked eight times by the Government of Sri Lanka.  The Secretariat had compiled the documents with respect to the invocations by the Government of Sri Lanka, referred to in the footnotes of the Secretariat documents WT/COMTD/W/39 and its Addendum 1, and provided those to the delegation of Sri Lanka.  The Secretariat was diffident about attempting to make judgements about what difficulties were associated with the invocations.  The Secretariat could compile the documents referred to into some kind of working document if that was helpful.  However, he did not believe that the Secretariat was in a position to carry out an analysis of difficulties encountered by Members in the process of invoking different WTO provisions.  That would have to be left to the judgement of the Members concerned.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that his delegation was grateful for the information provided.  He said that information regarding the practical experience of the use of Article XVIII:C had to be provided by Members.  The Government of Sri Lanka had used Article XVIII:C in a particular situation at a particular time as the economic circumstances and the trade policies being followed at that time were quite different from the current situation of the country.  His country had faced balance-of-payments difficulties in the 1940's and 1950's and there had been other economic development constraints.  A different trade policy regime had therefore been followed in the 1940's and 1950's.  For example, an import licences schemes had been restricting foreign exchange allocations.  It was against that background that the Government of Sri Lanka had invoked Article XVIII at that time.  From 1977 onwards, as the trade policy context had changed,, the Government of Sri Lanka had followed a more liberal economic policy under which import licence requirements and exchange rate controls had been abolished.
&& The Chairman said that the comments made by the representative of Sri Lanka reflected the fact that the philosophy of trade and its relationship with development had been evolving over time.  He went on to say that, at the informal meeting in September, the delegation of India had made reference to its submission in document WT/GC/W/363 of 12 October 1999.  The delegation of India had also suggested an in-depth analysis of each provision of Article XVIII to identify the elements preventing developing countries from making use of those provisions and that contributions from Members, including experience from Members that had invoked the provisions, would be useful in that respect.
&& The representative of India said that Ministers at the Doha Ministerial Conference had given a clear mandate for a complete review of Article XVIII with a view to ensure that it served the original objective of facilitating the progressive development of economies in developing countries and to allow them to implement the programmes and policies of economic development designed to raise the general standard of living of their people.  Article XVIII was not a new issue.  It had been on the agenda since before the Seattle Ministerial Conference.  Her delegation had been flagging the issue of a review of Article XVIII as her delegation believed that Article XVIII was the most important S&D provisions, the implementation of which should serve the basic objective of development.  Her delegation had also explained at considerable length the rational behind seeking a review of Article XVIII.  There was a need to clarify the procedural ambiguities which prevented its effective utilisation.  The Secretariat papers noted that Article XVIII had been replaced twice.  Once in 1948 and the second time in 1957.  The objective underlying the last change was to represent and accord a new and more positive approach to the problem of economic development and to the ways and means of reconciling the requirements of economic development with obligations undertaken under the GATT regarding the conduct of commercial policy.  Considering the obligations that Members had on account of a changed and increasingly competitive trading environment and the balance that needed to be struck with developmental imperatives, there was a need to re-examine and reassess Article XVIII so as to make it more user friendly and geared towards integrating developing countries faster into the multilateral trading system.  
She further said that developing countries were finding it increasingly difficult to have recourse to the provisions under Article XVIII on account of the almost punitive provisions of compensation which would actually nullify the impact of the development measures taken by them for raising the general standards of living.  The ability of a Member, in the process of development of its economy, to offer additional concessions or face suspension of concessions of other measures being taken by the Member to promote industrial development was limited.  Thus, where Members were satisfied that all reasonable efforts had been made to consult, by the member seeking to invoke the provisions of Article XVIII, then for the purposes of paragraphs 7.(b) and 18.(b) of Article XVIII, as the case might be, shall be sufficient for WTO Members, acting jointly, to concur in the proposed measure without the member having to offer additional concessions or having to face temporary suspension of concessions.  It might be recalled that her delegation had initially made that proposal in document WT/GC/W/363 of 12 October 1999.  In addition to making a determination that the economic benefits accruing to the member using Article XVIII far outweighed the adverse impact on global trade of that measure it was important to establish that there was a significant negative impact on the exports of another Member.  Suspension of equivalent concessions or demands for additional compensation did otherwise not appear to be justified.  Her delegation also felt that there was a need to amend Article XVIII:C, particularly paragraph 13 by adding the words "development of a particular industry" to the already existing objective of Section C of "establishment of a particular industry".  Further, her delegation had earlier indicated that the procedures under paragraphs 14 to 21 of Article XVIII also required reconsideration.  Under the present system, the member resorting to Section C of Article XVIII had first to seek the concurrence of the contracting parties which shall, inter alia, consult as to the purpose of the proposed measures, alternative measures available under other provisions, effect of the proposed measure on the economic and commercial interest of other contracting parties.  Even after all that had been done, any other contracting party substantially effected could take action to withdraw equivalent concessions.  As indicated by her delegation, that would defeat the objective of seeking to initiate the proposed measures.  Her delegation therefore urged Members to consider those suggestions in order to further clarify and improve the elements which were currently hampering the effective use of Article XVIII by developing country members.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation wished to address two points.  The first related to the overall Article XVIII review and the second specifically to Section C of Article XVIII.  Her delegation had reviewed recent information and records of the CTD discussions over the past year.  Her delegation was still not persuaded that a current review was warranted.  No compelling arguments or new information had been presented to change that view.  Her delegation was still prepared to listen to any new ideas and to reflect on them.  Much time had been spent on implementation issues of the last few years, including tiret 3.  She recalled substantial consideration as part of the Uruguay Round of negotiations as well.  That might be an area where there was no consensus to move forward.  With regard to Article XVIII:C her delegation continued to believe that it should only be used after recourse to all other WTO mechanisms had been exhausted.  Members currently had recourse to the Agreement on Safeguards and Countervailing Duties and the understanding of balance-of-payments.  Those provisions had served the needs of the international community well.  At the Doha Ministerial Conference, Members had agreed to a rules discussion.  However, no consensus had been reached to open negotiations on Article XVIII.  She asked Members what had changed.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation's view was in line with that presented by the representative of the United States in that there was no new material which allowed for a review of Article XVIII.  No compelling case had been made for any changes.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation supported the position presented by the representatives of the United States and the European Communities.
&& The representative of India said that it was her delegations understanding that the mandate with respect to Article XVIII was clear.  It was part of the implementation issues which Members were discussing and for which Members had a deadline to meet.  Her delegation was looking for a constructive dialogue on the issue.  That was why her delegation urged Members to participate in the debate and keep the mandate given by Ministers at the Doha Ministerial Conference in mind.  Her understanding was that Article XVIII was an outstanding implementation issue that had to be further reviewed.
&& The Chairman said that the item was on the agenda of the CTD because of the documents that had emerged from the Doha Ministerial Conference.  The Committee would have to address it in whatever way Members agreed by consensus to deal with it.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made.

I.	ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman said that item K dealt with electronic commerce and was another of the Committee's standing agenda items.  At the last meeting of the Committee the delegation of Pakistan had made a number of suggestions.  In considering how to deal with the issue, he said that delegations might also wish to keep in mind the Committee's work programme on e-commerce contained in document WT/COMTD/35.  
&& The representative of Canada suggested that the Secretariat be asked to prepare an update of the situation in the Secretariat regarding the CTD's work programme on e-commerce.  That update would inform Members about which of the seminars had been held, their results, and how they were linked to other work on e-commerce in the WTO as the issue of e-commerce was dealt with by four separate WTO bodies.
&& The Chairman proposed that the Secretariat would provide such an update and that the Committee revert to the topic at a future date.
It was so agreed.

J.	DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT
&& The Chairman said that it was too early to prepare a draft Annual Report of the CTD, particularly as the discussion on some items had not been completed.  Furthermore, the Sub‑Committee on LDCs had scheduled a Meeting for 7th November, and Members might wish to await the outcome of that Meeting before finalizing the Annual Report of the CTD.  It had already been agreed that the Committee meet again to discuss the Technical Assistance Plan for 2003 on 11 November 2002.  The Committee could possibly discuss the Draft report at that meeting, if time permitted.  He said that he wished to provide Members with the opportunity to inform him of any particular item they might wish to include in the CTD Annual Report or to discuss any aspect of a possible Report.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that he supported the proposal by the Chairman as it was important that the Committee had the results of the discussions in the Sub-Committee on LDCs as well as the continued discussions on the 2003 TA Plan before it before finalizing the report.  He was concerned that there might not be enough time for a discussion of the draft Annual Report of the CTD on 11 November.
&& The Chairman said that should there not be sufficient time on 11 November, another date would have to be sought to deal with the Annual Report of the CTD.	 

K.	OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman said that the delegation of Croatia had suggested a topic for discussion, and Members had agreed to its inclusion.  The item related to a Ministerial Trade Conference held in Zagreb, Croatia, in June 2002.
&& The representative of Croatia said that he was making the statement on behalf of the Governments of Croatia, Lithuania and Moldova.  Those Governments wished to thank the Secretariat for its report on the WTO Ministerial Trade Conference for Central and Southeast Europe held in Zagreb, Croatia, on 11 and 12 June 2002, contained in the document WT/COMTD/41 of 11 September 2002.  He also thanked the WTO Secretariat for the preparation and organization of that important and useful event.  His delegation had carefully read the Secretariat report, which was useful and contained accurate information reflecting in general the discussions held during the Conference.  He had also noted the clarification that the report had been prepared under the Secretariat's own responsibility, and was without prejudice to the positions of Members or to their rights and obligations under the WTO.  In that respect, the delegations he represented stressed that without having any intention to comment on the content of the report, they felt it necessary to highlight a specific issue that had not been included in the Report, but which was of significant importance to their Governments.  That point had been raised and emphasized by the representatives of the three Governments in practically all session of the conference in Zagreb and particularly in the session related to the DDA negotiation round.  It related to their Governments respective approaches and positions in the current negotiating round, which were strongly influenced by the fact that they had only recently acceded to the WTO.  In that process, they had made extensive market-access commitments, which had been recognized in paragraph 9 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  They therefore believed that that fact should be seriously taken into account and be adequately reflected in the DDA negotiations, including in different modalities for future market-access commitments.  They had, together with a number of other Members, consistently raised that issue in other bodies.  However, as the WTO Ministerial Conference held in Zagreb was an activity organized under a programme that fell within the competence of the CTD, they felt it necessary to state for the record that that specific issue had also been strongly emphasized in the Conference by senior high-level officials of their Governments.
Mr. Low, Director, Development and Economic Research Division, said that the point made had been well taken.  He proposed that the Secretariat issue a corrigendum to that document to take the point made by the representative of Croatia into account.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had recently circulated a document on capacity building considerations relating to transparency in government procurement (WT/WGTGP/W/34) to the Working Group on Transparency in Government Procurement.  That document set out a series of questions for Members' consideration relating to the practical implications of building transparency into government procurement systems.  Her delegation offered that paper as a contribution to the CTD's review of technical assistance and capacity building as well.  Her delegation requested that that document be circulated with a dual symbol, adding the CTD symbol.
&& The Chairman asked the Secretariat to look into that matter and reminded delegations that the next formal session of the CTD was scheduled for Monday, 11 November 2002 at 3 p.m.

__________


WT/COMTD/M/42 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/42 	Page  PAGE 39





