WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/64
2 August 2007


(07-3294)


Committee on Trade and Development 
Sixty-Fourth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 10 JULY 2007 

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B. C. Servansing (Mauritius) 



 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732672" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC173732672 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732673" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC173732673 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc173732674" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc173732674 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc173732675" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc173732675 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732676" C.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC173732676 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732677" -	communication from the european communities on the agreement on trade in goods of the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between the association of south east asian nations (asean) and the people's republic of china (wt/comtd/51/add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732677 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732678" -	communications from the united states on the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between asean and the people's republic of china, the protocol to amend the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between asean and the people's republic of china, and the agreement on trade in goods of the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between asean and the people's republic of china (wt/comtd/51/add.3 and wt/comtd/51/add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732678 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732679" -	communication from japan on the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between asean and the people's republic of china and the agreement on trade in goods of the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between asean and the people's republic of china (wt/comtd/51/add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732679 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732680" -	communication from brazil on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd//57/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732680 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732681" -	communication from china on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732681 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732682" -	communication from india on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt//comtd/57/add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732682 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732683" -	communication from pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732683 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732684" -	communication from the european communities – responses to questions  submitted by brazil, china, india and pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732684 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732685" D.	declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries	 PAGEREF _TOC173732685 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732686" -	statement by the chairman	 PAGEREF _TOC173732686 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732687" E.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (wt/l/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732687 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732688" F.	paragraph 51 of the doha declaration on identifying and debating developmental aspects of the negotiations, in order to help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected (wt/comtd/w/143/rev.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732688 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732689" G.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC173732689 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732690" -	communication from canada (wt/comtd/w/159)	 PAGEREF _TOC173732690 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732691" H.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC173732691 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732692" -	preparations for the technical assistance and training plan for 2008:  statement by the secretariat	 PAGEREF _TOC173732692 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC173732693" I.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC173732693 \H 10



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 64th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3035 issued on 15 June 2007.  He said that he wished to raise a matter under "Other Business" concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES ON THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.2)
&& -	COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE UNITED STATES ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, THE PROTOCOL TO AMEND THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.3 AND WT/COMTD/51/ADD.5)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM JAPAN ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman recalled that communications from the European Communities (EC), the United States (US) and Japan raising questions on the notifications made by ASEAN and China were circulated in 2006 as documents WT/COMTD/51/Add.2, Add.3 and Add.4, respectively.  His predecessor in the Chair had informed the Committee at its 58th Session on 6 July 2006 that the responses from ASEAN and China had been submitted bilaterally to each of the three Members that had raised questions.  A number of delegations had then indicated their wish to see all the responses, and were of the view that the responses should be circulated as a CTD document.  He also recalled that a new communication from the US, contained in document WT/COMTD/51/Add.5, had been on the CTD's agenda since the last meeting.  It had been agreed at the last meeting that he would consult informally with the concerned delegations, and would report back to the CTD.
He was now pleased to report a significant positive outcome to his informal consultations.  The responses by ASEAN and China to the questions raised by the EC, the US and Japan in documents WT/COMTD/51/Add.2, Add.3 and Add.4, respectively would shortly be circulated to the membership as a CTD document.  As for the points raised by the US in document WT/COMTD/51/Add.5, he said that they were receiving due attention by ASEAN and China, and responses would be provided to the membership in a transparent manner.  In view of these developments, he believed that the item could be taken off the CTD's agenda. 
&& The representative of the United States thanked ASEAN and China for their efforts to resolve the issue.  She also expressed her appreciation to the Chairman and to the Secretariat.  She said that her delegation accepted the way forward outlined by the Chairman, with the understanding that ASEAN and China would provide responsive answers in a reasonable amount of time, and that the word "transparent" as used by the Chairman meant "multilateral". 
&& The representative of China, on behalf of ASEAN and China, thanked the Chairman and his predecessor for their efforts in trying to bring the matter to a successful conclusion.  He said that the remaining points would be properly dealt with by ASEAN and China in a transparent manner in the future.  
&& The Chairman thanked those Members that had taken part in the informal consultations he had organized.  On the basis of the way forward that he had outlined, he proposed that the item be taken off the CTD's agenda.  
It was so agreed.
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD//57/ADD.1)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT//COMTD/57/ADD.3)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS  SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD on 11 May 2006.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4, respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that the item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting, as there were some outstanding issues that needed to be dealt with.  It had also been agreed that he would consult informally with the concerned delegations and would report back on the status of his consultations.  In this regard, he reported that his consultations had allowed some progress to be made on the matter, but it also appeared that more consultations, and more time, would be required before this item could be taken off the CTD's agenda.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor. 
&& The representative of Brazil said that Brazil had very recently presented to the EC, on a bilateral basis, a new request for information on certain matters concerning the EC's GSP scheme, including a request for trade statistics concerning the year 2006.  He also said that his delegation wanted this item to remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that her delegation had been questioning the compatibility of the EC's special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance with Article 1:1 of the GATT 1994, as well as with the Enabling Clause.  Pakistan considered that the tariff preferences accorded to products originating in the beneficiary countries under the special incentive arrangement were not granted "immediately and unconditionally" to the like products originating in all other Member countries and were, therefore, not consistent with Article 1:1 of the GATT 1994.  Pakistan also considered that the special incentive arrangement did not comply with the requirements set out in paragraphs 2(a), 3(a) and 3(c) of the Enabling Clause.  In particular, GSP schemes were required to be generalized, non-reciprocal, non-discriminatory and needed to be designed to facilitate and promote the trade of developing countries and not to raise barriers or to create undue difficulties for the trade of any other Member.  She indicated that the CTD's review of the scheme was slow, and that the responses provided by the EC were unsatisfactory.  She added that Pakistan had still not received responses to the second set of questions that had been posed to the EC.  Pakistan wished to continue with this agenda item at the next meeting of the CTD, and called on the CTD to consider whether some Members were stepping beyond the mandate envisaged in the design of the Enabling Clause.  
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the CTD had reached the limit of what it could do in considering this matter.  While he looked forward to seeing the request for information that had recently been submitted by Brazil, he emphasized that the EC had provided responses to the questions that had been raised by Members, and had addressed their concerns.  With regard to transparency issues, he believed that these should be treated in the context of the CTD's consideration of transparency for preferential trade arrangements.  He said that the EC believed its GSP scheme was compatible with WTO rules.  He added that there were avenues within the WTO system open to Members that might have concerns in this regard.  He expressed the willingness of his delegation to work with Members to find a quick and effective solution to the matter. 
&& The Chairman proposed that he continue his informal consultations on this matter, with a view to reporting at the next CTD meeting.  The item would, therefore, remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  
It was so agreed. 
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
-	STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN
&& The Chairman said that it had been agreed at the last meeting that the World Bank would be invited to make a presentation on its commodities work.  Unfortunately, commodities experts from the Bank were unavailable to participate in the present meeting.  The Secretariat was, however, in contact with Bank staff, and it was likely that a Bank representative would be available to make a presentation at the next CTD meeting.  He also suggested that the CTD move forward in listening to presentations by other relevant institutions.  In this regard, he recalled that one suggestion that had been put forward a number of times, and which was repeated at the last CTD meeting by Kenya, was to hear from private sector organizations working on commodity issues.  He, therefore, proposed that the Secretariat explore the possibility of inviting a private sector organization to a future meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman recalled that he had informed the CTD at its last meeting that his consultations on the General Council's Decision on Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements – contained in document WT/L/672 – had brought out the point that there was a need to identify in more detail the parameters within which Members wished to work in considering transparency for preferential trade arrangements notified under the Enabling Clause.  He had also mentioned that the proponents – Brazil and India – were working on a paper which would contain the elements of what they believed should be contained in Members' notifications of preferential trade arrangements.  He had said that, once the paper was ready, he would continue to work informally with Members on the basis of this text, and would eventually have the matter discussed in an open-ended format.  He now informed the Committee that he had been told by Brazil and India that their paper was in final form, or near-final form.  He would, therefore, continue his informal consultations on the basis of this text. 
He also recalled that he had mentioned at the last CTD meeting that a report on the status of the CTD's consideration of this matter would have to be provided to the General Council at its July 2007 meeting.  In this regard, he said that he would inform the General Council of progress that had been made on this matter, in the context of his informal consultations, and in terms of the paper by Brazil and India.  However, he did not believe that there would be enough time for the CTD to come to an agreement before the July 2007 General Council meeting on the Brazil/India text.  He proposed, therefore, that in his report to the General Council he also request an extension until December 2007 for the CTD to come to a decision on this matter.  He said that the item would appear on the agenda of the next CTD meeting.
It was so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED (WT/COMTD/W/143/REV.3)
&& The Chairman said that, under this agenda item, the Committee had since its 54th Session been undertaking a review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations based on a periodically updated background paper prepared by the Secretariat.  The third revision of the Secretariat paper – WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.3 – was considered for the first time by Members at the last CTD meeting.  It had been agreed that discussion based on this most recent revision would continue at the present meeting.  He also informed the Committee that Canada and the United States had submitted comments to the Secretariat on the revised paper, which had been forwarded to the respective Divisions.  He then opened the floor to allow the Committee to continue its review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.
&& The representative of the United States said that she would present to the Committee the comments that had been submitted by her delegation to the Secretariat.  Her delegation firstly expressed appreciation to the Secretariat for having presented the state of play in the negotiations and the various positions of Members in a succinct and balanced manner.  The revised Secretariat paper was useful in showing the degree to which development considerations permeated all aspects of the negotiations.  The paper rightly put the benefits of substantial tariff reductions and liberalization foremost in its discussions of the possible gains to developing countries.  Her delegation believed that the core contribution to development in the Doha Development Agenda would come through global market opening and the creation of new trade flows.  The paper did a particularly commendable job in strongly conveying this message in the section on services, where both the gains from improved access to others' markets and the dynamic productivity gains from opening one's own market in key services sectors – including the productivity gains to downstream manufacturing and agricultural production – were clearly explained. Her delegation agreed that trade liberalization and domestic reforms went hand in hand.  Pace, content and sequencing were vital elements to consider in developing and implementing growth strategies, which was why the US strongly supported work on Aid for Trade and the Integrated Framework.
She also noted a few caveats in the services section.  First, her delegation did not fully understand the point made in paragraph 51 of the paper on the absence of universal service requirements creating new unsustainable burdens on vulnerable groups.  Second, the reference to a "mandate" to re-negotiate MFN exemptions in paragraph 40 did not accurately reflect the text of the Annex on Article II, and should be clarified.  On agriculture, the goal of the US was to achieve real reforms across all three pillars.  Her delegation agreed with the paper's assessment that the market access pillar was the most complex, but also the most important, since market access had the greatest potential to deliver real economic benefits to Members.  Though the NAMA section clearly noted the gains from increased access to others' markets – including developing country markets – her delegation felt that it did not fully explain the dynamic efficiency gains from opening one's own markets.  These gains would account for most of the benefits from trade liberalization.  This, plus the NAMA section's list of defensive interests and policy concepts, resulted in a less balanced portrayal of the important gains which could be achieved in this area.  Finally, her delegation believed that the paper's description of the benefits to both economic development and the multilateral trading system from comprehensive regional trade agreements (RTAs), and the distortive, harmful effects of RTAs that were "limited in scope, poorly implemented and employed as an import substitution strategy" was particularly relevant to the CTD as it embarked on efforts to implement the General Council Decision on the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation saw the paper as a good reflection of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  While there might be specific comments by delegations on certain areas of the paper, it was overall a useful paper for Members in their work.    
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions, and that discussion under this agenda item continue at the next CTD meeting. 
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM CANADA (WT/COMTD/W/159)
&& The Chairman recalled that a communication from Canada – circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/159 – was introduced at the last meeting.  It had not been reflected in the formal agenda of the last meeting, as it was only received the day before that meeting.  The communication was, however, on the agenda for the present meeting.  He invited && The representative of Canada to introduce the communication.
&& The representative of Canada said that the communication aimed to introduce Canada's Least‑Developed Countries' Tariff (LDCT) programme, which provided duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for all but a small number of products from LDCs.  The communication also provided some information on how to utilize the scheme, as well as information on the scheme's rules of origin. 
&& The representative of Lesotho, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed appreciation to Canada for providing valuable information on its market access initiative for LDCs, and in particular the enhanced DFQF market access implemented since 1 January 2003 under the LDCT programme.  The LDC Group noted with gratification Canada's commitment to eliminating tariffs and quotas on 99 per cent of its tariff lines.  The Group was, however, looking forward to Canada phasing in the remaining products in order to reach 100 per cent of product lines before the end of the implementation period.  The Group recognized that Canada's imports from LDCs had increased significantly since the improvements in the LDCT programme.  However, the Group also noted that the bulk of those imports were made up of mineral fuels and oils, which were in most cases wholly obtained.  The Group wished to see increased imports into Canada of LDCs' industrial products as well.  This would be beneficial to LDCs as it would facilitate industrial development and foster diversification, which would render the economies of LDCs more resilient to external shocks.
He went on to say that complementary to extending product coverage was a need to fulfil the Hong Kong mandate on transparent and simple rules of origin.  As indicated in the Canadian communication, at the same time that Canada expanded its scheme for LDCs to cover almost all products except dairy and poultry, it also introduced more liberal rules of origin.  By accommodating value added in other LDCs, Canada's rules of origin encouraged trade between LDCs.  Overall, they stood as a good example of what could be done to promote LDC trade.  He recalled that in 2006 the LDC Group had presented a concrete proposal on rules of origin at the CTD in Special Session.  He said that the LDC proposal was precise, and set out in eight articles how simple and transparent preferential rules of origin for LDCs could be developed.  While some believed that there was no such thing as perfect rules of origin, he emphasized that rules of origin could be made simple, flexible and transparent under a DFQF arrangement. 
He said that the LDC Group thanked Canada for all forms of support accorded to exporters in LDCs.  The availability of market information and advice was valuable to LDCs, and the importance of trade- and investment-related technical assistance to exporters could not be overstated.  The Group also thanked Canada for encouraging other Members to disclose information on progress made with respect to implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs and to adopt simplified rules of origin.  The Group assured Members that it was ready to join them in working towards a successful outcome to the Doha Development Agenda. 
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that his delegation fully endorsed the statement made by Lesotho on behalf of the LDC Group.  He thanked Canada for the steps that had been taken to provide DFQF market access to LDCs, and observed that the submission by Canada enhanced the transparency of the Canadian scheme.  He also expressed appreciation for Canada's initiative to report to the CTD on steps taken to fulfil the commitments made by Members in the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs.  He said that the LDCs would continue to negotiate in relevant negotiating bodies on the basis of this decision.  He noted that in 2004 Canada had renewed its LDCT programme for a ten-year period until 2014.  Although his delegation had no doubt that DFQF access to the Canadian market would be extended beyond this period, a request was nonetheless made to the Government of Canada to accord DFQF market access to LDCs without a time limit.  This would go a long way in ensuring the predictability of market access, which was crucial to LDC exporters. 
He also noted that preferential market access was inextricably linked to the issue of rules of origin, and that the impact of even full DFQF market access could be nullified by stringent rules of origin.  In this regard, he expressed appreciation to Canada for having introduced more liberal rules of origin with respect to products from LDCs, thereby allowing LDCs to significantly increase their exports to the Canadian market – from US$403 million in 2002 to US$1.6 billion in 2006.  He informed the Committee that Bangladesh's exports to Canada had increased significantly since the introduction of the improved Canadian scheme, in particular in Chapters 61, 62 and 63 of the Harmonized System.  He also observed that Canada's rules of origin were not only designed to increase exports to Canada, but also to increase South-South trade.  At the same time, his delegation called on Canada to further improve its scheme in terms of coverage and in terms of flexibility and simplicity in rules of origin.  His delegation also hoped that Canada's initiatives would be emulated by other developed country Members and developing country Members declaring themselves in a position to do so.  Bangladesh requested them to provide information on the domestic processes involved to implement DFQF market access to LDCs, or to provide information on existing DFQF schemes.   
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	PREPARATIONS FOR THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING PLAN FOR 2008: 	STATEMENT BY THE SECRETARIAT
&& The Chairman invited the Secretariat to brief the Committee on steps being taken to prepare the next Technical Assistance and Training Plan.  
&& The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) recalled that informal consultations with Members were held on 14 June 2007 to discuss three matters, namely the financial situation and the state of play in the implementation of the Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan) for 2007, issues relating to more predictable funding through the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF) and preparations for the next TA Plan.  He informed the Committee that he wished to report at the present meeting on the outcome of those discussions as they related to preparations for the next TA Plan.  
He said that at the informal consultations, the Secretariat had raised the possibility of moving towards a biennial TA Plan, covering all trade-related technical assistance (TRTA) activities for the years 2008 and 2009.  The idea found strong overall support among those present at the consultations.  It was felt that a biennial TA Plan would have several advantages, including the enhancement of more stable and predictable funding, which was one of the challenges Members and the Secretariat had been facing in recent years.  It would also encourage more coherence between the CTD and the budget and finance community.  At the same time, it was felt that such an approach would need to have sufficient flexibility in order to take into account the dynamics of the Doha Round of negotiations, as well as the changing priorities and needs of beneficiaries.  Members requested the Secretariat to prepare an informal discussion paper, or "issues paper", focusing on ways to secure more predictable and stable funding.  This would cover not only the idea of biennial planning but also the possibility of transferring some of the activities from the DDAGTF to the regular budget – on which views were more divided – as well as any other suggestions.  The Secretariat was working on the paper and hoped to present it at an informal consultation in September 2007. 
Given the positive outcome of the informal discussions on the suggestion to prepare a biennial TA Plan for the years 2008 and 2009, the Secretariat proposed to start preparations for a new TA Plan based on that concept.  In terms of process, the aim was to undertake a first reading of the draft TA Plan at the informal consultation scheduled for September 2007, when the issues paper would also be considered.  A formal discussion would then take place at the CTD meeting scheduled for October 2007.  He explained that part of the idea behind moving to biennial planning was to allow better advance planning than was possible at present.  For the donors, it was believed that there might be some advantage in terms of preparing domestic budgetary and other processes.  It was not, however, the idea that Members would be required to make two-year contributions at one time.  While Members would have that option available, it was not central to the concept of biennial planning.
He also reported that at the June 2007 informal consultations, Members had welcomed initiatives to give more visibility to donor contributions and to enhance transparency.  It was recognized that this would also strengthen coherence between the various in-house trade capacity building programmes.  In this connection, he drew Members' attention to the fact that a trade capacity building webpage had been developed, and would be launched in the coming weeks.  The webpage would not only highlight the TA Plan per se, but all activities contained therein, and would also give more visibility to donors' contributions to the DDAGTF. 
&& The Committee took note of the information provided by the Secretariat.  
OTHER BUSINESS 
&& The Chairman said that he wished to raise a matter under "Other Business" concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  He recalled that at the 62nd Session of the CTD on 6 March 2007, Members had adopted the Committee's 2007 work programme, contained in document WT/COMTD/61.  The work programme included an item concerning the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system, scheduled to be discussed at the 65th Session.  He reminded Members that on previous occasions when this item was placed on the CTD's agenda, the Secretariat had prepared a background paper to assist Members in their discussion.  He, therefore, proposed that the Secretariat once again prepare a background paper for the CTD's upcoming discussion under this agenda item.
It was so agreed.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________



WT/COMTD/M/64 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/64 	Page  PAGE 9



 

 

 

 



