RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/4

22 December 1995

ORGANIZATION

(95-4123)

 

Committee on Trade and Development
Fourth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 17 NOVEMBER 1995

Chairman: Mr. Haron Siraj (Malaysia)

A. Adoption of Agenda

1. && The Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) welcomed delegates and
proposed that as matters relating to observership had not been resolved by the General Council, the
Committee should continue with its practice of inviting the same organizations as those invited to previous
meetings. The Committee so agreed. The Chairman indicated that under the agenda item "Other
Business", he would comment on the Annual Report to the General Council. The agenda for the meeting
in airgram WTO/AIR/192 was then adopted.

B.&&  Review of the Impact of the Results of the Uruguay Round on Developing Country
Members, in particular on the Least-Developed Country Members

2. && The Chairman recalled that the CTD had agreed to continue discussions of this agenda item
at this Session. He looked forward to significant contributions to the debate from Members.

3, && The representative of Bangladesh, speaking on behalf of least-developed countries, stressed
the importance of the CTD to developing countries. The Work Programme of the CTD and the Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization (WTO), required it to review the special provisions
relating to developing countries and to make recommendations to the General Council, and expectations
were very high that the Committee would fulfil its mandate. He said document WT/COMTD/W/11
showed the declining share of least-developed countries (LLDCs) in world trade and that GDP per capita
of LLDCs had fallen. The combination of these trends confirmed the marginalization of LLDCs in
the international trading system. While the primary responsibility for development was with the LLDCs,
the international community was committed by Ministers at Marrakesh to adopt positive measures
to assist them in increasing their trade and investment opportunities. LLDCs were disappointed that
no concrete measures had been adopted at recent meetings and global conferences. Losses for LLDCs
through the erosion of preferences had been predicted in the 1995 Least-Developed Countries’ Report
published by UNCTAD. While the preferential treatment provided by GSP schemes was appreciated,
there needed to be an assessment of gains and losses, so policymakers could formulate appropriate
policy responses. WT/COMTD/W/10 was a useful document as it listed measures to increase the trade
and investment opportunities of LLDCs. He thought it would be helpful if the Secretariat evaluated
the impact of those measures on individual countries. This would assist the formulation of appropriate
policy-responses. Expressing his appreciation for the technical assistance programme implemented
by the WTO, he said more assistance was needed. The generous gesture of the Norwegian government
in setting up a Trust Fund in the WTO was, he said, a step in the right direction.

4.&&  The representative of India said he did not want to go into the details of the positive and negative
aspects of the Round as this subject had been discussed on so many occasions. He did, however, want
to raise the issue of the legal value of the "special and differential provisions” in the Uruguay Round
Agreements. While the provisions giving longer time-periods for developing countries to implement
their obligations did not raise any difficulties, the same could not be said of other provisions. For
instance, he had been told that a provision which provided that a product under restraint should not
be subjected to anti-dumping duties had no legal value. He was concerned that the special and differential
provisions in Uruguay Round Agreements would not lead to enforceable legal rights. Developing
countries had undertaken substantial obligations thinking that they could rely on such provisions.
He requested the Secretariat to compile a list of the provisions which, prima facie, provided for special
and differential treatment to developing countries and to indicate whether they were legally enforceable.
He was not asking for any specific judgments, but rather a professional, objective and analytical listing
of the provisions.

5. &&  The representatives of Cuba and Peru supported India's proposal that an analysis be carried
out by the Secretariat on the legal status of the special provisions in favour of developing countries.
The representative of Canada said that while India's proposal was good in principle, India would agree
that the Secretariat should not undertake a legal interpretation of the WTO Agreement.

6.&&  The representative of India stated that he was only asking the Secretariat to put together
provisions which, prima facie, appear to confer legal rights on developing countries. It would be left
to the CTD to decide on the status of such provisions.

7.&&  The Chairman took note of the proposal and comments from Members. He suggested that
the discussions continue under Agenda Item H, the future Work Programme of the CTD.

C. && Consideration of Measures and Initiatives to Assist the Expansion of Trade and Investment
Opportunities of Developing Country Members, in particular on the Least-Developed
Country Members

8.&&  The Chairman said that the issue of credit and recognition for autonomous trade liberalization
measures had been on the agenda of the Second Session of the CTD but had not been discussed
exhaustively. While he did not want to influence the outcome of the discussion, the Chairman pointed
out that paragraph 8 of document WT/COMTD/W/4 called for long-term measures to deal with this
issue. The representative of Mexico said his delegation was interested in continuing the debate on
"credit and recognition” as Members had varying views and had proposed different solutions during
the Uruguay Round. He hoped that a consensus could be reached at this Fourth Session of the CTD.

 

9.&&  The representative of Zambia endorsed the statement made by Bangladesh, on behalf of the
LLDCs. Discussions on whether the Uruguay Round had worsened the position of least-developed
countries was a priority neither for Zambia nor for other least-developed countries. The economic
decline in least-developed countries had not been arrested because of the successful conclusion of the
Uruguay Round as these countries faced structural problems. The share of LLDCs' exports in world
trade had declined from 0.6 per cent in 1975 to less than 0.3 per cent in 1992. Out of the over
40 LLDCs, only two (Zambia and Bangladesh) had exports in excess of $1 billion. Their share in
world imports was negligible; in 1992, it amounted to less than 0.7 per cent. Unless something was
done at both the domestic and international level, the trend would continue. Political will to do something
tangible for least-developed countries was needed. Despite assurances given by almost every major
intergovernmental institution to assist African and other poorer countries, no new or serious initiatives
had been proposed. LLDCs were aware that to be part of the mainstream, much had to be done by
them. In the first place it would require the adoption of market-tested policies and fiscal discipline.
Over the past decade they had adopted and continued to adopt autonomous trade liberalization measures.
They accepted trade as an engine of growth and were committed to export-oriented development
strategies. Referring to the ongoing discussion, he said LLDCs should be granted credit by their trading
partners for autonomous liberalization measures. The argument that credit could be given only when
the measures were bound in the WTO ignored the fact that very few LLDCs reversed trade liberalization
measures. The best guarantee against any such reversal was the discipline of markets. He requested
trading partners to take into account domestic pressures they faced; by not binding all of their
autonomous trading liberalization measures, LLDCs were able to carry their constituencies with them
and continue with their reform programmes. He called for an ad-hoc solution, until a permanent
solution was found to the issue of "credit and recognition”.
he then pointed out that structural weaknesses in economies prevented LLDCs from taking
advantage, in the short- and medium-term, of the opportunities to attract investment and expand exports.
Among the grave problems facing LLDCs was the huge debt problem. In 1993, the external debt
of African LLDCs stood at $96.7 billion and the ratio of total debt to GNP was 130 per cent. In
nominal terms, the ratio of total debt to export of goods and services worsened from 389 per centin 1985
to 565 per cent in 1993. The debt burden constrained the ability of LLDCs to invest in newer
technologies to increase the production of goods and services for export. Instead of using their export
earnings to strengthen supply capacities, earnings went into servicing their debts, perpetuating the cycle
of poverty. Effective action at the multilateral level along the lines proposed by the World Bank to
ease the debt burden on African and other poorer countries was needed; otherwise, African countries
could not participate effectively in the multilateral trading system. A collective effort by the WTO,
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and other intergovernmental economic
institutions such as the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the
International Trade Centre (ITC) would yield results. The Bretton Woods Institutions could be
encouraged to significantly reduce the debt burden of African and other poorer countries, and to offer
loans on concessional terms. Such measures would help LLDCs to adjust quickly to the short-term
negative effects of the Uruguay Round, re-structure their economies, increase their exports and participate
effectively in the multilateral trading system. Uruguay Round tariff cuts on products of export interest
to LLDCs were below the global averages, and there was need for serious efforts by the international
trading community to eliminate the barriers facing LLDC trade. He went on to enumerate measures
that could be taken by the international trading community and by the WTO, UNCTAD and ITC to
increase the trading opportunities of LLDCs. Product coverage and margins of preferences under GSP
schemes should be improved. Preferences should be extended to semi-processed and processed
agricultural products, natural resource-based products, fish and fish products, leather and footwear,
textile and clothing. He encouraged countries who did not give preferential treatment to extend such
treatment to the exports of LLDCs. The assistance of the WTO and other intergovernmental institutions
was needed to develop and strengthen nascent service industries, especially in the increasingly important
areas of financial services, transport and telecommunications. He asked that LLDC exports be exempted
from any contingent protection measures, such as anti-dumping duties, countervailing duties and safeguard
measures; and that major trading partners refrain from using measures such as environmental and
labour regulations to restrict LLDC exports. Integrating LLDCs into the global economy called for
painstaking sacrifices from them, and for ingenuity and foresight from trading partners and
intergovernmental institutions such as the WTO, IMF, the World Bank, UNCTAD, ITC and FAO.
Policy reforms undertaken by almost every least-developed country were clear evidence of their
commitment to an open multilateral trading system.

11. &&  The representative of Morocco said that like Mexico, his delegation wanted credit and recognition
to remain on the CTD agenda until a solution was reached. A great deal of technical work on the
subject had been carried out and the time had come to try and spell out certain ideas specifically. He
said the Secretariat could assist by redistributing an informal paper submitted during the Uruguay Round
by a number of Members, including Mexico, Egypt and Morocco. The Secretariat could also prepare for the next meeting of the CTD a detailed document setting out the dimensions of the subject, and
outlining options open to Members.

12. && The representative of India said that credit should be given for autonomous liberalization
measures, and that binding of such measures in the WTO should not be a pre-requisite. If a country
did bind its measures in the WTO, the legitimacy of its claim to be granted credit could not be
questioned. While his delegation fully supported the concept, he was not in a position at this stage
to suggest any mechanism for implementing it. He noted that paragraph 13 of the background document
listed certain problems which could not be resolved at earlier meetings of the CTD. As no consensus
was in sight, he agreed with Members that the issue should remain on the agenda of the CTD. He
highlighted that the importance of the issue had also been recognized in the General Agreement on
Trade in Services (GATS).

13.&&  Recalling that his delegation was one of the co-sponsors of the proposal made by Mexico in 1990,
the representative of Peru said it was important for his delegation that the issue remained on the agenda
of the CTD until a satisfactory solution was found. His delegation supported the request made by
Morocco that a detailed informal paper be prepared by the Secretariat and thought such a paper should
be comprehensive and elaborate on the ideas proposed in paragraphs 13 and 17 of the background
document. The representative of Cote d'Ivoire recalled the strong support given by her delegation
during the Uruguay Round to the concept of credit and recognition. For her delegation, the issue had
additional importance because it would concretize the concept of coherence between the WTO and
the Bretton Woods Institutions. The argument that credit could be given only for bound measures,
ignored the benefits to trading partners from such measures. Granting credit for such measures would
not only be equitable, but would also underline the seriousness of developed countries about the need
to integrate the economies of developing countries into the global economy and encourage developing
countries to adopt liberal trading policies, thus complementing and strengthening the multilateral trading
system. She said this was an important issue and should be maintained on the future agenda of the
CTD.

14. && Expressing his appreciation for the background document prepared by the Secretariat the
representative of the European Communities recalled that at the Second Session, they had outlined
albeit in a preliminary manner, their views on the issue of credit and recognition. They were of the
view that liberalization measures had been taken into account in the Uruguay Round, and were reflected
in the overall results of the negotiations on market access. He thought some of the views expressed
in the background document were untenable and premature. This was especially so for the suggestion
of mini-cycles of negotiations; they would probably be outside the terms of reference of the CTD.
While commending countries adopting autonomous liberalization measures, he believed such measures
served the interests of those countries more than their trading partners; they could congratulate
themselves and look forward to an improvement in their economies. Considering the level of developing
countries’ bound tariffs, there was much scope for further liberalization. He thought the proposal for
a Concessional Tariff Concession (CTC) or a Temporary Tariff Concession (TTC) to be accorded,
not on an m.f.n. basis but an individual basis, raised the issue of the consistency with fundamental
rules of the WTO such as non-discrimination, predictability and transparency. The proposal was ill-
conceived and should be discarded.

15. && The representative of Japan said his delegation welcomed autonomous liberalization measures
adopted by developing countries. While he thought it was important that other countries encouraged
developing countries to continue with their liberalization efforts which often met with domestic resistance,
the approach adopted during the Uruguay Round should be seen against the background of the special
circumstances that existed at that time. Concessions were motivated partly by the desire to enhance
the participation of developing countries in market access negotiations on goods. There had been a
ground swell of support at the time to partly set aside the cardinal principle of reciprocity, in recognition
of the special position of developing countries. To continue to do so would undermine the practical
effectiveness of WTO principles. Moreover, it was very difficult to assess the value of autonomous
liberalization measures which were taken in response to special group interests or in response to trading
partners. This was why the Chairman of the Market Access Group presented guidelines rather than
formal rules. These guidelines were not intended as rules to be followed subsequently. Developing
countries already enjoyed, within the framework of the WTO, many benefits not available to other
countries, and Japan was of the view that granting credit and recognition only to developing countries
would affect the balance of rights and obligations between developed and developing countries. The
representative of the United States supported the positions adopted by the European Communities and
Japan on this issue.

16. && The representative of Bangladesh thought the term "autonomous trade liberalization measures"
was a misnomer as developing countries were coerced by the Bretton Woods Institutions to adopt such
measures. It was unfortunate that these tariff and non-tariff concessions were not negotiated in the
WTO and developing countries could not get negotiating credit.

17. && The representative of New Zealand thought it would be extremely difficult to devise a mechanism
that would provide areal incentive to developing countries to adopt liberalization measures. His country
had adopted extensive reforms in recent years, and he felt autonomous liberalization measures were
more likely to be adopted because of domestic interests than because of benefits from trading partners.
He emphasized the need for any solution to be WTO consistent, in particular with the m.f.n. principle.
He agreed with the European Communities that concepts such as TTC and CTC in the Secretariat
document could raise problems related to transparency and predictability. His delegation wished to
reflect further on Zambia's interesting statement. However, he found it difficult to understand why
developing countries had a problem with the proposition that credit could only be given for bound
measures when they had abandoned import substitution policies and protectionism, and committed
themselves to a market economy in order to participate fully in the multilateral trading system.

18.&&  The representative of Switzerland, while welcoming measures to liberalize a trading regime,
said the adoption of such measures outside multilateral trade negotiations was influenced by economic
circumstances and political considerations. Switzerland was in agreement with the European Communities
that it was imperative that any proposed solution be consistent with basic principles of the WTO such
as m.f.n., transparency and predictability. Such principles enabled trading partners to plan ahead and
make necessary judgments. They were needed to ensure the stability of the multilateral trading system
and were reflected in the requirement that all measures be bound in the WTO. Granting concessions
for unbound liberalization measures would be contrary to the spirit of the WTO Agreement.

19. && The representative of India referred to the statements that granting of credit would upset the
balance of rights and obligations between developed and developing countries in the WTO, and that
it was in the interest of developing countries to adopt these measures. He pointed out that it was not
auniversally accepted view that such measures benefited developing countries; the issue always drove
a wedge between various interest groups in these countries. As stated in paragraph 12 of the background
document, "receiving credit and recognition for liberalization measures would help them in resisting
domestic pressure not to liberalize trade, and would be an incentive for the continuation of such policies”.
Operationalizing the concept so that it did not run counter to GATT/WTO principles would not be
an easy task and he requested that the issue be maintained on the agenda of the CTD, until a solution
satisfactory to all Members was found. Supporting India's comments, the representative of Mexico
said that if credit was given for autonomous liberalization measures, this would encourage many countries
toreduce or eliminate differences between applied and bound rates of duty. Expressing disappointment
with the lack of progress, he asked Members to be flexible and constructive on this issue. The
Committee took note of the comments made, including the requests that this issue be maintained on the agenda of the CTD. The Committee would revert to "credit and recognition” when discussing
the future work programme under Agenda Item H.

20.&&  Turning to the issue of net food-importing developing countries, the Chairman drew attention
to a footnote in the CTD terms of reference which provided that "the Committee would give
consideration, inter alia, to any report that the Committee on Agriculture may decide to refer to it
following paragraph 6 of the Decision on Measures Concerning the possible Negative Effects of the
Reform Programme on Least-Developed and Net Food-Importing Developing Countries and Article XVI
of the Agreement on Agriculture”. He reminded Members that discussions were continuing in the
Committee of Agriculture on how to operationalize this Decision. The CTD would follow these
discussions and would take them into account when reporting to the General Council. He reminded
Members that this item was included in the agenda following a decision in the Sub-Committee on
Institutional, Procedural and Legal Matters, and the Committee needed to decide on how to follow-up
on this issue when addressing its future Work Programme under Agenda Item H.

D. Review of the Participation of Developing Country Members in the Multilateral
Trading System

21. && The Chairman said that document WT/COMTD/W/11, showed the increasing role of developing
countries in world trade. The statistics demonstrated the importance of these countries for world trade
growth.

22. && The representative of Norway said the background document prepared by the Secretariat gave
a clear overview of the current trends in world trade, and of the increasing participation of developing
countries in the international trading system. The document also showed clearly that economies of
developing countries as a group were the most dynamic in the world economy. In recent years, their
performance had helped recovery of the global economy and contributed to its sustainability. While
the integration of developing countries into the world economy should be a priority for the international
trading system, the position of least-developed and other poorer countries merited special consideration.
These countries had failed to benefit from a more open international trading system and unless the
international community took immediate steps to increase their trading opportunities, they would be
further marginalized in the world economy. While the WTO was not the place to discuss financial
aid or debt relief, trade-related technical assistance and market access for products of export interest
to LLDCs were within the mandate of the WTO. Pointing out the possibilities for special and differential
treatment for LLDCs under GSP schemes after the tariffication introduced by the Agreement on
Agriculture, he said Norway had taken action and expected other countries to do likewise. He urged
more advanced developing countries and countries-in-transition to give special treatment to the exports
of LLDCs so as to increase world trade. Improved market access conditions for textiles could also
enhance greatly the participation of developing countries, especially LLDCs in the multilateral trading
system. Increased trade-related technical assistance to developing countries would improve and deepen
knowledge of WTO rules and enhance capacity-building in these countries and equip them to take
advantage of the opportunities offered by the Uruguay Round. Assistance should be targeted at export-
promotion programmes and at identifying new market opportunities for products of export interest
to developing countries. Organizations such as the World Bank, IMF, ITC and UNCTAD were providing
technical assistance in their spheres of competence, and, as had been noted by Ministers in the various
declarations and decisions adopted at Marrakesh, further coherence in policy advice and assistance
was necessary.

23. && The representative of India agreed with Norway that the fundamental issue was that of market
access for products of export interest to developing countries. The performance of developing countries
had not been uniform, and some regions had fared better than others; the picture for African and Middle
Eastern countries was, he said, on the whole very dismal. The CTD had to recognize that developed
countries should improve market access conditions for products of export interest to developing countries.
He thought a coherent analysis would assist policymakers to design and implement the necessary measures
to assist these countries. It was necessary to consider why developing countries had not increased
their share of world trade, and to catalogue the problems inhibiting them from participating effectively
in the multilateral trading system. The Secretariat could assist the CTD in its evaluation of this subject
by undertaking a detailed study, analyzing the share in world trade of developing countries in major
product categories - especially the ones in which they had traditionally enjoyed a comparative advantage -
identifying if their shares in these product categories were increasing or decreasing and why it was
so. This study could also examine the impact of technical standards, health and environmental
regulations, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, and safeguard measures on the performance of
developing countries in important sectors such as textiles and clothing. It could also examine the effects
of restrictive business practices of transnational corporations. Such a comprehensive study would,
in his view, benefit all WTO Members. The CTD needed to do more than just take note of the
performance of developing countries in the international trading system, and a study such as the one
proposed would show the very many problems facing developing countries. A forward-looking and
analytical approach was needed, he said, so the CTD could address the problems facing developing
countries. The representative of Venezuela expressed his support for the proposal made by India.

24. && The representative of Ghana stressed the importance of investment flows in increasing
participation of developing countries in the international trading system. Countries which received
substantial investments produced goods and services for the global market place and increased their
participation in the international trading system. While technical assistance aimed at institutional and
capacity-building were appreciated by developing countries, the importance of resource inflows had
to be recognized.

25. && The representative of Canada, noting the exceptional performance of developing countries as
a group in the international trading system, drew attention to the variations in the performance of
countries. The dynamism shown by many developing countries in the last five to ten years had been
remarkable. If present trends were sustained, they would continue to increase their share in world
trade. The special situation of LLDCs needed to be recognized as they might not share in the benefits
of the Uruguay Round. Commenting on the proposal made by India, he did not object to the principle,
but was of the view that the CTD should not address subjects of interests to only developing countries.
Agreeing with the representative of Ghana on the importance of investment, he said that if a study
could be carried out on restrictive business practices, it could also address the treatment of foreign
direct investment by host countries. Such a study would interest developed countries who were not
always given the same treatment as nationals of the host state.

32. && The representative of India said he could see that for developed countries issues such as
investment and national treatment had priority. But now the subject of discussion was the participation
of developing countries in the international trading system, and it was necessary to know why the share
of some countries in world trade was declining. If the suggestion that restrictive business practices
of transnational corporations should be looked into was objectionable and unacceptable to some Members,
it could be dropped. However, it was his conviction that the CTD should look at the impact safeguard
measures, environmental standards, phytosanitary and sanitary measures were having on the performance
of developing countries in the multilateral trading system.

26. && The representative of the European Communities observed that while some developing countries
were making substantial progress, the same could not be said of countries in Africa and the Middle
East. The declining share in world trade of these countries was of concern to the European Communities.
While his delegation appreciated the spirit in which the proposal by India was made, he doubted whether
such a study would explain why countries in East Asia performed better than other developing countries,
especially considering that almost all of them faced the same market access conditions in developed
countries. Also, he wondered whether the CTD could not use studies already prepared on the subject,
instead of initiating new ones. The evidence suggested that it was not the trading policies of developed
countries that were to be blamed, but the economic policies and other conditions in the non-performing
countries.

27.&&  The representative of Peru expressed his support for the proposal made by India and said the
CTD should not be satisfied with a document which only reproduced figures; it rather had to analyze
the reasons for the lack of competitiveness of developing countries in the international trading system.
The dynamism of international trade was affected by the participation of developing countries and this
was a matter of importance to all Members of the WTO. His country had a more open investment
regime than some other countries, and his delegation had no objection to the Canadian proposal.

28.&&  The representative of Singapore said the critical question that arose from the interesting debate
was why some regions and developing countries were not benefiting from the multilateral trading system.
The CTD should analyze carefully the variations in performance of the regions and individual countries.
The reasons for the decline in the share of world trade of African and Middle Eastern countries might
not be due to a singular cause, such as market access difficulties or restrictive trade regulations. Given
that the share of Asian and Latin American countries had increased, he was inclined to agree with the
representative of the European Communities, that the differences in performance could be due to
structural rigidities. ASEAN countries favoured the establishment of a Working Group to look into
this issue and report to the CTD. Despite studies carried out by other institutions, it was necessary
for the CTD to gain an insight into the problems facing developing countries, so it could propose
appropriate policy responses. He offered delegates copies of a paper which touched on the issue under
review.

29. && The representative of Cuba welcomed the ongoing discussion and said the CTD should examine
the reasons for the non-performance of some regions and developing countries, and propose effective
solutions. Supporting the proposal made by India, he said he also found the ASEAN proposal very
interesting. Citing the example of the unequal treatment of developing countries in the GSP schemes
of certain countries, he disagreed with the representative of the European Communities that all developing
countries faced the same market access conditions. He had no objection to the study extending to
investment which was a dynamic aspect of development. The representative of Australia said care
should be taken not to duplicate work done by other institutions. She did not think, however, that
any studies covered all the elements specified by India and other Members.

30.&&  The Chairman stated that while there was a common denominator on the need for examining
the participation of developing countries in the international trading system from a qualitative perspective,
it was not clear whether Members wanted a Working Group established or a study done by the
Secretariat. He was therefore proposing the establishment of a Working Group to guide the Secretariat
in the preparation of the study. Membership of the Group would be open to any interested Members.
It would not carry out research on the relevant issues but direct the Secretariat on what should be done.
He invited Members to present ideas for such study so that appropriate terms of reference could be
drawn up. The CTD could analyze conclusions reached in such a study, and make appropriate
recommendations to the General Council.

31.&&  The representative of Singapore said that in view of the dimensions of the issues at stake,
the Secretariat should not be asked to produce yet another document. A significant input from CTD
members would be necessary to ensure the practical usefulness of the study. Supporting the proposal
made by the Chairman to establish a Working Group, he said he had a vested interest, as the findings
and conclusions of the CTD could provide policy guidance for consideration by Ministers when they
meet in Singapore in December 1996. He added that the marginalization of LLDCs in the international
trading system was an issue of grave concern to the international trading community, and Ministers
were committed in various Decisions and Declarations to working towards their integration into the
multilateral trading system. He was ready to play a positive role in the proposed Working Group.
The Committee took note of the comments made and agreed to establish such a Working Group. Saying
he was ready to serve on the Working Group, the Chairman emphasized the need for clear directions
to the Secretariat on the issues to be studied and analyzed.

E. && Review of the Application of Special Provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and
Related Ministerial Decisions in Favour of Developing Country Members, in particular
on the Least-Developed Country Members

32. && The Chairman said under this agenda item, discussions should cover the implementation of
GATT 1994 Part IV and the Enabling Clause, and the special provisions in the Multilateral Trade
Agreements and Related Ministerial Decisions and Declarations. Under Part [IV and the Enabling Clause
there were two sub-items; first, preferential arrangements among developing countries, and second,
changes in some GSP schemes. A notification from the Common Market for Eastern and Southern
Africa (COMESA), circulated in WT/COMTD/N/3, provided information on the establishment a new
regional grouping, and another from the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) in
WT/COMTD/3 provided information on the ASEAN Free-Trade Area. Recent notifications by some
Members of changes in their GSP schemes were contained in WTO documents WT/COMTD/N/1,
2, 4, 5 and 6, and their corresponding addenda and corrigenda. WT/COMTD/W/11/Add.1 provided
a Secretariat summary of the notified changes in GSP schemes.

33.&&  The representative of the United States said the extension of their GSP scheme through to 31 July
had been notified. She indicated that efforts were currently under way to renew the programme. The
Chairman looked forward to a solution to the impasse.

34.&&  The representative of India wondered whether the recent introduction of multi-layered preference
schemes had the effect of nullifying benefits granted under them. In his view new elements introduced
into some GSP schemes did not pay sufficient regard to fundamental concepts such as non-reciprocity
and non-discrimination. He thought a study by the Secretariat on the ramifications of the new elements
in some of these newly implemented GSP schemes might be helpful and that such a study should be
done in coordination with UNCTAD which had considerable expertise in this area. He agreed with
the Australian representative that work done by other institutions should not be duplicated. The
representative of Bangladesh said his delegation, like India, was concerned about the design of some
new GSP schemes. New conditionalities that were being imposed, especially in the area of environment,
had the effect of negating benefits under such schemes. This placed weaker countries at a serious
disadvantage.

35. && The representative of Zambia said the COMESA Treaty had been notified to Members at the
Second Session in WT/COMTD/N/3. Copies of the Treaty were available in the Secretariat. The
Treaty was signed on 5 November 1993 and ratified by a group of fifteen African countries on 8
December 1994. The current members of COMESA were Angola, Burundi, Comoros Islands, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Rwanda, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda, Zaire,
Zambia and Zimbabwe. The COMESA Treaty superseded the Preferential Trade Area for Eastern
and Southern African States (PTA), and dealt with a broad range of subjects including cooperation
in economic and social sectors. The Treaty aimed to promote a balanced and harmonious development
of production and marketing structures, and the sustainable growth and development of its member
states. COMESA aimed to raise the standard of living of the citizens of its member state, foster closer
relations among its member states through joint adoption of macro-economic policies and programmes,
and cooperation in all fields of economic activity. It provided for free movement of persons and the
right of establishment of business by nationals of member states. It also aimed to establish a customs
union within a transitional period of ten years. COMESA was based on the principles of "open
regionalism”, it did not introduce any barriers to trade and it was firmly anchored in the multilateral
system of trade. Queries or comments on the Treaty could be channelled through the Secretariat.
COMESA was committed to the principle of transparency and would respond promptly.

36. && The representative of Switzerland said his government was currently in the process of revising
its GSP scheme, and the revision should be completed by the end of 1996. The present Swiss scheme
accorded duty-free entry to industrial products exported by LLDCs. Every effort was being made
to increase concessions in the agricultural sector, and it was likely that some new products in this sector
of export interest to LLDCs would be included. In addition to improving market access conditions
for LLDCs, the revised Swiss scheme would respect the cardinal rules of transparency and predictability.

37. && The representative of Norway said the revised GSP scheme of Norway was summarized in
WT/COMTD/N/6. Norway had seized the opportunities presented by the successful conclusion of
the Uruguay Round and revamped its GSP scheme by improving the concessions to developing countries,
especially to the least-developed among them. While improved market access under GSP schemes
was important and could assist diversification of exports, Norway believed the integration of developing
countries into the multilateral trading system required the adoption of appropriate economic and social
policies and good management of the economy. Norway wanted developing countries to see GSP
schemes from that perspective.

38.&&  The representative of the European Communities said they had notified their amended GSP
scheme to the Secretariat, and a copy of the relevant EC Council Regulation could be obtained from
the Secretariat. Addressing the concerns expressed by India and Bangladesh on the inclusion of
environmental and labour standards in the new GSP scheme of the EC and other countries, he said
it was not the intention of the EC to penalize countries. The new EC scheme offered additional benefits
to developing countries which complied with such standards; margins of preferences were not reduced,
if countries did not meet the standards. The five year validity of the new EC scheme added
predictability. The scheme aimed at maintaining existing margins of preferences through the mechanisms
of modulation and of graduation. Preferential margins ranged from 15 per cent to 100 per cent depending
on the sensitivity of the products. There were no quantitative restrictions. To protect as much as
possible the margins of preferences enjoyed by countries under the previous scheme, the new margins
of preferences would be applied to bound rates. The new scheme allowed the EC to withdraw
preferences for some countries in certain specific sectors, under certain conditions. Preferences could,
for example, be withdrawn if exports constituted 25 per cent of total exports to the EC. The objective
of the new graduation policy was not to penalize "successful" countries, but to redistribute margins
of preferences in a way that improved competitiveness of countries which most needed GSP benefits.

51. && The representative of Egypt thanked the Norwegian government for setting up a technical
assistance fund in the WTO. He found the amended GSP scheme notified by the EC very confusing.
They were currently studying its details, although his country's exports were covered by a bilateral
agreement. It had been brought to the attention of his delegation by UNCTAD that Australia had decided
to phase out its GSP scheme for developing countries, with the exception of LLDCs and small-island
states. The decision was regrettable. The representative of Australia said her country had notified
the changes to its GSP scheme. As aspects of the new scheme seemed to be unclear to some Members,
she had additional material on the scheme which she could share with them.

39. && The representative of Japan said thirteen countries had been designated as new beneficiaries
under their amended GSP Scheme. The criteria for determining eligibility for preferential status were
that the economy of the country or territory should be in the process of development; the country
should be a member of UNCTAD; the country or territory should be willing to have preferential status
under Japan's GSP scheme; and a cabinet order should proclaim that the benefits be extended to the
country or territory. A country fulfilling these criteria would be declared a beneficiary. Japan accepted
that there had been erosion of preferences due to Uruguay Round tariff reductions. However, Japan
believed that such reductions, along with the higher level of bindings, offered increased stability and
predictability in the trading system. Drawing attention to the many benefits resulting from the successful
conclusion of the Uruguay Round, he added that GSP schemes were voluntary and donor countries
had no obligation to compensate for loss of preferential margins. Notwithstanding that Japan had,
on a voluntary basis, introduced improvements under their GSP scheme following the successful
conclusion of the Uruguay Round, and reduced the preferential tariff rates for a number of agricultural
products including twelve tropical products.

40. && The representative of Mexico suggested that donor countries use an electronic medium, such
as the "Internet", to disseminate information on their GSP schemes. Details should be available in
a simple user-friendly format that could be easily accessed by interested persons or firms. He was
aware that some donor countries were seriously studying this possibility, and requested representatives
of those present at the meeting to provide information on steps being taken by them.


Al. && The Chairman noted that with respect to the special provisions in the Multilateral Trade
Agreements and Associated Legal Texts, WT/COMTD/W/10 was an important reference document
as it sets out, among other things, provisions which were action-oriented. The representative of India
suggested that, if the Secretariat paper was further elaborated on the lines of the proposal he had made
under the second agenda item, it would meet the expectations of his delegation. The Committee took
note of the comments made.

F. Annual Review of WTO Technical Cooperation Activities as they Relate to Developing
Country Members

42. && The Chairman said that a summary of the technical assistance activities of the WTO during 1995
activities was contained in WT/COMTD/W/12 .

43. && The representative of Tanzania endorsed the statement earlier made by Bangladesh, on behalf
of LLDCs, and associated his delegation with the statements by Zambia, India and Singapore. In the
recent past, Tanzania had benefited from seminars organized by the Secretariat, and had received
assistance on its notification and other obligations arising from WTO Agreement. His delegation
appreciated the efforts and commitment of the Director-General to mobilize additional resources for
technical assistance, especially for least-developed countries. Welcoming warmly the contribution of
Norway in establishing a technical assistance Trust Fund in the WTO, he requested other donor countries
to contribute to the Fund. Past assistance given to countries in the preparation of their Uruguay Round
commitments and seminars on the implications of the Round were helpful. What was necessary now,
was assistance to increase exports and to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the successful
conclusion of the Round. He suggested that efforts should now focus on capacity-building and practical
initiatives aimed at horizontal and vertical diversification of production and export structures. He said
that the notion of "demand-driven technical assistance” should not prevent the Secretariat from being
proactive; from advising countries on the nature of technical assistance they would need to make use
of the opportunities in the international trading system. He stressed the importance of closer collaboration
between the WTO and other institutions in the design and implementation of technical assistance
programmes. Relevant organizations with which closer cooperation should be pursued included
UNCTAD and ITC, and institutions such as the IMF, World Bank, European Communities, the World
Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).


44. && The representative of Bangladesh said the function of the WTO technical assistance programme
should not, as now, be directed at acquainting Members with WTO rules. He asked that the programme
be structured to give practical assistance to LLDCs to increase their exports and take advantage of
the Uruguay Round; it should take account of the development dimension. Practical measures were
needed to increase the participation of LLDCs in the international trading system. Supporting Tanzania,
he strongly urged the Secretariat to pursue the suggestions made by its representative.

45. &&  The representative of the European Communities said that, in 1996, they would be organizing,
with the cooperation of the ACP and the WTO Secretariat, eight regional seminars in the ACP countries
at a cost of about ECU 1.1 million. Six seminars would be held in the African region and fifty-
four countries were expected to participate; one would be held in the Caribbean and another in the
Pacific, with fifteen and eight countries expected to participate, respectively. Each country would
be represented by two government officials and two representatives from the private sector. The main
purpose of the seminars was to acquaint and increase the understanding of trade policymakers and
businessmen of the results of the Uruguay Round. The trading opportunities and the general economic
impact of the Uruguay Round would be analyzed in that context. The seminars would aim at identifying
policy measures needed to get maximum benefit from post-Uruguay Round opportunities. A brief
description of the programme, he said, could be found in the background document prepared by the
Secretariat.

46.&&  The representative of Cuba while expressing his appreciation for the technical assistance activities
of the WTO, said he agreed with Tanzania and Bangladesh that technical assistance should be increased
and targeted at capacity-building and other practical initiatives which would assist developing countries
to increase their exports and take advantage of the opportunities presented by the Uruguay Round.
He encouraged the Secretariat to pursue the matter with other institutions with a capability to assist
in these goals, so that resources could be used to maximum advantage. He stressed the importance
of regional and sub-regional seminars on subjects such as notification requirements, in helping developing
countries benefit from the multilateral trading system. He was encouraged by the gesture of the European
Communities and hoped that his country would be able to participate in the seminar to be organized
in the Caribbean region.

47. && The representative of Switzerland said she had not had the opportunity to study in detail the
document prepared by the Secretariat as they had received it the day before the meeting; she expected
to comment on the document at the next meeting of the CTD. She then said that demands for technical
assistance were growing, and so were the activities of institutions engaged in providing technical
assistance. As this increased the prospect of duplication of functions, it was absolutely necessary to
coordinate these various activities to ensure that resources were deployed to maximum benefit. The
idea of diversification was important and was being studied and analyzed in many institutions such
as UNCTAD, FAO and the World Bank. She reiterated that an efficient management of resources
required proper coordination of activities. The new multilateral trading environment required the
adaptation and intensification of programmes for technical assistance and cooperation. Her government
was in the process of reviewing its trade policies to meet these new challenges. The revision of their
GSP scheme was but one aspect of this review. She said that Switzerland, in cooperation with the
UNCTAD Secretariat, would soon hold a seminar on "Technical Cooperation for Trade and Development
in the Face of Globalization". The seminar was aimed at identifying concrete policies to facilitate the
integration of developing countries and countries-in-transition into the multilateral trading system.
In addition, the seminar would attempt to identify technical cooperation requirements flowing from
the Uruguay Round Agreements, and to focus specifically on how such assistance could be delivered.
The seminar would also consider and clarify the role of each institution in the delivery of technical
assistance. It was expected that the conclusions of the seminar would be part of the background material
for UNCTAD IX.


48.&&  The representative of Bangladesh asked if the WTO technical assistance fund had been established
and if so, wished to have details about its operation. The Director of the Technical Cooperation and
Training Division said the fund had not yet been established; a detailed plan had been submitted to
the Norwegian government and the Fund could start operating shortly after the adoption of a positive
decision by them.


49.&&  The representative of Cote d'Ivoire associated herself with the statement made by Tanzania.
Her delegation greatly appreciated the Director-General's personal commitment to assisting African
countries to increase their exports and take advantage of the opportunities offered by the Uruguay Round,
and for setting up a Programme of Action for Africa. She also greatly appreciated the financial support
extended by Norway and the European Communities and their willingness to assist Africa and other
countries to benefit from the multilateral trading system. The Committee took note of the comments
made.

G.  && Work of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries

50. && The Chairman recalled that during the Second Session, the CTD established the Sub-Committee
on Least-Developed Countries and appointed Miss Anne Stoddart, Deputy Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, as Chairperson of the Sub-Committee. He invited Miss Stoddart to present
an oral report to the CTD.

51.&&  The Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries said the First Meeting
of the Sub-Committee had taken place on 17 October 1995. The details of the proceedings could be
found in WT/COMTD/LLDC/1. The meeting was well attended and, in her view, the general level
of interest showed by Members demonstrated the seriousness accorded to the Marrakesh commitment
to ensure the effective participation of LLDCs in the multilateral trading system. The Sub-Committee
adopted its Programme of Work which was designed primarily to facilitate the full integration of LLDCs
into the multilateral trading system. She hoped to carry out consultations on items that would be accorded
"priority status” at the next meeting of the Sub-Committee in February 1996. The Work Programme
represented a considerable challenge, and she was sure the Members of the Sub-Committee would work
together to produce constructive results. She underlined the importance of technical assistance to LLDCs
and said it would continue to play a vital role in enabling them to make the most of the opportunities
and challenges of the post-Uruguay Round trading environment. She noted that the Norwegian initiative
in establishing a technical assistance fund in the WTO for the benefit of LLDCs was widely commended
by the Members of the Sub-Committee. The representatives of UNCTAD, ITC and the Technical
Cooperation and Training Division informed the Sub-Committee of work in progress of special relevance
to LLDCs. She urged Members of the CTD to be ready to play their full part in meeting the heavy
responsibilities assigned to the Sub-Committee. Practical results could be achieved, she said, if Members
worked together with determination.

 

52. && The representative of Bangladesh thanked the Chairperson for her statement. He drew attention
to the declining share of LLDCs in world trade and the drop in their GDP per capita and said that
it was absolutely necessary that something be done for these countries. As the problems of LLDCs
were within public knowledge, he did not think further elaboration was necessary.

53.&&  The representative of Norway thanked the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee for her accurate
report on the meeting and said that the debate in the CTD had underscored the fact that the Sub-
Committee had an important task to perform. He informed Members that his delegation was holding
consultations with the Secretariat to develop guidelines for getting the best use out of the Fund. An
interesting proposal made by the Secretariat was being studied in Oslo and Members would be informed
as soon as a decision was taken. He encouraged contributions from other countries to the Trust Fund,
which could do much to increase and strengthen the participation of developing countries in the
multilateral trading system. He welcomed the EC's initiative to hold regional seminars for the ACP
countries. The Committee took note of the comments made.

H. Future Work Programme of the Committee on Trade and Development

54. && The Chairman reminded Members that the terms of reference of the CTD required it "to establish
a programme of work which may be reviewed as necessary each year". The draft work programme
for 1996 basically followed the work programme of 1995, and included tentative dates for the meetings
of the CTD in 1996. Regarding the two items of the 1995 work programme which were not included
in the terms of reference of the CTD, i.e. review of the impact of the Uruguay Round on developing
country Members and the issue of credit and recognition, he suggested that the proposed work programme
for 1996 carry an explicit reference to the impact of the Uruguay Round. The issue of credit and
recognition could, he thought, be discussed under "Consideration of Measures and Initiatives to Assist
the Expansion of Trade and Investment Opportunities of Developing Country Members, in particular
on the Least-Developed Country Members"; it was not necessary for specific reference to be made
to it in the programme of work.

55. && The Chairman then recalled that the CTD was responsible for the notification requirements
of Article XVIII: A, C and D, Part IV and the Enabling Clause. The Secretariat had responded to
arequest made at the Second Session that relevant documents containing notification obligations relating
to development issues and past decisions of the CTD on the subject be circulated to Members. These
documents were available in the room. Suggesting that the CTD address the notification requirements
at its first meeting in 1996, he hoped the discussion would clarify which notification obligations were
relevant to the CTD, and whether there was the need to have standard formats for notifications.

56.&&  The Chairman then turned to the proposed work programme and invited preliminary comments
from Members, and informed those who wished to propose amendments to the programme could do
so in writing to the Secretariat. He would then thereafter hold consultations with Members on the
proposed changes. He hoped to finalize the programme of work early and include it in the CTD's
report to the General Council.

57. The representative of India recalled his delegation’ s proposal made at the Second Session, to
include an item in the terms of reference of the CTD. Consultations were still in progress and his
delegation wanted the matter to be included in the work programme for 1996. The Chairman said
that as consultations were still going on, the Indian delegation could raise the matter next year under
any appropriate item of the work programme.


58.&&  The representative of Peru, referring to the decision to establish a Working Group to examine
issues raised by Members, thought it would be appropriate to discuss the participation of developing
countries in the international trading system at the next meeting of the CTD in March 1996. According
to the draft work programme, the issue would not come up for discussion until October 1996 and in
his delegation's view, that was too late. The discussion of Item B could be brought forward in order
for the Working Group to make a significant contribution to the work of the CTD. Peru was willing
to participate in the Working Group. The Chairman assured Peru that his proposal would be taken
into account. He reminded Members to submit their proposals to amend the draft work programme
in writing to the Secretariat. The Committee took note of the comments made.

I. Other Business

59.&&  The Chairman said Rule 36bis of the CTD's Rules of Procedure, required that " After the last
meeting of the year, a report to the General Council on the activities of the Committee on Trade and
Development during the year shall be adopted". He suggested that Members entrust him with the
responsibility of preparing the draft report, which would include, among other things, the work
programme for 1996. Before submission to the General Council, he would circulate a draft to Members
for their comments. The CTD so agreed. The Committee also agreed to authorize the Chairman
to make an oral report to the GATT CONTRACTING PARTIES on the activities of the CTD for this
year.

60.&&  The Chairman thanked Members for their active participation and for their confidence in him.
He assured them that he had taken careful note of all proposals and comments. He confirmed that
a Working Group would be established to give clear directions to the Secretariat on issues to be analyzed
in the light of proposals made by India, Singapore and other Members; membership of the Group
would be open-ended. The Chairman declared the meeting closed.
