 
Committee on Trade and Development
Thirteenth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 25 NOVEMBER 1996


&& Chairman: H.E. Mr. Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)

A. Adoption of the agenda
1. The following agenda was adopted:

A. Adoption of the Agenda

B. Review of the Application of Special Provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements
and Related Ministerial Decisions in Favour of Developing Country Members, in
Particular Least-Developed Country Members
- Supervision of the Implementation of GATT 1994 Part IV and the Enabling

Clause (WT/COMTD/7, WT/COMTD/N/2/ADD. 2-3, WT/COMTD/N/5/ADD. 1)

C. Annual Review of WTO Technical Cooperation Activities as They Relate to Developing
Country Members

D. Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation

- Modalities
E. Other Business
Qs The Committee agreed to invite to its next meeting the same international organizations which
had been invited to this meeting.

B. Review of the Application of Special Provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and
Related Ministerial Decisions in Favour of Developing Country Members, in Particular
Least-Developed Country Members

- Supervision of the Implementation of GATT 1994 Part IV and the Enabling Clause
(WT/COMTD/7, WT/COMTD/N/2/ADD.2-3, WT/COMTD/N/5/ADD.1)

35 && The Chairman recalled that, in the airgram convening the meeting, Members had been invited
to notify to the Secretariat information relevant to the Committee's review of this agenda item, in time
for circulation and consideration at this meeting. Notifications had been received from Japan, circulated
in document WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.2 and 3, New Zealand, circulated in
document WT/COMTD/N/S/Add.1, and the Latin American Integration Association circulated in
document WT/COMTD/7.

4. && The representative of the United States said that he had some brief information concerning
the status of his country's legislation on the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP). According
to its most recent renewal, signed into law on 1 October 1996, its expiration would be 31 May 1997;
the President would seek reauthorization for the GSP at the beginning of the next Congress, convening
in January 1997. The programme allowed for the refund of customs duties dating back to 1 August 1995,
provided proper documentation was submitted. Furthermore, the U.S. Executive branch had the legal
authority to extend the GSP product coverage for LLDCs only while the current GSP legislation was
in effect. During the coming months the U.S. Executive branch would review the product coverage
and certain exclusions in that regard. The next legislation would probably be different from that which
was currently in effect.

5. && The representative of Canada said that a review had been carried out of Canada's GSP scheme,
and he believed that the new GSP scheme had come into force earlier that year. He hoped to be able
to circulate full details to delegations in due course.

6. && The Committee took note of the statements made.

C. Annual Review of WTO Technical Cooperation Activities as They Relate to Developing
Country Members

7. && The Chairman recalled that the Secretariat had circulated its Report on Technical Cooperation
for 1996, in document WT/COMTD/W/21. That document completed the information for 1996 and
complemented an earlier report submitted to the Committee in May, in document WT/COMTD/W/14,
and Add.1 in June of the same year.

8. && The representative of Switzerland regretted that the annual report on technical cooperation had
been distributed only shortly before the meeting. The representative of the Secretariat said that the
late distribution of the document was caused by the heavy workload in the Secretariat in preparation
for the Singapore Ministerial Conference. The representative of Uruguay said that, while it would
be useful to receive documentation earlier in the future, he understood the reasons for the delay.

9. && The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation would have preferred
to receive the document at an earlier stage but several improvements had been made over the years.
His delegation had some suggestions for the future. Regional seminars should be encouraged in the
future. It was a cost-effective method that promoted a better understanding of the different countries
and also a better understanding among officials of each others’ difficulties. He welcomed the work
that had been done in compiling the handbook on Notification Obligations, which would be of use
to many delegations. The Trade Policy Review Mechanism was also an element that developing
countries, and particularly the least-developed, should be encouraged to undergo in the future. He
recalled that his delegation had made a similar observation when discussing the Annual Report of the
CTD. A trade policy review, even at an earlier date than foreseen in Annex 3 of the Agreement
Establishing the WTO, was probably one of the most comprehensive forms of technical assistance that
countries could get, as it obliged them to put their trade policy in order and to check, in the preparation
of the reports, the levels of fulfilment of obligations. It was a useful mechanism of self-reflection for
national administrations. In referring to the report on technical cooperation, he suggested that the
Committee avoid limiting the assessment to only quantitative terms. It would be useful to know the
Secretariat's view of the difficulties encountered. Human resources and institutional capacity building,
for example, formed the main focus of the Committee's activity. What had been the result of such
efforts? What difficulties did the countries have? Answers to these questions would be important,
not only for determining the ordinary budget of those organizations, but also for assisting Member
donor governments. If Member governments wanted to contribute on a voluntary basis, they would
need to have a better understanding of what the difficulties were. It would thus be useful to have a
Secretariat's qualitative assessment of the type of problems that existed and had been identified during
the seminars and fact-finding missions. The Report also mentioned that: "In addition, comprehensive
studies on the outcome of the Uruguay Round for requesting individual countries or groups of countries,
as well as background notes on specific issues in different areas of the negotiations, were prepared."
It would be useful to have a list of these notes.

10.&&  The representative of the United States said that he too had received the report too late to read
it with care. He agreed with the European Communities concerning ideas for improving technical
assistance, as discussed at various Committee meetings on technical assistance over the past year.
A written, qualitative assessment by the Secretariat would therefore be helpful, even though a qualitative
assessment had perhaps not been the original objective of the report. Rather, the Committee needed
to be informed of which technical assistance activities had been undertaken. Nevertheless, some
interesting data or analysis existed which might be included, and it would be helpful if the Secretariat
could consider preparing another document some time in the next few months. Such a document would
contain the Secretariat's assessment of the strengths and efficiencies of the programmes based on its
experience in carrying out the programmes. Further analysis of that kind might enable the Committee
to focus its efforts on the question of how to make technical assistance as meaningful as possible.

11.&& The representative of Norway thanked the Secretariat for putting together the overview of
technical assistance carried out in the past year and, in particular, welcomed the activities carried out
under the WTO Trust Fund for Technical Assistance. He encouraged the Secretariat to pursue relevant
activities under the Fund in 1997 without of course interfering with activities under the ordinary budget.
Additionally, he saw merit in the points raised by the delegations of the European Communities and
of the United States about a qualitative assessment of the activities carried out. It would be to the
advantage of all delegations to have the Secretariat's qualitative assessments of various activities.

12. && The representative of Egypt welcomed the efforts of the Secretariat toward intensifying
cooperation with other international organizations, particularly UNCTAD and the UNDP. His delegation
supported a number of points mentioned by the delegation of the European Communities. First, his
delegation had received indications that the handbook on Notifications had been useful, and he thanked
the Secretariat for its effort in preparing it. Second, his delegation supported the statement by the
representative of the European Communities regarding the difficulties faced by the Secretariat. Thirdly,
he concurred with the delegations of the United States and the European Communities, that a qualitative
assessment would be useful, and could be done in a separate paper. His delegation hoped that such
a paper would be ready for the next meeting of the CTD and that the item would remain on the agenda
for the coming meetings so that the report would be adequately addressed by the Committee. Lastly,
his delegation supported the European Communities’ intervention regarding the documents and other
efforts that had already been done in various countries. Further details on the specific activities which
benefitted certain developing countries would be useful as these could easily be replicated at low cost
once initial work was done, benefitting other developing countries, in particular, the least-developed
among them. He hoped to come back with additional detailed remarks on the Report at the next meeting.

13.&&  The representative of Switzerland said he had some preliminary comments, not on technical
cooperation activities undertaken at the WTO, but rather on the Report itself. In this context he supported
the interventions by previous speakers and said that it would be interesting to learn about the problems
and successes of the previous programmes of technical cooperation. His delegation realized that the
Secretariat had followed the same format it had used in the past since previous reports had not been
subject to the type of comments which had been made at this meeting. Future reports, however, could
be of a different format, which would have to be agreed on, based on the year's work and follow-up.
His delegation supported the idea of having a new report sometime in the next few months, following
the Committee's discussions on the modalities. Particularly, the assessment and the evaluation of past
programmes should be contained in such a report, as should the criteria under which the assessment
of the programmes would take place. He suggested that the Secretariat prepare a more detailed report
based on the criteria it had to agree on. His delegation also supported interventions by other delegations
suggesting that the agenda item be retained for the next meeting.

14.&& The representative of Argentina said that the Report was an excellent document, and he
understood the reasons behind the delay in its circulation. He also expressed satisfaction with the work
done on the manual on Notifications: it was a useful instrument for authorities and provided a basis
for consultation, enabling Members to better comply with WTO obligations. Finally, the lack of a
qualitative analysis in the Report was perhaps caused by a lack of contact between the countries involved
and the Secretariat. Delegations, as well as the Secretariat, had an obligation to make contributions
to this analysis. His government, for example, could have expressed clear appreciation if it had been
asked for an assessment on the courses held in his country. His delegation would like to participate
in the preparation of the qualitative analysis.

15. &&The representative of Australia said, by way of preliminary remarks, that she wished to add
her delegation’ s voice to those who had suggested that the Secretariat assess the difficulties and successes
experienced over the past year. Such assessment would be useful for the Committee's discussion on
modalities and the application of the technical cooperation guidelines, which the Committee would
address. It would be useful if the Committee could have a report from the Secretariat, of the sort
suggested by Egypt, in time for a meeting in early 1997.

16.&& The representative of Venezuela thanked the Secretariat for the work it had done in the area
of technical cooperation. His delegation realized that administrative and other resources of the Secretariat
had been stretched by the preparations for the Singapore Ministerial Conference. As for an evaluation
of the activities, he agreed with the representative of Argentina. The government beneficiaries of the
technical cooperation could report on the way in which they had benefitted from the programmes carried
out by the WTO. He wondered whether a distinction had been made between activities developed
through the regular budget of the WTO and activities developed through the Trust Fund on Technical
Activities.

17. && The Chairman, speaking in his capacity as the representative of Morocco, thanked the Secretariat
for the Report and said that there was a strong commitment to make the technical cooperation the best
available. The Report covered all the activities which had been carried out by WTO in cooperation
with other institutions. However, he was of the view that the Report was somewhat vague. In spite
of the tables, the details pertinent to making an assessment of the situation were lacking. In some parts
of the Report, it was difficult to distinguish whether an activity had been one of WTO or one of another
organization, such as UNCTAD. There should be a separate section for the cases where the WTO
had been invited along with the delegation of another organization, such as the UNDP, spelling out
what the WTO staff had contributed to the efforts. Otherwise, the Report could give the impression
that the WTO had been doing something beyond its purview and competence. The Committee had
to be careful about the description of the work. There had been many queries regarding the Technical
Assistance Programme for Africa. If the Committee did not agree on what the report should contain,
it would not know what to expect from it. It would be a narrative document without any real use.
The Committee had to make sure that the Report contained enough details of the activities and a good
assessment so as to enable it to make recommendations.

18. && The Chairman suggested that the Committee revert to this agenda item at its next meeting,
and develop a model or guidelines for an annual report on technical cooperation activities during the
course of the next year. In the meantime, delegations would submit written contributions with a view
to assisting the Secretariat in producing, in January 1997, a more meaningful document for the assessment
of the 1996 technical assistance activities.

19. && The Committee so agreed.

D. Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation
- Modalities
20. && The Chairman recalled that at the Committee's last meeting on 31 October, he had mentioned
that he intended to raise this issue at today's meeting with a view to starting the discussion on this
important item and carrying it into next year. He added that the delegation of Morocco had submitted
a statement in the Budget Committee on that subject and on related financial budgetary implications,
contained in document WT/BFA/W/12, dated 19 November 1996. The Secretariat had provided his
delegation with some answers to its questions in the Budget Committee, which were related to this
subject. Since the answers did not fully respond to all the questions, his delegation would redirect
its questions to the Secretariat in the future. He intended to request the Budget Committee to circulate
the answers in an official document.

21.&& A representative of the Secretariat introduced the Secretariat non-paper on WTO Technical
Cooperation: Implementation Modalities! of 25 November 1996. The Secretariat's intention in presenting
the non-paper had been to assist delegations in the discussions on this matter. It therefore included
an indication of the different activities that had been carried out by the Secretariat in technical
cooperation, without wanting to rank them according to their relative importance or level of magnitude.
All modes of delivery mentioned in the document had been utilized in providing technical assistance,
some in more detail, others in less, and they were all part of the material and instruments that the WTO
used in dealing with the different elements of training and assistance. The relative importance depended
on the request received from the different beneficiaries. The document included some elements on
how technical cooperation should be organized in the future, including the establishment of a central
point, a central officer or office, in the recipient country to become the focal point for communications
with the WTO. An element of particular importance was that of selecting officials of beneficiary
countries to be included in a programme for the training of trainers, as had been discussed and adopted
in the guidelines on technical assistance, and the element relating to local expertize, also to be utilized
in future technical cooperation activities at the national, regional or sub-regional levels. With respect
to coordination, the Secretariat proposed that the Technical Cooperation and Training Division coordinate
and administer WTO's collaboration in the area of technical assistance with other organizations, for
example with UNCTAD, the ITC, the World Bank, and also at the regional and sub-regional levels.
It would also be the responsibility of the Technical Cooperation and Training Division to negotiate
and execute inter-agency programmes, which was a growing area in view of the fact that other
organizations were increasingly seeking joint activities with the WTO. Finally, some organizations
already had joint activities with other Divisions of the Secretariat, notably in the areas of customs duties,
intellectual property and agriculture. The coordination of those activities would also have to lie with
the Technical Cooperation and Training Division, and therefore with the CTD in the ensuing stage
of supervision.

22. The representative of the Secretariat continued, explaining that, regarding management, the
Secretariat would work according to a three-year plan, as approved in the guidelines. The three-year
plan had been qualified in the sense that the Technical Cooperation and Training Division was trying
to identify the type of activities that would be included by region. This would be indicative and would
be subject to specific agreement for each yearly plan. The paper had suggested that there be a deadline,
both with respect to requests addressed to the WTO for technical assistance and with respect to voluntary
contributions for certain types of activities, as a sample date to allow a platform for the activities of
the following year. The date of 15 November was mentioned in the non-paper, but only as an indication.
Another important point had been to leave an open door to accommodate, to the extent possible, new
requests that would be coming while the regular plan was being applied. Finally, he wanted to emphasize
that, as regards the modalities, the reporting would be done to the Committee on Trade and Development,
pursuant to instructions which the Technical Cooperation and Training Division would receive from
the Committee, as had been discussed under the previous agenda item, and the Committee would
supervise the work in this area.

23. && The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation had only preliminary
comments for the time being. While some interesting ideas had been expressed, the non-paper could
be improved, most importantly the part on the Modes of Delivery. The same difficulty had already
been encountered in the annual reports on technical cooperation of the past two years. It was essential
now that the Committee discuss the modes of delivery to define, or to redefine more clearly, what
was meant by each of those activities. A requesting country having to select from the instruments
presented might be more confused than helped. It was important to know what was meant by a national
seminar, a technical mission, or a detailed in-depth seminar. What was a special training course, a
practical training programme and participation in other activities on the regional and sub-regional levels
and in Geneva? It was essential to have a clear-cut definition of each of the instruments available,
so that delegations could request the use of the one which would suit them best. The Committee should
use its discussion to try to improve on these concepts. His delegation suggested that a section on follow-
up also be included, as had been mentioned in the guidelines, but so far had not been reflected in the
non-paper. It was his delegation's view that it would be useful to reformulate slightly the language
on International Coordination in order to make it clear that the Secretariat would develop, negotiate,
and execute inter-agency programmes for the part that related to the Secretariat.

24.&& The representative of the European Communities continued by commenting on the section on
Management in the non-paper. As the representative of the Secretariat had explained, the section
contained some useful ideas, but preference should be given to establishing a certain deadline so that
the Secretariat would be in a better position to plan the activities for the year ahead. It would also
be useful if the requests for technical assistance were accompanied by justifications. A request should
not only be for a seminar to be organized in a certain capital, but should also contain a justification
on why that specific seminar was necessary for that country. That would also assist the Secretariat
in acquiring a better knowledge of the difficulties of individual WTO Members. Finally, he suggested
that the point which indicated that all the requests and contributions should be addressed through the
Division on Technical Cooperation and Training should appear earlier in the paper, probably as the
first sentence in the section on Management, to set the terms of what followed next.

25. && The representative of Canada said that it was unclear how the relationship between the Technical
Cooperation and Training Division and the line Divisions within the WTO worked. It was clear that
the Technical Cooperation and Training Division was the coordinating Division, but the delivery seemed
to be done primarily through the line Divisions. Perhaps a more detailed explanation of how that delivery
mechanism worked should be included in the section on Management, in the next version. He agreed
with the representative of the European Communities that, all requests should go through the Technical
Cooperation and Training Division. He did not know if that was the current practice. For instance,
in case a particular country wanted aid on dispute settlement issues, were requests addressed to the
Legal Division? He would appreciate information on such procedures as well as on the question of
who approved the technical assistance activities.

26. && The representative of Argentina drew attention to the point on flexibility in carrying out technical
cooperation. This was important and should be preserved in the exercise. Secondly, his delegation
had some doubts as to how the "Modes of Delivery” exercise would fit with the guidelines already
drawn up. While the guidelines exercise had been long, it had resulted in setting the parameters for
technical cooperation. His delegation did not see the merits of negotiating Modalities in a way that
would reproduce the exercise of negotiations on guidelines. The section of the text dealing with long-
term engagements included some commitments the States would need to take on in order to receive
technical cooperation; that part should not necessarily be interpreted as a prerequisite in order to receive
technical cooperation. For example, it referred to the desirability of establishing a "focal point” in
a country. That should not be a prerequisite conditioning the actual receipt of technical cooperation.
If the Committee was going to advance along those lines, it needed to be explicit. Perhaps it would
be more useful to keep the text as a sort of indicative non-paper, which the Secretariat could use in
future work as a guide for the preparation of annual reports.

27.&&  The representative of Uruguay said that he fully agreed with what had been said by the
representative of Argentina and wished to underscore a couple of points. First, the greatest virtue
of the discussion and of the non-paper was the fact that they were general. His delegation agreed with
the ideas stated by the representative of the European Communities, to the effect that it might be
interesting to know, in general, what each one of the subjects meant, without reaching a dictionary-type
definition that could become taxing and restrictive. One positive aspect of technical cooperation was
that it was not restrictive, but rather it adapted to the needs of each country requesting the assistance.
His delegation was not calling for a negotiated text, which would be restrictive in nature. Because
countries often did not need one specific modality, but rather a combination of different ones or aspects
of them, it would be good to build in sufficient flexibility. South-South cooperation was very useful,
as one often could learn more easily from what others suffered than from top-down, professor-to-student
instruction. That was what was being done on the regional level, so maybe regional experience should
be considered in the future.

28. && The representative of Switzerland said that because his delegation had received the non-paper
rather late, it would comment on it in more detail at a later stage. It seemed a good basis for elaborating
the implementation modalities. To achieve the aims set out in the guidelines for WTO technical
cooperation, it was imperative that such modalities be developed by the Committee and that they be
sufficiently helpful and precise, so that the Committee could set up a type of technical cooperation
which would benefit both donors and recipients, and, indeed, the image of the WTO. There were
some errors which further work could correct to make the modalities more precise. First, more thought
needed to be given to the operation of the WTO Trust Fund. Pursuant to Section 24C of the guidelines
for WTO technical cooperation, which stipulated that "the WTO Trust Fund shall be managed according
to the recommendations contained in the Decision taken by the General Council of 18 July 1996 and
to the financial regulations and financial rules of 5 August 1996," it was now necessary to establish
specific rules for the management of the WTO Trust Fund for Technical Cooperation. One idea would
be for the Fund to be composed of two parts - an earmarked part and a non-earmarked part. The non-
earmarked contributions could be used for any activities and projects appearing in the WTO's three-year
plan for technical cooperation, and earmarked contributions could be used for particular projects, which
could be chosen by the donor from the lists of projects appearing in the three-year plan. Another issue
needing reflection concerned the role and the range of donors who might contribute to the WTO Trust
Fund.
The representative of Switzerland then said that the second problem concerned project
management and evaluation criteria. Section 1 of the guidelines provided that WTO technical cooperation
activities "be administered by the Secretariat and reviewed by Members, in accordance with operational
directives and implementation modalities, to be established by the Committee on Trade and
Development,” while in Section 24C, the guidelines called for "monitoring and evaluation by the
Committee on Trade and Development, based on annual evaluation of the results of technical assistance
activities, in order to ensure optimum use of resources, according to appropriate evaluation criteria."
In his delegation's view, those operational directives and evaluation criteria needed to be elaborated
by the Committee based on existing documents, such as the ITC Manual on Programming, Project
Design, Monitoring and Evaluation. Section 22 of the guidelines provided for "follow-up of individual
programmes and assessment of their effectiveness." It would probably not be necessary to evaluate
every single project, but all major projects and programmes should be evaluated and exposed according
to internationally recognized procedures and criteria. Such an evaluation should take place no sooner
than one year after the end of the project or programme, to allow an assessment of the sustainability
of the benefits. In this context, he reminded delegations of the Committee's intention to develop a
format for the reports by the Secretariat.
The representative of Switzerland continued, saying that the third point concerned international
coordination. Section 23 of the guidelines provided for a “close institutional dialogue with other
international organizations, in particular with ITC and UNCTAD, and with other regional institutions
to ensure a coherent approach to identify areas of competence and complementarity." His delegation
would be grateful if the Secretariat would inform the Committee about any recent steps taken towards
such a dialogue, particularly in view of the high-level meeting planned for 1997 in the context of the
WTO Action Plan for the Least-Developed Countries. The Secretariat could be asked to prepare an
outline of the necessary steps for the implementation of that part of the guidelines and of the possible
role of the CTD in both the process and the high-level meeting. He emphasized that the ideas just
expressed were very preliminary and that the guidelines contained other provisions which required
further elaboration, as had been pointed out by other delegations. His delegation planned to present
its ideas in writing to the Committee, and to participate actively in the work required, since his
Government attached great importance to those issues and hoped that the Committee would continue
its efforts to carry out effective WTO technical cooperation activities to meet the essential needs of
recipients. His delegation hoped that further work would be undertaken and that the item would remain
on the agenda.

31.&& The representative of Egypt thanked the Chairman for his efforts from the start of the process
regarding technical cooperation, including those regarding the guidelines earlier in the year. It appeared
that the Committee was on the right track. To start working on the Implementation Modalities was
a step that had been foreseen in the guidelines, and hence, his delegation welcomed the start of the
discussions. However, like other delegations, his delegation had received the non-paper only recently,
and thus had not had time to study it. Regarding the Modes of Delivery, he shared some of the concerns
raised by the delegation of the European Communities. His delegation was nevertheless pleased to
see various modes of delivery listed, since in the past, concentration seemed to have been on seminars
as one of the most important modes of delivery, even though other modes of delivery would perhaps
have been more suitable for some of the purposes. It was a valid point that certain modes of delivery
would require some refinement and improvement. Secondly, he shared the concern raised by the
delegation of Argentina regarding the establishment of a focal point. Egypt had established different
focal points and enquiry points, in accordance with various WTO provisions. Those arrangements
were under the purview of different authorities, which had different areas of competence. Thus it was
unclear how the new "focal point” would affect the competence of various organizations and authorities
within Egypt's Government. His delegation wished to reflect on the idea more to determine whether
it would be feasible to have the new focal point, or whether it would create an additional level of
bureaucracy that might not be needed at that point in time. Regarding international coordination, there
were several joint programmes of cooperation with other international organizations. His delegation
sought clarification on the question of how those joint projects would be evaluated, since they sometimes
fell within the competence of more than one organization, which made their assessment and evaluation,
as well as their reporting to different bodies, a difficult task. The Chairman had referred to that point
earlier, regarding the Tripartite Technical Cooperation Programme for Africa. His delegation would
welcome more details in that respect. As mentioned by the delegation of Canada, the relationships
between the different Divisions in the WTO were unclear, in terms of the delivery of technical
cooperation programmes. Members also needed to clarify the roles of different Committees within
the WTO regarding technical cooperation, in view of a certain overlap in activities related to technical
cooperation in different Committees. Thus, the modalities should include language on the need to
clarify the distribution of the workload and the division of labour among Divisions and also among
the various Committees in the WTO machinery. His delegation also supported the suggestion by the
representative of Switzerland to send comments in writing to the Secretariat, which could be included
in a second version of the non-paper for discussion at the CTD's next meeting. A paper prepared
for the evaluation of technical cooperation would assist the Committee in its work to refine the
implementation modalities. His delegation intended to send specific comments to the Secretariat regarding
the non-paper.

32.&& The representative of Cote d'Ivoire said that the initiative concerning technical cooperation
was consistent with WTO's intention to help countries participate fully. The non-paper was a good
basis for the discussion, and it had been improved by the comments of delegations. Her delegation
was of the view that those countries benefitting from technical cooperation should be required to
contribute by submitting reports, to allow better transparency. Comments from countries themselves
could help to improve the programme over the years. Her delegation wished to thank the Secretariat
for all the technical cooperation activities it had undertaken - including those it had undertaken
cooperatively with other organizations - despite the fact that it had only limited resources. There had
been a seminar in Céte d'Ivoire, and the feedback had been positive. Her delegation also wished to
thank those countries which, despite financial difficulties, contributed to the programme. Finally, she
thanked the European Communities for financing the Abidjan Seminar, which had brought together
African countries.

33. && The representative of Venezuela said that he agreed with the representative of Argentina regarding
the nature of the non-paper and its relationship to the guidelines that had already been formulated by
the Committee. It was a document basically for information. Although it was informal in nature,
its drafting implicitly suggested certain conditionalities, as illustrated by the representative of Argentina,
for example, in the area of the designation of a focal point, or enquiry point. The document could
be improved through incorporating suggestions such as those made by the representatives of Canada
and the European Communities, which would enable a country using it to have a better idea of what
had been done in the area of technical cooperation, and how programmes had been delivered and
organized. Also, while his delegation had listened with great interest to the comments put forth by
the delegation of Switzerland regarding the Trust Fund for Technical Cooperation, it wanted to exercise
caution. The Committee needed to contemplate the impact which the Fund might have on other
programmes that were already existing, such as the one in the ITC, which had windows to channel
the contributions received for cooperation. Those activities should not be impaired by activities planned
in this body.

34.&& The representative of Madagascar congratulated the Chairman on the dynamic way in which
he had worked to accelerate the discussions and the implementation of the programme of technical
cooperation. The programme was important for the least-developed countries, such as Madagascar.
His delegation wished to express satisfaction with the quality of the technical cooperation it had been
receiving from the WTO Secretariat on a number of occasions. In 1996 alone, seminars had been
organized in Madagascar on the implementation of the Uruguay Round Agreements, and in Abidjan,
as well as the Meeting for Ministers of Least-Developed Countries held in Geneva for the preparation
of the Singapore Meeting, in addition to other meetings for delegations from LLDCs. Delegations
could only be pleased with the current level of technical cooperation provided by the WTO.
Nevertheless, given the international environment and its imperatives, improvement and acceleration
were needed. He was thus thankful that the Chairman had put the issue on the agenda of the Sub-
Committee, thereby giving it a certain level of priority.

35; The representative of Madagascar continued, saying that the non-paper merited in-depth analysis.
His delegation would provide a written analysis at a later stage. It was important to consider the match
between supply and demand for technical assistance, and to place a certain level of responsibility on
the beneficiary countries receiving such technical assistance. A country first needed to define its own
needs. On the basis of those needs, the Secretariat could then explain the extent to which it was in
a position to respond. One could not ask donors, however generous and willing, to finance something
that had not been well-structured or defined. Regarding specific aspects of the non-paper, he suggested
that the date of 15 November, which had been set as a deadline for requests for technical cooperation,
could be advanced by a couple of months to allow donors to communicate views about what had been
requested by the beneficiary country. This would be for the purpose of facilitating donations. Regarding
the question of international and inter-institutional coordination, it was common knowledge that those
Members receiving technical assistance had great difficulty in defining their problems. They were
aware of the problem of integration in international trade and a general need for technical assistance,
but, due to the overlap and duplication among various organizations and the difficulties in distinguishing
their special capabilities, countries sometimes approached an inappropriate organization. The WTO
could therefore assist such countries in better understanding the capabilities of each organization, so
as to refine their requests. The WTO should not just supply technical assistance, but should also have
an advisory role, so that countries approaching the WTO would know how to find solutions to their
problems. The WTO had this type of incident at the Meeting for Ministers of Least-Developed Countries
in preparation for the Singapore Ministerial Conference. For example, the WTO sometimes had to
turn down a request for technical assistance, since it was not within its competence. In such instances,
countries still had a problem and needed some response. If the WTO was not able to provide the
assistance, perhaps it could advise countries where to go for such assistance.

36. && The representative of Korea said that it was important to establish criteria to evaluate which
means of technical cooperation activities were effective. Referring to statements made by the Swiss
and Egyptian delegations concerning international cooperation, he noted that similar kinds of technical
cooperation funds in the WTO, UNCTAD and ITC existed. To be cost-effective, it might perhaps
be possible to implement a type of coordination, such as regular consultations with the relevant
organizations. Such a framework could include running lists of countries receiving technical assistance.
By identifying the countries and specifying their needs, cooperation among the relevant organizations
might be promoted.

37. && The representative of the Secretariat said that he wished to comment on the issue raised by
the delegate of Canada, on the coordination of requests for technical cooperation and on the planning
and the execution of those requests. As indicated in the non-paper, the Technical Cooperation and
Training Division was the focal point for the contacts between the Secretariat and the delegations in
the area of technical cooperation, as well as for the organization of activities related to technical
assistance. However, there was no doubt that, in certain cases, there were countries which made requests
directly to the operational Divisions in charge of a specific subject or type of activity. The Secretariat
had been trying to coordinate to avoid duplication, with a view to establishing a clear programme of
activities performed by the different Divisions. When a particular request was made, the operational
Divisions and the Technical Cooperation and Training Division designed certain steps. In many cases
the Secretariat staff participating in those activities did not work in the operational Division concerned
with that specific subject, but still took on some responsibility in activities performed abroad because
it was well informed on the subject. There was, therefore, a coordinating role for the Technical
Cooperation and Training Division. The Report which delegations had considered earlier surveyed
the technical cooperation activities performed by the Secretariat, and as such showed that there was
a clear knowledge in the Secretariat of the various activities that were being carried out by the different
Divisions.

38. && The Chairman said that he was of the view that the Committee needed to stress that it had only
just begun its work on the establishment of modalities for the technical assistance of the Organization.
It was better to move the process steadily because what the Committee ultimately sought was to "get
its money's worth", obtaining the best technical assistance possible for the Members, particularly for
the developing and least-developed countries. As some delegations had emphasized, the effort of
clarification and transparency was essential if the Committee wanted to attract additional voluntary
contributions. The Committee needed to communicate to donors how the money would be allocated
and the impact it would have.
The Chairman then referred to the question raised by the representative of Canada, concerning
the relationship between the Technical Cooperation and Training Division and the other Divisions.
Did the Committee want a Technical Cooperation and Training Division which would provide the
substance of the assistance, or did it want a Division which coordinated the contribution that each
Division, in its own competence, was going to make to the countries? For instance, if there was a
need for technical assistance in making notifications, would the Division dealing with notifications
handle the substance, while the Technical Cooperation and Training Division coordinated the work?
It was a question demanding attention as the Committee considered what kind of Technical Cooperation
and Training Division it wanted, entailing important budgetary implications as well as the size of each
Division. UNCTAD's Technical Cooperation Division had a different shape from that of the WTO;
UNCTAD's arrangement might be a useful source for determining what would be optimal for the WTO
in order to deliver the best technical assistance, and, as such, should be on the Committee's agenda.
The Chairman continued, referring to a pointraised by the delegation of Switzerland and others.
There was perhaps merit in establishing a guide on technical cooperation at the WTO - in other words,
a booklet that would outline the basic scheme and explain the different modes of delivery of technical
assistance. He had proposed that the WTO have more regional seminars, where people were introduced
to the work of the Organization, before it provided the more substantive technical assistance. The
basic scheme should introduce the concept of flexibility that had been elaborated by the representatives
of Venezuela and Uruguay. The scheme should be described in the booklet on technical assistance,
so that people would know what was available and what the different possibilities were. In that way
they would be able to make their own requests, and not just go for the easiest option, which was to
participate in seminars or to provide for officials to come to Geneva for training. Here, also, the
Committee needed to make sure that when people came to Geneva, the training was more practically
oriented. The WTO should not give them lectures, which they could get in their own countries or
universities, but rather offer them practical training.
The Chairman said that a third element for future discussion by the Committee entailed the
many questions that had been raised by the delegation of Switzerland, concerning the WTO Trust Fund.
The Committee also needed to make sure that its monitoring and evaluation procedures were clear.
Dates for the evaluation and review were to be set in advance. The Committee on Trade and
Development should have special meetings regarding those issues. In his opinion, there should be
a small group within the Committee on Trade and Development to do preparatory and other work for
the meeting on evaluation, to prevent that meeting from resulting only in discussion which did not
yield results. The criteria for the evaluation, a subject raised by the Swiss delegation, represented
the fourth item to be discussed. One aspect that had been mentioned was the idea of having the Technical
Cooperation and Training Division do its Report to the Committee each year according to some basic
elements agreed to in advance. There could be certain sections, including one on the internal evaluation
of programmes.
 The Chairman then said that his final point concerned cooperation, a subject which had been
mentioned by many delegations. Here, also, the Committee needed to be very careful. As Committee
Chairman, he had had many contacts with the heads of the ITC and UNCTAD, Mr. Bélisle and
Mr. Ricupero, respectively. Those contacts were geared toward ensuring a certain coherence between
the guidelines and modalities, which the Committee was working on, and the activities of those other
institutions, which would facilitate the execution of common programmes. The Committee needed
to make sure that its guidelines and modalities were not too different from theirs, taking into account,
of course, each organization's specificity. He had understood from his conversations with them that
they were aware of that point and that they would cooperate with the WTO. Against this background,
he proposed that the Committee invite them to give their views at its next meeting, planned for
30 January 1997. He would be presiding over the Committee for the last time, taking just a few minutes
to hand the role of Chairman over to his successor. At that meeting, with the Committee's approval,
he could invite the ITC's and UNCTAD's Technical Cooperation Divisions to give the Committee
their views on how they themselves conducted technical cooperation activities.
The Chairman concluded by saying that, while many of the LLDCs had the impression that
the WTO was either an aid agency or a development agency, it was neither. They seemed to come
to the WTO for help. Because they identified their problems but did not identify the institutions that
should deal with their problems, an integrated approach was necessary when they came to Geneva.
Availability of representatives of the three organizations to help them and the existence of common
programmes of the three organizations, would solve the problem of identifying the institutions, which
would make a difference to LLDCs. He clarified that he was not of the view that the WTO could
address issues that were not within the purview of its competence. That was why the Committee had
attempted to include the concept of international cooperation in its guidelines, so that it could direct
the countries that needed help in subjects outside WTO competence to other institutions in Geneva
which handled those issues. Finally, some work needed to be done regarding the organization of a
high-level meeting between the three institutions, as proposed in the Committee's Report to the General
Council. As Chairman of the Committee which made and accepted the proposals, he had taken the
initiative of making preliminary contact with the heads of the other two institutions, to inform them
that the meeting was scheduled to take place, and to ask them for their cooperation. It was his
understanding that Mr. Ricupero was directing his own Secretariat to start thinking about the best
contributions UNCTAD might make to this high-level meeting, and that Mr. Bélisle would be doing
the same. He had also consulted with the Director General of the WTO. He invited the delegation
of Switzerland to come forward with its contribution on modalities as soon as possible. The delegation
of Morocco would also make a contribution on the modalities, probably before the end of the year.
He thanked the Secretariat for its efforts, which would constitute a good basis for further work.
The Chairman said that he wished to take the opportunity of the final CTD meeting which
he was chairing to thank the Development Division for providing him with support and ideas. He
also thanked all the delegations and said that the year had been a good one. He had always found
a spirit of cooperation from them all. It was the way the Committee should continue to work in the
future.

45. &&The Committee took note of the statements made.
