RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/6

2 July 1996

ORGANIZATION

(96-2516)

Committee on Trade and Development
Sixth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETINGS OF 24 MAY AND 7 JUNE 1996

Chairman: Mr. Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)

A. Adoption of Agenda

1. && Welcoming delegates to Sixth Session of the Committee on Trade and Development, the
Chairman, Ambassador Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi, said it was a privilege to have the Director-General
of the WTO, Mr. Renato Ruggiero at this session. The Chairman was aware of the priority the
Director-General placed on increasing the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading
system, and on the technical cooperation activities of the WTO. His views would be of great value
in the discussions on the provision of guidelines for technical cooperation.

2.&&  Turning to the proposed agenda for the meeting in WTO/AIR/326, the Chairman suggested
that, as the question of observer status remained unsolved in the General Council, the Committee decide
that the same organizations invited for the Sixth Session be invited for the next session. It was so
decided. He intended to deal with preparations for the forthcoming Ministerial Meeting in Singapore
as well as the Chairmanship of the Sub-Committee of Least-Developed Countries under item 2C (Other
Business). The Committee noted that the delegate of the United States would have a brief comment
on the Notification of Preferential Trade Agreements, under agenda item Other Business. The Agenda
was then adopted.

B. Provision of Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation

3. && The Chairman said that in his view, the current meeting was just the beginning of the process
of establishing guidelines for technical cooperation. He proposed that the discussion be structured
so that the issue of guidelines could be addressed taking into account both experience with technical
cooperation within the GATT/WTO as well as outside the organization. The Committee should first
hear from the Director-General and have an overview of the main elements to be taken into account
in providing guidelines. He would give the opportunity for delegations to express any general remarks
on technical cooperation after the statement by the Director-General. Finally the Committee would
look at the guidelines for technical cooperation. At this stage, the Chairman would make some
suggestions on how delegations could structure their interventions.

4. && The Director-General in his opening remarks emphasized the importance he placed on the work
of this Committee; he would be present again at the June session of the Committee, along with the
Secretary-General of UNCTAD. He earnestly believed that the greatest success of the Uruguay Round
was the increased level of participation of developing countries. It was of major historical importance.
Every effort must be made to strengthen this new configuration of the world economy. He said that
globalization had presented one of the greatest opportunities for developing countries to increase their
participation in the multilateral trading system. Fast growing developing countries had helped pull
the industrialized countries in North America and Western Europe out of the recession of the 90s.
Interdependence resulting from globalization had set in motion the process of integrating countries
on the margins of the trading system. The increased importance in the world economy of developing
countries as players, not dependants, increased the importance of the work of this Committee.
In achieving the mandate for greater coherence in the management of a microeconomic policy,
one of the most important goals would be to integrate development policy and trade policy. He expressed
great satisfaction with respect to the recent negotiations of the WTO with the IMF and World Bank;
there was now a new vision - not in terms of cross-conditionality but in terms of cross-fertilization.
This was a completely different and new perception. Consequently, development policy would be
a part of the adjustment programmes of developing countries. A rule-based global multilateral system
with the capacity of enforcement was, he said, of greatest importance for developing countries and
presented the only real means to achieve economic development. He saw regionalism as the first step
on the road to more active participation in the global trading system for developing countries and
particularly for the least-developed of them. He also saw a new coordinated vision for WTO cooperation
with UNCTAD and ITC. While the Director-General was aware of the dissatisfaction expressed by
some developing countries on the outcome of the Uruguay Round, he thought it was too early for the
new initiatives in favour of developing countries to have had an impact. However, given the importance
of trade policy for development policy, it was necessary to see what could be done within the rules
already established to meet the expectations of developing countries.
The Ministerial Conference due to take place in Singapore was the first meeting at a political
level since the WTO was established. This meeting would not only take stock of what had been done,
but it would establish a Work Programme. He looked forward to strong participation by developing
countries in the preparation for Singapore, and invited written proposals from members on how they
saw the outcome of the Singapore meeting. It was important that these views be taken into account
in the preparations for Singapore.
 Turning to least-developed countries, he drew attention to the marginalization of least-developed
countries that had taken place. Their economic structures did not enable them to take advantage of
the multilateral trading system, and strong efforts were needed on their behalf. An important initiative,
he said, had been taken by the French President with the backing of other G7 leaders to include matters
relating to these countries in the forthcoming G7 Summit in Lyon. The concluding sessions of the
forthcoming G7 meeting would be looking at what could be done to help the least-developed countries
better integrate into the world trading system. Representatives of the United Nations, World Bank,
IMF and WTO had been invited, and he himself would attend. This initiative recognized the importance
to the world economy of countries other than a limited number of industrialized countries. This was,
in his view, an important part of the preparations for the Singapore meeting. Looking ahead he was
realistically ambitious that there would be some additional measures taken in favour of least-developed
countries. He expected real progress in their favour; towards the objectives of bound duty-free access
for exports, towards larger quotas, and towards a more flexible application of rules of origin.
 He could not accept the perception that developing countries had little interest in so-called new
issues. While the relevance of the rules for various countries differed, every country had an interest
in a common framework of rules. For instance, as aid flows declined, initiatives in the area of
investment were of prime importance. He said that 66 per cent of foreign investment flows occurred
among industrialized countries, and that most of the rest went to 10 developing countries. Industrialized
countries, and the more advanced developing countries, had to take into account the needs of other
countries, particularly of the least-developed countries. He insisted that their needs must not be forgotten.
Turning to the problems of net-food importing countries, he said that work was going on in the
Agricultural Committee and that this subject would be considered in the General Council when preparing
for the Ministerial conference.
He said that technical cooperation was a major issue. He saw the WTO role in this area as
part of a larger effort; part of a coordinated and integrated programme bringing together all institutions
to improve institutional capacity and human resources. It must, he said, be part of a global design.
He saw a role for WTO, UNCTAD, ITC and the Common Fund for Commodities in encouraging
diversification and enhancing export capacity. He was certain that through well structured efforts and
institutional collaboration a real impact could be made; such efforts must be sustained and have
follow-up. He gave great importance to cooperation with the World Bank notably for the use of new
technologies.

10. && The Chairman thanked the Director-General for insisting on the need for a broader vision when
looking at technical cooperation. He drew the attention of delegates to the report on Technical
Cooperation - document WT/COMTD/W/14 - and observed that a discussion on technical cooperation
should consider three elements. First, the provisions for technical cooperation already contained in
the WTO agreements. Second, the specific needs of countries and the need for coherence between
technical cooperation programmes provided by different organizations to meet such needs. Third,
what additional assistance was required to implement the commitments that flowed from the universal
membership of WTO agreements. This was necessary in order for developing countries to benefit
from the new market openings that followed from the Uruguay Round, and to be further integrated
into the multilateral trading system. Cooperation, particularly with the World Bank and IMF would
be in accordance with the mandate for Coherence in Global Economic Policymaking given by Ministers.
Such cooperation would ensure that recipient countries gained maximum benefit from their
complementarity and competence. Coordination of technical assistance provided by different
organizations should, in his view, be an important element of the guidelines for technical cooperation
and the Committee should have acomplete picture of activities in respect of technical cooperation carried
out by other organizations as well as the WTO.

11. && The Chairman recalled that a questionnaire on technical cooperation had been sent to developing
country members, to countries with economies in transition and to industrialized countries. It had
been elaborated after his consultations with interested parties. He stated that the intention was neither
to extend the scope of WTO technical cooperation nor to draw up a "shopping list” of needs, but rather
to establish a better appreciation of overall needs and to establish priorities. Responses were anticipated
not only from those members receiving traditional assistance, but also those providing technical assistance
as some of the questions were relevant for both groups of countries. The Chairman then informed
the Committee that he had invited the Secretary-General of UNCTAD and the Executive-Secretary
of ITC to address the Committee at its next session. The Chairman of the General Council and the
Director-General of the WTO would also be present.

12. && The representative of the European Communities noted with appreciation the Director-General s
commitment to the integration of developing countries, particularly of the least-developed, into the
multilateral trading system. He agreed with the Director-General on the importance of the high level
participation by developing countries and that the higher level of commitments accepted by developing
countries would enable them to benefit from globalization. Technical assistance, particularly to least
developed countries, could play acentral role in helping them respect their commitments. The European
Communities had already made extra-budgetary contributions for holding seminars in Africa.
Recognizing the importance of coordinating the efforts of different organizations so results would be
maximized was to be welcomed, as was the good working relationship established with the World Bank
and UNCTAD and the ITC. The work of ITC was directed to specific targeted projects; the European
Communities had started discussions with ITC and it was certain effective cooperation would result.
EC concerns, however, went beyond technical assistance. The degree to which developing countries
benefited from the results of the Uruguay Round would vary and it was essential that countries,
particularly industrialized countries, fully respect the commitments they had undertaken. He wished
to have a better understanding of the Director-General's interesting suggestions in the area of tariffs
and thought it should be looked at in greater depth. Liberalization in new areas, he said, should take
into account the interests of the least-developed countries. He had no doubt that negotiations which
would facilitate and enhance international investment flows would benefit both countries making the
investment, and countries receiving investment, through the transfer of technology and through increased
economic activity. He called upon fast growing developing countries to play a role in assisting
least-developed countries. In conclusion, he reiterated the European Communities’ commitment to
participating actively in the drawing up of guidelines for technical assistance.

13. && The representative of Tunisia said he fully shared the Director-General's vision on technical
cooperation. Technical assistance was linked to current needs arising from the Uruguay Round
agreements. Technical cooperation, however, was directed at helping developing countries increase
their participation in international trade and should be the essential part of what the Committee was
trying to achieve in the run up to Singapore. Recalling that it was the initiative taken by African Trade
Ministers in Tunis that had paved the way for cooperation between WTO, UNCTAD and ITC, he now
welcomed this cooperation, already evident in programmes being carried out in African countries.
In addition he attached great importance to the harmonization of macroeconomic policies. Coordination
between the World Bank, the IMF and the WTO was vital to obtain proper harmonization of
macroeconomic policies and to bring about the right environment for development. He hoped that
at forthcoming sessions of the CTD it would be possible not only to focus on what the WTO could
do in the field of technical assistance, but what it could do in cooperation with other organizations
to improve the level of participation of developing countries in the world trade and their capacity to
benefit from the multilateral trading system.

14.&&  The representative of Singapore, speaking on behalf of ASEAN, said that the presence of the
Director-General was a measure of the high profile the Committee of Trade and Development was
taking and the role it was beginning to play. It was imperative that a rules-based organization such
as the WTO was seen to have a conscience - a sense of equity. The CTD was the conscience that created
asense of equity for the WTO. He agreed with the Director-General that globalization and liberalization
were an integral part of the global economy. However, it had to be recognized that some countries
needed time and resources to integrate themselves into this global economy; in order to be competitive,
they needed knowledge, skills and access to technology. He recalled that there were provisions that
provided for gradual liberalization, technical assistance and cooperation. Equity needed progress in
areas of importance to developing countries suchas textiles, agriculture, and maritime transport services.
Even though the Uruguay Round was seen as a single undertaking, there were signs that countries
were picking and choosing areas of interest to themselves; this sent unfortunate signals to trading
partners. In conclusion, he said that while technical assistance could play a very important role (as
was evident from the ASEAN experience), it must not result in a “crutch” mentality; self-help was
vital. So was cooperation between developing countries, in particular the more advanced developing
countries helping their less advanced trading partners. The one page paper on definition and allocation
of technical cooperation activities presented at the recent UNCTAD conference encapsulated the range
of possibilities of cooperation between the WTO, UNCTAD and ITC. He asked that it be circulated
as an official document. The forthcoming Ministerial meeting was taking place in an ASEAN country.
ASEAN was an example of how free-trade promoted economic development, social growth and stability.
He looked forward to a good discussion on trade and development in Singapore.

15. && The representative of Cuba, speaking on behalf of the Latin American and Caribbean countries,
underlined the importance they attached to the Committee on Trade and Development. He welcomed
the objective identified earlier by the Director-General to provide impetus to the participation of
developing countries in the world trading system. He expressed concern that the trends in 1996 (Table I
in WT/COMTD/W/14) showed that missions to Latin American Countries and the Caribbean countries
were only about half of those in 1995. The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean would like
to know what the plans of the secretariat for the region were. He emphasized the need to enhance
efforts for countries in the region as they needed technical assistance to identify interests and assess
the possible implications of the Singapore Ministerial Meeting. He welcomed the fact that the
questionnaire was very detailed and complete.

16. && The representative of Egypt expressed appreciation for the efforts of the Chairman and the
dynamism he had brought to the Committee. She also welcomed the clear vision brought by the
Director-General. His commitment to assisting the developing countries, including the least-developed
and the net food-importing countries, was certain to show results at the Singapore meeting. She agreed,
that without a clear vision of the real dimensions of the problem, no comprehensive progress was
possible. She looked forward to cooperation with UNCTAD and ITC and to coherent, comprehensive
and sustained programmes on technical cooperation. She agreed with the representative of Tunisia
on the need to distinguish between greater coherence as mandated by the Marrakesh declaration and
technical cooperation. She awaited the outcome of consultations with the multilateral financial
institutions; in that regard she would appreciate clarification on the implications of the term
"cross-fertilization". The Chairman commented that he had always in mind the difference between
Bretton Woods institutions and others, such as UNCTAD and ITC.

17. && The representative of Pakistan said that the active and imaginative role of the Chairman was
timely and beneficial. It was also evident that the Director-General had given considerable thought
to the work of the Committee and to the question of how it could be of greatest benefit to developing
country members of WTO. The greater degree of liberalization that characterized the post-Uruguay
Round world economy meant that developing countries could make less use of the principle of non-
reciprocity. This was more challenging; it even seemed threatening. It also presented great
opportunities. One of the greatest contributions of the technical assistance programme would be to
increase the familiarity of developing countries with the new realities of the trading system and of their
rights and obligations. This was particularly the case for those areas of the negotiations where they
participated less actively such as TRIPS, TRIMS and Services. Opportunities in the Services sector
could be subjects of new seminars and information dissemination activities. He also thought programmes
should involve the private sector, in particular small businesses which would benefit from international
exposure. He agreed with the Director-General and the Chairman that agriculture and textiles were
among the most important sectors for developing countries. There was a need he said to safeguard
the interests of net-food importing countries, of textile importing countries and of cotton-producing
countries. Welcoming the greater integration with other international organizations, he thought more
use could also be made of seminars and discussions held in reputed universities. It would be useful,
he said, to compile and disseminate a compendium of such events, and to extend financing for
participation. New information technology should be increasingly used for a two-way flow of
information. Pakistan had found the questionnaire very useful and had already sent the response of
the Government.

18. && The representative of Norway agreed with the Director-General that one of the most important
elements of the Uruguay Round was the high level of participation by developing countries, and that
this had political implications. He hoped that the Singapore meeting would attract a high level of
participation, both quantitatively and qualitatively, and be truly representative of a global organization
working in the globalized economy. The Secretariat document reviewing Technical Cooperation indicate&& d
that the focus has been on core issues, on most needy countries, and on activities in which the WTO
had the greatest degree of expertise. He agreed with this approach which should be continued with
sufficient flexibility to adapt to changing needs and priorities. Special attention should be directed
at human capacity building, particularly in least-developed countries. He called for the stringent
management of activities so that the credibility of the system was strengthened. This would help attract
additional voluntary funding. He said the CTD was the forum where users and donors of technical
assistance could discuss the proper use of funds, and how funds could be properly disbursed. Monitoring
and feedback required wide participation of Members. He asked that all possibilities be explored for
increasing participation of developing countries, especially the least-developed among them. He was
very pleased with the draft questionnaire; he had two suggestions which he would later take up with
the Secretariat.

19.&&  The representative of Paraguay said that although he agreed on the need to coordinate
programmes of different organizations, he felt the WTO should play the dominant role and called for
additional financial resources. He also agreed that technical cooperation was distinct from technical
assistance and called for greater involvement of the recipients in the programming and delivery of
technical assistance and cooperation. There could be no one pattern for technical cooperation;
programmes needed to be tailor-made for countries. He called on developed countries to fulfil their
commitments under the Uruguay Round agreements, including those relating to technical assistance.
He stressed that the interests of least-developed countries should not be ignored, as there was the risk
of their further marginalization from the mainstream of economic activity. He noted that their needs
as well as their numbers were increasing.

20. && The representative of Peru welcomed the interest shown by the Director-General and the
Chairman and said that technical cooperation had a role to play in the implementation of the rules and
disciplines of the WTO. He underlined that the fuller participation of developing countries in the
multilateral system benefited all countries. There was, he said, a greater need for interaction between
the Secretariat and the CTD, not only to keep participants informed, but also as a mechanism for
monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of technical cooperation. Certain priorities were shared
by all developing countries and setting them was an issue of common interest. As the WTO lacked
sufficient resources, he suggested there be a cost-benefit analysis of programmes. He thought
fund-raising should be strengthened and suggested coordination and a cost sharing among organizations
doing similar work. He saw a need to involve the private sector and in particular small and medium-sized
enterprises which faced the greatest problems with obtaining market access. Commenting on the high
technical content of the questionnaire, he thought it would be useful in developing a basic framework
for technical assistance.

21. && The representative of Bangladesh, welcoming the active involvement of the Chairman and of
the Director-General, said he hoped technical assistance would keep pace with the increasing needs
of recipient countries. Underlining the Director-General's remarks concerning the need to increase
the flow of foreign direct investment, he said that 48 least-developed countries attracted only one per cent
of the flows to developing countries. The most urgent need of these countries was to improve the
supply response, and the WTO could send appropriate signals to multilateral financial institutions and
donor countries. He welcomed the Director-General’ s call for zero tariff for least-developed country
exports and agreed that what was necessary was cross-fertilization, not cross-retaliation. While
least-developed countries themselves had the primary responsibility to do what was necessary to benefit
more from globalization and liberalization, an enabling external environment was essential. Rules,
he said, were not important in themselves: they should enhance the welfare of people and contribute
to their development.

22. && The representative of Hong Kong shared the vision of the Director-General of interdependent
economies in a world of balanced development. It needed commitment from all countries and should
be reflected in all deliberations in the WTO. He was glad to see a systematic and coordinated approach
to technical cooperation. Hong Kong had taken due note of the Director-General's message to more
advanced developing countries. He emphasized that perhaps even more important than technical
assistance was the balanced implementation of Uruguay Round commitments; and establishing a truly
balanced agenda for the Singapore Ministerial Conference. While he did not disagree that in the
long-term the post-Uruguay Round multilateral trading system was going to benefit developing countries,
he saw a certain amount of foot-dragging in areas of special interest to developing countries. Some
participants were pushing a narrow agenda of interest to them, and this had given rise to the
dissatisfaction among developing countries. A truly balanced agenda for the Singapore conference,
and action in areas of particular interest to developing countries, such as textiles, was essential, or
else technical cooperation would seem more like a consolation prize. It was the task of this Committee
to define the challenges and opportunities facing developing countries and to target technical assistance
accordingly.

23.&&  The representative of the Cameroon congratulated the Chairman for his efforts to make the
voice of the developing countries heard, as borne out by the presence of the Director-General. Echoing
the interventions already made on technical cooperation and assistance, he noted with satisfaction the
interest in increasing the participation of developing countries in the global world economy. He also
noted with satisfaction the evidence of increased cooperation among institutions and looked forward
to this being continued; he stressed that complementarity and cross-fertilization should be encouraged.
The support of the entire international community for immediate efforts on behalf of least-developed
countries was evident at the recent UNCTAD Conference. He emphasized the importance of training
and capacity building and said that they should be given priority on a long-term basis. This would
have lasting and tangible results. He saw great benefit from the integration of programmes of various
agencies. He called on developed countries to respect the commitments they had made under the Uruguay
Round Agreements, especially those in favour of developing countries. He called on developed countries
to keep the commitments made in favour of developing countries, in addition to their other commitments.
Looking forward to the Singapore meeting, he called for a balanced agenda that took into account the
interests of developing countries.

24.&&  The representative of India welcomed the presence of the Director-General and the opportunity
provided to discuss technical cooperation in a focused and coherent manner. The questionnaire would
help the systematic organization of work in this area. He shared the view that technical cooperation
could not be discussed in isolation, but that it should be placed in the context of the results of the
Uruguay Round. He hoped that the optimism expressed by the Director-General as regards the results
of the Uruguay Round would be borne out. It was not just the perception of developing countries that
they had benefitted little from the Uruguay Round; specific studies by reputed organizations drew
the same conclusion. While technical cooperation could help in garnering the benefits that were available,
it was also necessary to improve market conditions for products of export interest to developing countries.
He himself had been closely involved in the preparation for negotiations on coherence in global economic
policymaking and felt strongly that this issue must be distinguished from the issue of technical
cooperation. Furthermore, discussions on investment should not take away the focus from technical
cooperation. He was not convinced that a multilateral investment regime would encourage flows to
countries that did not receive them. Certain least-developed countries with very open regimes had
failed to attract foreign investment. He agreed strongly with the representative of Singapore on the
great importance of equity, a concept that needed to permeate the whole Organization and to which
all countries should be committed.


25. && The representative of Chile noted the concern of the Director-General as regards the issue of
technical cooperation and agreed that in a world of increasing globalization, there was a need for
sustained technical cooperation. Economic development required not only trade butalso stable economic
institutions and coherent macroeconomic policies so that the proper environment existed in which trade
could flourish. Welcoming increased cooperation among WTO, UNCTAD, the ITC and the World
Bank, he said that sustained and coordinated technical assistance could improve management and
institutional capacities, increase the role of the private sector and help economic development. Technical
assistance needed to be tailor-made to meet the specific needs of countries. He reiterated that technical
assistance should be demand-driven in the sense that it should be delivered in response to requests from
countries; the questionnaire would help in the proper targeting of technical assistance. He looked
forward to the participation of the Secretary-General of UNCTAD at the next session and to increased
cooperation with UNCTAD and ITC.

26. && The representative of Canada said that the draft questionnaire was illustrative of the Chairman s
effort to make the work of the Committee more focused. His delegation shared the Director-General s
view that increased participation of developing countries in the global economy would eventually benefit
developed countries. The Director-General had already pointed out that developed countries would
also benefit from a greater integration of developing countries into the world economy. This
inter-dependence must be borne in mind. Trade policy was an integral part of development policy.
The inclusion of issues such as investment on the Singapore agenda was important, not only because
of the need for balance, but also because it was of interest to all countries, particularly those developing
countries which only attract a negligible flow of investment. He believed that delegations were
sympathetic to the idea of providing duty-free access to certain products of export interest to the
least-developed countries. He welcomed stronger links not only with UNCTAD and ITC but also with
the IMF and the World Bank. He suggested that the Committee develop specific application forms
to be used when developing countries sought technical assistance, whether on a bilateral or multilateral
basis; and, as a second step, set up a registry to keep track of requests and of what had been done
by way of response. This suggestion would help in dealing with requests more systematically.

27. && The representative of the United States was pleased that the Director-General had placed technical
assistance in the broader context of development policy and objectives. Noting the universal nature
of participation in the Uruguay Round, he agreed with the Director-General that there were countries
who, because of their structural problems, had not benefited from the international trading system.
Having heard the frustrations expressed by certain countries that technical cooperation was inadequate
to enable them to fulfil Uruguay Round obligations and to achieve commercial objectives, he commended
the questionnaire as a step in the right direction. It would enable more customized and coordinated
delivery of technical assistance and could be regarded as one aspect of coherence. He agreed that the
WTO should encourage organizations with appropriate responsibilities to step in where it did not have
the resources. He saw a greater role for the WTO in technical cooperation related specifically to
fulfilling obligations flowing from the Uruguay Round agreements.

28.&&  The representative of Brazil welcomed the initiative taken by the Chairman to formulate the
questionnaire and the vision brought by the Director-General. The WTO's role was important, not
only to countries adopting adjustment programmes, but also to countries implementing regional trade
agreements. He agreed with the Director-General on the importance of regional trade agreements in
preparing the way for wider liberalization. He saw a role for technical assistance in reinforcing the
liberalization at the global level and strengthening institutional capacities of developing countries.

29.&&  The representative of Madagascar said that the questionnaire would assist in the identification
of technical assistance needs of countries, and would enable the WTO to design and implement its
programmes with those needs in mind. Coordination among organizations would result in efficiency
and coherence and maximize the impact of available resources. It was essential to focus on the needs
of the most marginalized countries. Welcoming the Norwegian initiative to establish a Trust fund for
these countries, he hoped contributions would be forthcoming from other countries. Foreign investment
was an important means of reinforcing the export sector and facilitating the integration of domestically
weaker countries into the multilateral trading system. As suggested by his delegation in the
Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries, a multilateral agreement should have special machinery
to ensure that flows to developing countries were encouraged.

30. && The representative of Argentina said that the questionnaire would help focus technical cooperation
on the priorities of countries receiving technical assistance. He stressed the importance of improving
human resources and institutional capacity. This would help the implementation of the WTO Agreement
and would increase the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system.

31. && The representative of Australia said that her delegation agreed with the Director-General that
increased cooperation among institutions would give opportunities for cross-fertilization. Complementary
work programmes would support the theme of partnership for development as highlighted at the recent
UNCTAD conference. A written stocktaking of trade related undertakings by various international
and regional organizations would clarify the extent of overlap and possible duplication. She supported
the proposal made by the representative of Singapore that the ITC paper presented to UNCTAD be
issued as an official document. Follow-up and evaluation of technical cooperation should be part of
the Committee's long-term programme strategies. She stressed that technical assistance should be
demand-driven and achieve tangible results. It could assist WTO accessions and implementation of
WTO agreements. It was imperative that developing countries be included in the debate on new trade
issues. Their input would be necessary for a balanced agreement on any of these issues. She called
on the CTD to improve its educative role and to raise its profile by upgrading its public relations activities
and by taking advantage, where appropriate, of more innovative forms of global communication including
information technology. New technology to access industrial, agricultural, environmental and educational
expertise had been discussed at the recent EU Ministerial Conference on Information Technology and
at the second Ministerial Conference on Information Society and Development in Johannesburg.
Developments in this area carried the potential for cross-fertilization.

32. && The representative of Switzerland agreed with the Chairman and the Director-General on the
need for special efforts in favour of least-developed countries. Stressing the importance that Switzerland
placed on a rational distribution of responsibilities, he welcomed the increased coordination between
WTO, UNCTAD and ITC. A seminar was organized recently by Switzerland to assess the needs for
technical cooperation in the area of trade; to clarify the specific roles of various agencies; and to
devise a means of evaluating technical assistance. The report, published as an UNCTAD document,
stressed the need for strengthening cooperation between multilateral agencies and beneficiaries with
a view to creating new synergies and avoiding duplication. It recommended increased cooperation
based on an exchange of information, joint analyses of cooperation programmes and the sharing of
know-how. The Swiss Government had put forward concrete proposals for increasing cooperation
between agencies, beneficiaries and donors at the operational level by means of integrated programmes
for a country or a region, and for improving transparency with regard to trade-related assistance. The
Swiss Government looked forward to collaboration with all the multilateral agencies in implementing
the proposals.

33.&&  The representative of the Czech Republic said that economies in transition were all facing
difficulties arising from political and economic changes and that they experienced the same necessity
to raise their level of participation in the multilateral trading system as the developing countries. He
had participated in a trade policy course run by the GATT and funded by the Swiss Government. Such
programmes were beneficial as officials acquired a significant expertise in GATT/WTO matters. Efforts
needed to be built upon through coordinated initiatives by national administrations, more developed
members and international organizations. He had benefited greatly from attending seminars on
anti-dumping, and on sanitary and phytosanitary measure (funded by the US government) and was
of the view that both private and state participation should be encouraged.

34. && The representative of Tanzania welcomed the commitment to increased participation of the
least-developed countries in the multilateral trading system and agreed with the representative of the
EC that more could be done by advanced developing countries. While he agreed with the
Director-General that it was too early to see the benefits of the Uruguay Round, governments were
already feeling the burden of meeting their obligations. Developed countries should assist least-developed.
countries in increasing their participation in the meetings through the adoption of the appropriate
international support measures and also by fulfilling the commitments they made in the context of the
Uruguay Round. He strongly supported initiatives towards integrated technical assistance programmes
in African countries. While supporting demand-driven technical assistance, it would at times be necessary
for the Secretariat to take the initiative to suggest technical assistance, and to make known in what
areas assistance was available. He looked forward to the early implementation of a bound zero tariff
for exports of least-developed countries.

35. && The representative of New Zealand commended the Director-General and the Chairman for
their vision and said that his delegation attached importance to human resource development and improved.
understanding of the WTO system. New Zealand had already made a modest contribution to WTO
funds. The representative of Venezuela said that the Chairman and the Director-General had shown
the importance they placed on increasing the participation of developing countries in the multilateral
trading system. He stressed the importance of a qualitative and quantitative improvement in the level
of participation of developing countries. Although he accepted that technical assistance for
least-developed countries should have priority, he shared the concern expressed by the representative
of Cuba as regards the declining trend of technical cooperation with countries in Latin America and
the Caribbean. The questionnaire laid the foundations for establishing priorities and ensuring that
maximum use was made of available resources.

36. && The representative of El Salvador, endorsing the statement made by the representative of Cuba,
wished to put on record is delegation’ s interest in establishing priorities based on national experience
so that expectations were met. The representative of Japan supported the basic direction in which
technical assistance was moving. He wished to emphasize the importance of self-help, of coordination
and of concentrating WTO technical assistance in areas of its competence. The questionnaire would
be very useful in determining priorities. The representative of Korea thought that it was necessary
for technical assistance to be demand-driven, particularly as resources were limited. In addition there
should be no duplication, particularly in the programmes of WTO and UNCTAD. He had suggestions
on the questionnaire which he would take up with the Secretariat on a bilateral basis. The representative
of Poland was of the view that the increased coordination between WTO, UNCTAD and ITC could
be extended to WIPO, World Bank and IMF. Agreeing with the priority being attached to the needs
of the least-developed countries, he thought that the needs of the countries acceding to the WTO were
also important. He stressed the usefulness of seminars and welcomed the decision to publish a Handbook
on Notification Obligations.

37. && The Chairman welcomed the quality of the discussion and drew attention to the usefulness of
the Director-General's statement as an introduction to the discussion on the provision of guidelines.
The WTO was a partnership and economic development was in the interest of all countries. Technical
cooperation enabled countries to seize opportunities; coordination with other agencies was necessary
to direct resources to where they would be put to good use and remove any duplication. While
coordination with UNCTAD and ITC was of paramount importance, coordination with the Bretton
Woods Institutions was also important. The initiatives in favour of least-developed countries were
very encouraging. Stressing the importance of working in partnership, he called on every country
to participate in the preparations for the Singapore meeting. He would convene another meeting shortly
to go into the specificities of the guidelines so that the Secretariat could organize a coordinated and
coherent programme of technical assistance. Reporting on the CTD's informal consultations on the
preparations for Singapore, he stated that he was in touch with the Chairpersons of other WTO bodies
to obtain information on specific provisions in favour of developing countries to be implemented
multilaterally. In addition, the Secretariat was preparing a study based on comments from members,
and he would himself have further consultations.

38. && Reconvening the meeting on 7 June, the Chairman recalled the interesting discussion that had
taken place after the Director-General delivered his statement to the Sixth Session of the Committee
on Trade and Development (CTD). Returning to item B of the agenda ("Provision of guidelines for
World Trade Organization (WTO) technical cooperation), he invited delegations to inform the Committee
of their views on the following: (i) the questionnaire on technical cooperation; (ii) past experience
of members with technical assistance either as recipients of such assistance from WTO or as providers
of such assistance on a bilateral basis; (iii) the scope of WTO activities, whether it should be extended,
what areas it should cover, whether the WTO should approach other governmental and/or non-
governmental institutions for the funding and on cost sharing; and (iv) the form the guidelines should
take: whether priorities were to be formulated on the basis of the scope of activities, on the
country/regional distribution, or on the basis of modes of delivery; and whether they should be set
in budgetary terms. He recalled that, under agenda item C (Other Business), the representative of
the United States intended to make an intervention. He expected to receive reactions to the questionnaire
at the meeting scheduled for July.

39. && The representative of the European Community (EC) looked forward to the responses to the
questionnaire, which he thought, could serve the invaluable purpose of acquainting donors with the
real technical assistance needs of developing countries. The European Communities would use the
opportunity to make a statement which would reflect their perspectives of technical cooperation. The
representative of Norway, agreeing on the usefulness of the questionnaire, suggested some drafting
changes. He wanted the words “if no please specify” and "if yes please specify” added at the end
of the first question under the title heading "Institutional Framework” and "Drafting of Laws, Regulations
and Procedures", respectively. The representative of Japan commended the questionnaire and encouraged.
recipient countries to respond, since it would assist providers of technical assistance to know exactly
what their needs were.

40. && The representative of Egypt expressed satisfaction with the Chairman's effort to revitalize the
work of the Committee, and his emphasis on the complementarity between the work done by this
Committee and by United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). Technical
assistance was an essential element of the balance of rights and obligations in WTO agreements. The
Chairman's efforts to receive information on how issues pertaining to developing countries were being
dealt with in other Committees of the WTO was to be welcomed. Such a global view by the CTD
would be an important contribution to the Ministerial meeting in Singapore. The overall level of technical
assistance since the entry into force of the Uruguay Round agreements fell short of the needs and
expectations of recipient countries. It was necessary to translate into deeds the priority attached
universally, including by the Director-General of WTO, to Africa. He then asked that priority areas
for WTO technical cooperation be identified, as well as the relevant competence of the various
organizations including UNCTAD and International Trade Centre (ITC). While he fully supported
cooperation, synergy and non-duplication among the relevant organizations, the WTO ought to be able
to finance programmes which fell within its competence from its own resources. He was concerned
about the reference, made in WTO/AIR/326, to projects funded by the World Bank for Egyptian officials
on safeguards, anti-dumping and countervailing duties and the workshop funded by Norway for countries
in transition. Technical cooperation should probably not be implemented within country programmes
of the relevant International Financial Institutions. He stressed the importance of follow-up which
should be made an integral part of technical cooperation programmes. Turning to the questionnaire,
he agreed that it was necessary to have a global view of technical assistance requirements. Maximum
benefit could be obtained if each organization concentrated in the areas within their competences. It
was necessary to agree whether such an overview should be taken by the UNCTAD or the WTO.
Important elements in the questionnaire related to research capabilities, drafting of laws and regulations
and instruments for enforcing and monitoring policies. While acknowledging the role of technical
cooperation activities at the regional, intra-regional and sub-regional levels, he placed primary importance
to activities at the national level: needs and conditions could vary, as could the legal and institutional
framework. He requested that technical assistance should particularly focus on the following:
(i) assisting countries to comply with notification obligations; (ji) making full use of the provisions
in various agreements for transitional periods; (iii) arresting the increasing marginalization of some
countries and integrating them into the global economy by identifying and utilizing trade opportunities,
and by using new information technology methods for promoting trade; and (iv) reinforcing the
institutional and human capacities of developing countries both at the governmental level and the private
sector level. Highly specialized advisory missions and training programmes and material were superior
to seminars as modes of delivery. There was insufficient experience for setting rigid priorities for
the allocation of funds. Moreover, technical assistance should be provided to developing countries
who were parties to dispute settlement cases initiated in the WTO.

41. && The representative of Pakistan, commending the well-structured and comprehensive questionnaire,
thought that a more rational and need-oriented technical assistance programme could be formulated
on the basis of responses. The representative of Canada indicated that, at the fortchmoning sessions
of the Committee, his delegation was prepared to take up issues related to additional funding and cost
sharing raised in the Secretariat paper on policy objectives for 1997. The paper was silent on eventual
guidelines on technical cooperation. It was important to ensure that the objectives in that paper
corresponded to the guidelines being developed in the CTD. His delegation would wish to revert to
the questions raised in that paper: in particular whether the WTO should approach governmental and
non-governmental organizations for purposes of funding technical cooperation activities and the issue
of cost sharing. The Chairman said that it was his understanding that the work on guidelines done
in the CTD would be an essential input in the evolution of policy guidelines for 1997. The representative
of Philippines, speaking on behalf of ASEAN, commended the Chairman for focusing on technical
cooperation. It was her belief that responses to the questionnaire would induce recipient countries
to examine the role of and requirements for technical cooperation. This was timely and opportune,
and would be reflected in the way their authorities responded.

42. && The Chairman said that the views expressed would form an essential input into the future work
of the Committee. Turning to the guidelines for technical cooperation, he thought that it would be
appropriate to hear the experience of donor countries and recipients of technical assistance. Delegations
were also invited to give their views on the question of whether the scope of WTO technical cooperation
should be extended and if so, to which areas; and on the approach which the WTO should adopt as
regards cost sharing: should it approach governments and NGOs to seek funding of technical cooperation
activities? The representative of Korea welcomed the questionnaire and highlighted the difficulties
facing many least-developed members of WTO. Every effort should be made to help them take a more
active part in deliberations like those in this Committee. Many least-developed countries did not maintain
representation in Geneva and could not participate in meetings. Requesting the WTO to pursue all
ways of increasing funding including the viability of cost sharing, he said that his delegation was willing
to play its part in the spirit of south-South cooperation. The representative of Morocco was of the
view that the questionnaire could provide a good basis for stocktaking. He thought a more incisive
analysis than that provided in WTO document WT/COMTD/W/14 was necessary: It would be necessary
to have not only a numerical enumeration of seminars but also information on countries which had
participated, subjects covered, and an evaluation of the results. An evaluation was vital for determining
cost efficiency and to assess to what extent the means deployed and objectives achieved. Technical
cooperation activities should be visible and predictable, and established according to programmes which
could be evaluated. He suggested that the CTD set up an evaluation mechanism to assess how
programmes measured up against objectives set in the Committee.

43.&&  The representative of El Salvador emphasized that technical cooperation should be adapted
to the needs and priorities of recipients. The guidelines for technical cooperation in the WTO could
be extended to other organizations. The increased complexity of WTO activities was reflected in the
requirements of technical cooperation. The fundamental objective of WTO technical cooperation was
to assist recipients in better understanding rules and standards that needed to be implemented and to
strengthen the human and institutional capacities with a view to increasing the participation of developing
countries in the multilateral trading system. From her delegation's point of view, the most effective
mode of delivery of technical assistance was through the organization of trade policy courses for officials
from developing countries. It had given the chance to delegates from her capital to enter into the
dynamics of the ongoing dialogue and to increase their confidence in the system's responsiveness to
the needs of countries at different levels of development including El Salvador. Sharing experiences
and knowledge with colleagues from other countries and regions had had an overall positive effect.
Her delegation had also benefited from short-term seminars on technical aspects that included simulation
exercises. Her country's experience with regional and national seminars had not been entirely positive;
she stressed the need for resources and efforts to be well targeted. She placed on record El Salvador's
appreciation for the professional assistance received from WTO officials. Looking ahead, she reiterated
the need to strengthen the institutional and human capacities of developing countries. In that context,
special efforts should be made to deepen the knowledge of officials from capitals who were responsible
for administering WTO agreements. The lack of a sufficient number of trained officials in capitals
who were familiar with the multilateral trading system complicated the incorporation of WTO
commitments into the domestic legal system. There was need to increase the frequency of training
courses in the Spanish language; one way of overcoming financial limitations would be to shorten
the duration of each course and have a course every year in English, in French and in Spanish. She
suggested adopting the training programme of the Commission of the EC, so that officials from capitals
could have a chance to work at assigned tasks in the WTO and participate in the daily work. Her own
country conducted a 10-month programme, which was in operation since June 1995, which brought
officials to its mission in Geneva for two to four weeks. Their arrival was timed to coincide with
meetings in their area of responsibility. They would also meet officials in the WTO and other delegates.
She was uncertain whether E] Salvador could, for financial reasons, continue with this programme,
and suggested that resources be made available for such programmes by the WTO and by other Members.

44. && The representative of Pakistan introduced a written proposal on guidelines for WTO technical
cooperation which was aimed at redirecting the focus of future technical assistance in the face of post-
Uruguay Round realities. He underlined the need for focusing on institutional and human capacity
building in developing countries in order to have a broad-based impact. There was a need to give
the private sector access to technical assistance, since they were the ones who made the necessary
business decisions. Pakistan endorsed coordination with institutions such as the World Bank, the Asian
Bank and UNDP so as to get maximum use of available resources; however, cost sharing by the
government and non-government organizations in developing countries was not a feasible proposition.
The Chairman thanked Pakistan for the constructive proposal and stated that some of the proposals
also fell within the competence of UNCTAD and ITC.

45.&&  The representative of Hong Kong stated that his delegation found the trade policy courses and
specific courses such as the one on dispute settlement very useful. Such horizontal training activities
could contribute to raising the general level of understanding of the WTO system and help the
implementation of the commitments undertaken during the Uruguay Round. The Secretariat needed
to explore how its training programme could be expanded, so that many officials from developing
countries could benefit from it. Members could also start thinking about how resources may be allocated
to meet additional demands. He agreed with the priority given to the needs of least-developed countries
and called for a geographical balance in meeting the needs for technical assistance. The main source
of funding should come from Members; and while he welcomed and encouraged funding from institutions
and non-governmental organizations, such financing should be complementary to resources provided
by WTO. The guidelines could, without imposing rigid criteria, consider how the WTO could fund
technical assistance activities falling in its area of competence.

46. && The representative of Switzerland noted that after the Uruguay Round agreements came into
force, the needs for technical assistance, particularly of least-developed countries, had increased
considerably. It was necessary and appropriate to establish guidelines for trade-related technical
assistance provided by the WTO, so that there could be an efficient response to demand. Keeping
in mind that the main responsibility of the WTO was not in the area of technical assistance and that
it should not be transferred into a technical cooperation agency, her delegation suggested that it might
be useful if the guidelines which were to be adopted by the General Council reflected the following
considerations:

(a) WTO technical assistance should concentrate on the areas within its sphere of
competence and expertise. These included both assistance in the area of the
implementation of the results of the Uruguay Round, including dispute settlement and
the training of officers responsible for WTO issues, including on negotiation techniques.

(b) Organizational and institutional modalities of technical assistance within WTO should
be defined in order to improve transparency and the management of technical assistance.
The Committee on Trade and Development should be appropriately informed and have
an overall purview of all technical assistance activities in WTO. The Secretariat should,
periodically, present arelevant and systematic report on technical cooperation activities
underway and those programmed for the future. The report should also include a section
on the budgetary implications of these activities. The Committee should asses annually
the results of activities falling within its competence and draw lessons for the future.

(c) Criteria and principles underlying activities in the area of technical cooperation that
would ensure optimum utilization of resources, sustainability and timeliness should
be given priority. Courses and seminars should aim at creating training ability (monitors
and trainers) in recipient countries and at using local expertise whenever possible.
With a view to ensuring the active participation of the recipient countries, they would
be asked to cover, in accordance with their level of development, certain costs linked
to the technical cooperation projects, for example, through contributions in kind.

(d) Coordination between different agencies with a mandate in trade should be intensified
with the aim of sharing responsibilities according to specific areas of competence and
expertise in arational fashion. With a view to further improving transparency, a general
overview of activities in different organizations could be compiled and, with the help
of new technology, be made available for interactive consultation by executing bodies,
governments and the private sector.

(e) A basic level of activities, which would need to be defined, should be financed by the
regular budget of the WTO. Additional resources could come from international
financial institutions or other donor sources. A global fund of all available resources
could be set up and managed by the WTO in conformity with multilateral guidelines
and with management criteria drawn up by the CTD, in cooperation with the Budget
Committee. The CTD could identify the rules governing the allocation of activities
according to the different types of funding.

47. && The Chairman said that Switzerland's well thought out intervention was very useful and welcomed
the offer by the Swiss delegation to make available a detailed paper outlining its views for circulation
to delegations as a non-paper.

48. && The representative of Argentina said that, in the light of his country's experience, his delegation
was of the view that the WTO's technical cooperation activities should be developed in response to
specific requests by countries. Activities should be reviewed periodically and adjusted according to
the circumstances prevailing at that time. This would be a way of identifying the problems which had
been encountered by the majority of countries, and devising the appropriate policy responses. Argentina
would be ready to examine further the concept of cost sharing. Basic training courses held in Geneva
were extremely useful and should be continued. It should be explored if their frequency could be
increased. His country had benefited very much from these seminars, and he was concerned that the
few candidates recently proposed by it would not have places on the programme. Argentina also placed
great importance on training seminars, which focused on specific topics such as the new dispute
settlement mechanism, TRIPS, TRIMS and on Trade and Environment. The WTO should examine
the feasibility of holding joint seminars with UNITAR, which had a proven track record in this area.
Such seminars enabled junior officials to gain a better understanding of the relevant issues and equipped
them to better handle issues which might arise. Argentina appreciated technical assistance which was
aimed at strengthening the human and institutional capacities of developing countries; such assistance
equipped focal points in capitals to meet implementation obligations, and to comply with notification
obligations which seemed to create significant problems for some developing countries. He suggested
that the Secretariat assist with the organization of seminars at the national and at regional levels,
particularly those concerned with the strengthening of institutions responsible for the implementation
of WTO agreements. He agreed with Pakistan on the need to disseminate information as widely as
possible so that the private sector would gain knowledge of WTO rules and regulations, and would
obtain a comprehensive understanding of the Agreements on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and
Technical Barriers to Trade. Information already available was at times inadequately distributed and
there was a clear need to improve access to information. The WTO in conjunction with ITC and
UNCTAD could consider the establishment of on-line data banks on national rules, particularly those
relating to the SPS Agreement and the TBT agreement. The technical cooperation programmes organized
by the Secretariat were very useful; they were a very important element in the training of officials
and in the strengthening of institutional capacity.

49. && The representative of India welcomed the questionnaire as an information gathering exercise
that would help to define the parameters of technical cooperation. He stated that technical assistance
should respond to the requests of recipient countries. He believed that the questionnaire would reinforce
that approach to technical assistance. The main objective of technical cooperation should be capacity
building in recipient countries. It was necessary that specific requirements of recipients be identified,
and appropriate expertise made available. The inclusion of technical experts from developing countries
was important as they were likely to be better placed to respond to requirements of developing countries.
Turning to technical cooperation through the transfer of technology and equipment, he stressed that
such transfers must not be an end in themselves but an integral part of a process leading to sustainable
development. He stressed the importance of small and medium-sized enterprises benefitting from
technical cooperation. These enterprises were the backbone of the development effort in many countries;
they were active in manufacturing and in export activities, and their growth should be supported. He
suggested that the funding of technical cooperation should come from developed country Members
of the WTO, and through cost sharing with other developmental organizations.

50. && The representative of the Philippines, speaking on behalf of ASEAN, said that trade policy
courses organized by the WTO were greatly valued. She was interested in the idea advanced by the
representative of E] Salvador to shorten the duration of the course, so as to create the possibility of
organizing additional courses. She placed special emphasis on seminars on specific subjects such as
the one on anti-dumping which has been of great benefit to participants. Regional seminars should
encourage participants to share their experiences with WTO agreements; each seminar should have
a final session where participants had a chance to evaluate their experience, and to share their domestic
experience in bringing national laws and regulations into conformity with WTO agreements. She agreed
with the representative of India that the expertise available in developing countries should be harnessed.
The scope of technical cooperation activities should be limited to those areas which fell within the WTO's
competence. She supported the idea of cost sharing, and noted that ASEAN had already funded certain
WTO technical cooperation activities. The representative of Cuba said that technical cooperation should
have priority, as it was directly related to commitments undertaken by developing countries in the WTO,
and to the expansion of trade. Technical cooperation should have universal coverage without omitting
certain priorities. The guidelines should take into account the particular needs of developing countries.
Regional initiatives could bring together issues of common interest. Seminars and bilateral assistance
to his country had been very valuable, particularly trade policy courses. He agreed with the
representative of E] Salvador on the need to have a course in the Spanish language each year. Technical
assistance should be provided to assist developing countries in complying with their notification
obligations, and in modifying their domestic laws so as to bring them into conformity with their WTO
commitments. He agreed that coordination with other organizations such as UNCTAD and ITC should
be increased, taking into account their different fields of expertise.

51. && The representative of Jamaica said that trade policy courses and seminars had been very useful.
She said that consideration should be given to extending the WTO mandate in technical cooperation.
Seminars, while useful, were insufficient for building up the necessary expertise in capitals. Training
courses should be available to a larger number of participants, and some kind of practical experience
needed to be included. She emphasized the need to increase funding so that countries like her's could
build up a body of experts in WTO laws and regulations, and could strengthen institutional capacities
needed to meet their obligations. The representative of the Czech Republic welcomed the opportunity
to have a structured discussion on technical cooperation. His delegation was awaiting the responses
to the questionnaire and looked forward to the meeting at which these responses would be discussed.
Seminars on anti-dumping, SPS and dispute settlement had been useful, as had those sponsored, for
instance, by the Swiss Government directed at increasing the knowledge of state officials and
entrepreneurs. His authorities looked forward to receiving more assistance in processing and evaluating
responses to notification requirements. He hoped that countries in transition would have access to
courses similar to those organized for developing country officials. The representative of Poland said
that his country was looking forward to continuing to receive technical assistance; his authorities had
in the past found technical assistance to be extremely helpful. Trade policy courses as well as seminars,
particularly those on anti-dumping and dispute settlement had been useful to young officials. While
workshops organized by WTO had been useful, there were many officials in capitals who still had
problems with notification obligations. The preparation of a guide, such as the one proposed in the
Working Group on Notifications, could be very helpful particularly in the areas of technical barriers
to trade and subsidies. A compilation of periodic documents evaluating the benefits of increased market
access resulting from the Uruguay Round could also be helpful.

52.&&  The representative of Brazil said that his government's officials had found the training courses
useful with a view to ensuring maximum benefit there was perhaps merit in introducing an evaluation
session at the end of each course. Needs varied and a number of courses probably had to be re-designed.
His government had organized seminars, and was of the view that regional seminars could be cost
effective. He agreed that emphasis should be placed on assistance in the new areas. The representative
of Peru underlined the importance that the Committee evaluate the effectiveness of technical cooperation.
This could be done biannually with the view of making recommendations to Ministers. He agreed
on the usefulness of trade policy courses and on the need to increase their frequency, even if the duration
was shortened. He went on to suggest that annually, three to five day seminars be organized for officials
assigned to Geneva. This would give officials, who were dealing with a particular area, an overview
of the WTO agreements.

53. && The representative of the European Communities welcomed the opportunity of hearing views
of delegations on the guidelines. The Secretariat's paper lacked specifics; it was not clear whether
the Secretariat had identified different needs of developing countries on the basis of past experience;
it was doubtful if national seminars and technical missions were designed with these needs in mind.
It would be useful to have a more precise knowledge of the coverage of the briefing sessions. Regional
seminars were useful not only for reasons of cost effectiveness, but also because they gave the participants
a chance to share their experiences. The Secretariat would be in a better position to identify the needs
of different regions, and the common needs of Members in one particular region. The focus of technical
assistance should primarily be on assisting developing countries to comply with their obligations under
the various WTO agreements. He asked that the special position of least-developed countries be taken
into account; priority should be given to ensuring that those who were not Members of the WTO did
not miss the deadline for ratification. He welcomed the Secretariat's paper on the special integrated
programme for selected least-developed countries.

54. && The representative of Cote D'Ivoire said that the training activities in Geneva and specific
missions organized in capitals were very useful, as were the seminars and workshops organized at the
national, sub-regional and regional levels. However, officials in capitals would benefit if the duration
of seminars organized in capitals were extended. Her delegation was of the view that the number of
officials participating in seminars organized in Geneva should be increased. This had become necessary
given the complexity of the Uruguay Round agreements. Expressing her country's appreciation for
the technical assistance it had received, she requested that, in the future, the WTO should extend their
technical assistance programmes to sub-regional economic entities, as their policies had an impact at
the national level. Making effective use of information technology in technical assistance programmes
would increase efficiency, and would enable several ministries and government departments to benefit
from these programmes.

55. && The representative of Japan intended to use his governments national experience with technical
assistance as an input to the Committee's discussions. His authorities had organized three regional
seminars on the results of the Uruguay Round and the multilateral trading system for 22 developing
nations in Asia at the cost of CHF 120,000 per seminar. The WTO Secretariat's input was very much
appreciated. The lessons which could be drawn from this experience were that there was a need to
identify the actual needs of recipient countries and to target the assistance accordingly. Countries in
the process of accession and newly acceded countries needed basic information; others needed specific
technical advice such as how to implement notification obligations. Without adequate knowledge of
the needs of recipients, seminars and workshops would not achieve their intended purposes. It was
important to have some way of grasping the needs of each developing country. Japan had also acquired
some experience in delivering bilateral technical assistance to Russia. Three experiences with such
assistance had led Japan to conclude that it was better to send experts to the recipient country, rather
than the other way round. In this particular case, officials from Russia visited Japan in 1995, and
the Japanese officials visited Russia in 1994 and in 1996. Japanese officials who went to Moscow
were able to give technical assistance to officials in many ministries. Some had previously no direct
exposure to WTO work and needed basic information; others needed more focused knowledge. WTO
should focus technical assistance on areas within its competence, such as assisting developing countries
to comply with their notification obligations. The work being done to produce a Handbook on
Notifications was very important. His experience with some working groups on accession showed
the extent to which technical assistance could benefit countries, especially when targeted at improving
the knowledge of acceding countries of the fundamental rules of the WTO, and with respect to how
the organization operated. He placed particular importance on familiarity with the WTO Agreement
on Agriculture, as it covered both market access and domestic measures. It would be very useful to
share knowledge with countries and organizations providing technical assistance so as to avoid
duplication. The establishment of a focal point in each organization would facilitate the exchange of
information. Bilateral assistance could be notified to the WTO Secretariat, so as to enable it to take
account of this information when drawing up its own programmes. His delegation was not sure about
the merits of seeking funding from other sources nor of cost sharing. However, it was his delegation’ s
view that in such situations, a consensus ad idem and a clear demarcation of responsibilities was essential.

56. && The representative of Norway referred to the trust fund established by it for least-developed
countries and stated that the guidelines would improve transparency and increase efficiency. His
authorities had given thought to trade-related assistance and had come to the conclusion that greater
collaboration between those responsible for development assistance and trade policy would be useful.
Information about technical assistance missions could be transmitted to local representatives of donor
countries; a briefing session at the conclusion would open the possibility of increasing benefits through
synergy, as would contact points for dealing with trade-related technical assistance. His government
was of the view that the WTO should restrict its activities on technical cooperation to areas in which
it had competence, such as explaining the basic rules and the various agreements to recipient countries.
Activities such as institution building and export promotion should have a lower priority. The
representative of Australia emphasized the importance of guidelines, as they would clearly identify
the objectives of the WTO technical assistance programme. His authorities were giving the issue careful
consideration and would come back to it later. Their own experience testified to how much the
Secretariat's assistance was appreciated by countries in the Pacific region, whose needs varied greatly.
The focus of WTO technical assistance should be on the areas within its competence, such as accessions
and implementation of WTO agreements. They placed importance on having a mechanism for evaluating
the effectiveness of technical assistance. The representative of Mexico, commending the Chairman
and the Secretariat for their initiatives related to technical assistance, said that, as demand for technical
assistance exceeded the capacity to deliver, the suggestions made by the representatives of El Salvador,
Philippines and Peru were valuable. He supported the EC's call for efforts to encourage least-developed
countries to accede before the deadline of 31 December 1996. The representative of Venezuela strongly
endorsed the need for training a sufficient number of officials from capitals, who were responsible
for administering WTO agreements. Seminars on the General Agreement on Trade in Services were
helpful, as countries such as his had very little experience in this new area. He agreed on the need
for clearly identifying the competences of the different organizations. He requested the Secretariat
to compile an inventory of technical assistance programmes focusing on matters such as SPS. Contacts
between recipients and those delivering technical assistance were vital to the success of any programme;
such contacts facilitated the identification of the real needs of recipient countries, and enabled donors
to target their assistance accordingly.

57.&& The Deputy-Director General of the WTO said that there had been two main developments
in the area of technical cooperation since the completion of the Uruguay Round negotiations. Firstly,
the need for specialized technical assistance by developing countries had increased because of the
extension of multilateral disciplines to areas such as services, TRIPS and TRIMS. Secondly, there
was the growing need for the WTO to target its assistance on institutional and human capacity building
soas to equip developing countries, including the newly acceded countries and least-developed countries,
to participate effectively in the WTO and the multilateral trading system. The WTO was giving careful
consideration to improving efficiency and putting resources to best use through improved coordination
with other organizations. It was also exploring how staff limitations could be overcome; in that
connection the use of consultants was being studied. He had listened carefully to the comments and
suggestions including the need expressed to enlarge and diversify the activities within the resources
available as well as the need for evaluation and for briefing sessions. He noted that the Handbook
on Notifications was being drawn up by the Secretariat and would be distributed as soon as it was
finalized.

58. The Chairman noted the wish expressed by many delegations that WTO document
WT/COMTD/W/14 be revised and an addendum be issued. He requested the delegations of the EC
to submit in writing its views on what improvements should be introduced into the document. He
stressed the importance of having detailed knowledge about the needs of recipient countries, so that
technical assistance could be targeted accordingly. He proposed to have a well-structured inventory
of the ideas that had been expressed, with a view to making recommendations to Ministers in Singapore.
In addition, the Committee could use this inventory as reference material when drafting guidelines
on technical cooperation in the future.

59. The Committee took note of the statements made.
C. Other Business

60.&&  The representative of the United States said that while preferential agreements among developing
countries were outside the requirements of Article XXIV, there was nevertheless a clear obligation
under the Enabling Clause to notify such agreements to the Committee on Trade and Development.
He strongly urged countries who had not notified such agreements to do so, in a spirit of creating
increased transparency.

61. && The Chairman said that with regard to the implementation of the Uruguay Round commitments
vis-a-vis developing countries he had, after informal contacts, addressed a letter to the Chairpersons
of other WTO bodies requesting information on progress regarding such multilateral commitments.
He intended to take this up at the meeting in July. As regards the study on the participation of
developing countries in the multilateral trading system, he had already circulated a draft outline which
had been prepared by the Secretariat on the basis of written and oral comments. Efforts would be
made to take account of the requests and comments made by delegations. The study would be ready
by the summer break affording the Committee the opportunity to consider and analyze its conclusions.
The Committee could then decide whether or not to make recommendations to the Singapore Ministerial
meeting. Looking beyond Singapore, he noted that the report would be of immense use to the
Committee, and would probably set the direction of its future work.

62. && The representative of Peru said that it would be necessary at some stage to decide whether
such a study should be updated regularly. His delegation was pleased that investment and competition
policy had been included in the study. The representative of Hong Kong said that a study of market
access conditions should not be limited to tariffs, but include measures which acted as barriers to trade
such as anti-dumping measures, countervailing duties and safeguards. He asked the Secretariat that
it address in its study the question of how, as a means of further integrating least-developed countries
into the multilateral trading system, a package of tariff liberalization, specifically targeted with their
interests in mind, could be implemented.

63. && The representative of India said that, in a letter to the Chairman, dated 26 April, his delegation
had indicated that it would not be able to accept the inclusion of competition and international investment
as items in the Secretariat study. UNCTAD IX had been mandated by governments to prepare a study
aimed at clarifying the scope of these subjects. He was in no way trying to underestimate the importance
or relevance of the subjects, but it was important not to launch any parallel discussions. These issues
were currently being debated by the heads of delegations, and it would be prudent to wait for the
conclusions. Furthermore, given time constraints and the complexity of the subjects, it would not be
possible for the Secretariat to make an in-depth study enabling the CTD to make useful recommendations
to Ministers in Singapore. He did not wish to preempt discussions on the issues which were going
on even now among heads of delegations. Furthermore, if the Committee intended to study the issues
with the aim of drafting possible recommendations to Ministers in Singapore, this would not permit
the in-depth study required. He noted that his delegation's position precluded the possibility of forming
a consensus in the Committee on the Secretariat's outline contained in paper 2882.

64.&&  The representative of Japan said that he reserved the right to comment on the document which
had just been forwarded to Tokyo. The representative of Egypt stressed that it was very important
for her delegation that the study looked into the issue of restrictive business practices and how they
negated liberalization of market access, as well as how the playing field could be levelled. She also
stressed the importance of studying the issue of access to technology, particularly the impediments
which developing countries faced in acquiring technology at concessional terms. She queried whether
the inclusion of macroeconomic management was relevant to the study. The representative of the
European Communities said that the doubts expressed could be assuaged if the paragraph on "Summary
and Conclusions” were redrafted to specify that the study was not intended to lead to recommendations,
but was intended as an information gathering and educative process on the reasons of the
underperformance of some countries, particularly the least developed ones. The representative of Poland
said that the section on external conditions should include a section on regional agreements, as it would
be interesting to identify the advantages and disadvantages of membership to such arrangements. The
role of international institutions and the influence of programmes under their aegis could also be examined
under this section. The representative of the United States said that his delegation would like to see
more symmetry between external conditions and the effects of trade policy on market access. However,
he was prepared to rely on the Chairman, and accepted that the document was not a "shopping list”
for Singapore. Because of institutional reasons, it was unlikely that elements such as the current
international financial and monetary climate would be discussed in Singapore. He agreed with the
representative of the European Communities that it would be appropriate to redraft the paragraph on
summary and conclusions.

65. && The Chairman, noting the concerns expressed with regard to notification obligations, said that
the Chairman of that group had indicated to him that such concerns were being addressed. He assured
the representative of Venezuela that institutional and human capacity building would be covered in
the section of the study on domestic conditions entitled "Institutional limitations". He took note of
the comment made by the representative of India that he needed time to contact his capital for instructions
on the section of the study dealing with investment and international competition; and of the suggestion
made by the representative Hong Kong that the second and third indents in the paper could be combined
under the title "International economic and financial environments". He stressed that the study was
not intended to be anything more than an inquiry into the reasons why some countries were
underperforming. While the inclusion of subjects did not suggest that they fell within the competence
of the WTO, a priori exclusions of subjects would, in his view, be self-defeating. As far as possible,
the study would be based on information already in the public domain, and would not have the status
of a CTD document. Delegations could differ or ask for further elaboration. He would ensure that
there was a balance in the issues covered in the report. The Secretariat would, on its own responsibility,
start gathering the information necessary to prepare the report. The Chairman recalled that the next
meeting of the Committee would be addressed by the Secretary-General of UNCTAD and the Director
of the ITC. The Committee would not only consider in greater depth the issue of coherence between
the three organizations, but would also gain a better appreciation of how UNCTAD and ITC designed
and implemented their technical assistance programmes. The Chairman assured the representative
of Egypt that the Committee would, at a future meeting, review the paper jointly prepared by WTO
and UNCTAD.

66. && The Committee took note of the statements made.
