RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/2

8 August 1995

ORGANIZATION

(95-2323)

 

Committee on Trade and Development
Second Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 5 JULY 1995

Chairman: Mr. Haron Siraj (Malaysia)

1. && Following an indication by the United States that it would be making a statement on the Working
Party examining the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) under "Other Business", the draft agenda
for the session, contained in airgram WTO/AIR/83, was adopted as modified.

2. && Before turning to the agenda items, the Chairman urged delegations to use this first opportunity
for putting the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) on a path to increasing the participation
of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system. He referred to two outstanding
issues raised at the First Session of the CTD. He first reminded delegations about the proposal made
by India concerning the terms of reference of the CTD. Since then, India had submitted a proposal
in writing to him, and he had held preliminary discussions with certain delegations including India.
The Chairman, however, stated that he would like to pursue further consultations with a larger number
of delegations before submitting the proposal to the CTD for discussion. Second, referring to the matters
raised by the representative of Argentina, speaking on behalf of the Informal Group of Developing
Countries, he indicated that pursuant to his request, the document concerning the International Trade
Center (ITC) had been transmitted to the Executive Director of the ITC through the Chairman of the
General Council. With regard to the proposal for the setting up of a Working Group to examine possible
areas of cooperation between the WTO and ITC with respect to technical cooperation activities and
programmes, he stated that since the issue of cooperation between the WTO, the Bretton Woods
Institutions and the United Nations and its specialized agencies was under active consideration, it would
be prudent to defer discussion of the matter until the results of the broader consultations were known.

B. Procedural and Institutional Matters

3. && The Chairman recalled that at the First Session of the CTD, a preliminary discussion was held
on the establishing of a Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries. He stated that
Miss Anne Stoddart, Deputy Permanent Representative of the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom,
had been appointed Chairperson and following informal consultations undertaken by her, consensus
had emerged on the establishment of this Sub-Committee and on its terms of reference. He invited
delegations to consider adopting document WT/COMTD/W/8, which embodied the draft decision to
establish the Sub-Committee. He thanked the Chairperson for her work. The Committee adopted
the decision.

4. && Turning to the rules of procedure of the CTD, the Chairman recalled that the only issue still
pending from the last Session concerned Rule 12is, which made reference to the Sub-Committee on
Least-Developed Countries. He proposed that in view of the decision that had just been adopted by
the CTD, the rules of procedure of the CTD, as contained in document WT/COMTD/W/3, be adopted.
The Committee adopted its rules of procedure. The Chairman indicated that he would transmit the
rules of procedure to the General Council for final approval.
WT/COMTD/M/2
Page 2

5. && With regard to the issue of which institutions should be granted observer status in the CTD,
the Chairman stated that since the General Council had not yet finalized the rules on observership,
the CTD should continue to follow its ad hoc procedures. He thus proposed that the CTD agree to
invite to its Third Session the same organizations that were invited to the Second Session. The
Committee so agreed.

C. Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation

6. && The Chairman recalled that a preliminary debate on technical cooperation was held at the last
meeting of the CTD. He drew the attention of delegates to document WT/COMTD/W/7, which was
requested at that meeting. He stated that an attempt had been made to highlight the salient features
of the technical assistance programme of the WTO Secretariat and that of other intergovernmental
organizations, whose assistance and cooperation would be required in the implementation of the Uruguay
Round Agreements.

7. && Delegations expressed their appreciation for the documents prepared by the Secretariat. There
was unanimous support for the WTO Secretariat to coordinate its technical assistance activities with
other international organizations with a view to removing any overlap in their programmes. The
representatives ofa number of developing countries expressed satisfaction with the work of the Technical
Cooperation and Training Division and called for an increase in resources for the Division so as to
enable it to effectively meet the increasing technical assistance needs of developing countries. A number
of representatives stated that the seminar on notification requirements was helpful and encouraged similar
workshops to be held from time to time. Some delegations indicated that information on notification
requirements was still incomplete and called for more assistance to be given in this area, not the least
because of the non-representation in Geneva of a number of developing countries.

8. && The representative of the United States, referring to the "future activities" in document
WT/COMTD/W/7, requested more details from the Secretariat on the type of programmes which
were under consideration to assist developing countries in meeting their notification and other WTO
obligations. He indicated his country's interest and full support for such type of assistance.

9. && The representative of the Philippines drew the attention of delegates to the discussions being
held at the meeting of Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) on coordination and cooperation between
the various intergovernmental organizations. She stated that with respect to technical cooperation,
closer relationship between the United Nations, its specialized agencies and functional commissions,
and the WTO was feasible, and that the relationship between the WTO and the UN, as agreed to by
WTO Members, did allow for such closer collaboration. She was of the view that more work could
be done on how to coordinate technical cooperation activities, so as to avoid overlapping in some areas
and lack of assistance in other areas. With respect to the objectives of technical assistance and its
programming in a given year, she pointed out that while reports on technical assistance were submitted
to ECOSOC, this happened only once a year during meetings of ECOSOC. She cautioned that unless
the WTO was able to plan its technical assistance activities for the entire year in advance, effective
coordination of activities with other organizations would be quite difficult, unless a formal understanding
was reached with them to meet at least on a quarterly basis. Coordination could help to solve some
of the WTO constraints relating to funding, as some of the UN organizations had the necessary funds
at their disposal. She stressed the importance of technical assistance in providing meaningful training
to officials from developing countries and helping them in the formulation of policies. She also stated
that long-term planning of technical cooperation activities was necessary, especially where a seminar
was jointly being planned and organized by two or more institutions. Developing countries needed
more than ever technical assistance directed towards enhancing their competitiveness after the
implementation of the Uruguay Round Agreements.
WT/COMTD/M/2
Page 3

10. && The representative of Switzerland, in referring to document WT/COMTD/W/7, stated that
it was essential for the WTO to carve out a positive role for itself as far as the provision of technical
assistance was concerned. Agreeing with some of the points raised in the Secretariat document and
by the representative of the Philippines, he indicated that the aim of such cooperation should be to
ensure the creation of new synergies. He submitted that there were two levels of coordination:
conceptual coordination relating to the design of technical assistance programmes and coordination
relating to the programming of technical cooperation activities. He enquired whether the Secretariat
had any on-going concrete technical cooperation project which it was coordinating with UNCTAD.

11. && In speaking about the need for cooperation between the WTO and other international
organizations, the representative of the European Communities stated that whereas some international
organizations had very specific technical cooperation programmes, others had programmes which were
of relevance to the WTO's technical assistance activities. Agreeing with the representative of the
Philippines, he stated that there was a need to be aware of the different activities being undertaken
by other international organizations. Cooperation with these organizations should be strengthened by
developing more systematic contacts, instead of working on an ad hoc basis. He further stated that
the next step would be to ensure that these contacts were made on a regular basis, and that they covered
the two aspects raised by the representative of Switzerland, i.e. the designing of programmes and the
programming of activities.

12. && The representative of the Republic of Korea, recalling that there were around twenty-five
countries in the process of acceding to the WTO, requested the Secretariat to provide technical assistance
in the form of seminars for these countries. He believed such seminars would help the acceding
countries, a majority of whom were developing countries, to become aware of what was expected of
them. The representative of India was grateful to the Secretariat for having organized a regional seminar
on anti-dumping in his country, and indicated that he would like to see similar seminars and workshops
organized to analyze other topical subjects such as subsidies and countervailing measures, customs
duties and other issues of a technical nature. Referring to the trade policy courses given by the
Secretariat, the representative of El Salvador stated that they were useful and thorough. She further
stated that, although her delegation was aware of the problems regarding funding, it would like to see
the number of courses or the quotas of countries increased.

13. && The representative of Hong Kong, speaking in his capacity as Chairman of the Council for
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), informed the Committee that contact
had been made with the World Intellectual Property Organization and other relevant bodies to establish
the resources they had available for technical cooperation. He stated that the TRIPS Council would
have a wide-ranging debate on technical cooperation in its autumn session with a view to finding out
the nature of assistance required by developing countries and how to mobilize resources to match these
requirements.

14. && The representative of Morocco stated that given the increased participation of developing countries
and countries-in-transition in the WTO, it was necessary for the organization to increase its technical
assistance activities, especially considering the complexity of some of the Uruguay Round Agreements.
He submitted that since the WTO would have the responsibility for ensuring the implementation of
the Uruguay Round Agreements, it was imperative for it to be made the focal point and the coordinator
for technical cooperation activities, even for those carried out by other international organizations.
In reference to the courses offered by the Secretariat, he indicated that his delegation favoured their
restructuring; that instead of focusing generally on the WTO Agreements, specific Agreements could
be analyzed each time, thus making it easier for officials to come to grips with the elements in each
of the covered Agreements.

15. && The representative of Norway stated that the document WT/COMTD/W/7 was a very useful
document; he was of the view that it could be a valuable source of reference for institutions including
governmental bodies which did not have the opportunity to closely follow the work of the WTO. He
stated that his delegation attached great importance to the promotion of the WTO technical assistance
activities vis-d-vis governmental bodies other than trade authorities, and that the forthcoming visit to
the WTO by the Norwegian Minister of Development Cooperation to discuss the opportunities and
challenges facing developing countries, especially least-developed countries, was evidence of the
promotion of the work of the WTO in the area of trade and development. To enable trade authorities
to maintain close contact with their development counterparts, he suggested that the Secretariat should
endeavour to inform the CTD of all its technical assistance needs and any plans and strategies to meet
those demands.

16. && After noting that resources were scarce in contemporary times, the representative of Costa Rica
stated that in some areas such as sanitary and phytosanitary measures, rules of origin and environment,
coordination should be sought and strengthened so as to avoid duplication. She considered it equally
important to set out in advance the priorities, such as technical assistance which would be needed by
Members to comply with their notification obligations and with the changes in the Harmonized System.
She proposed that document WT/COMTD/W/7 be expanded to include a section on technical cooperation
activities of other international organizations in the area of environment. She was of the view that
the WTO could benefit from projects drawn up by UNCTAD on matters of relevance to the WTO,
including technical assistance. The representative of Trinidad and Tobago indicated that the discussion
had been productive and reminded delegations to press for increased resources for technical assistance
in other fora in the WTO, especially in the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration.

17.  && The Director of the Technical Cooperation and Training Division thanked delegations for their
comments and stated that the technical assistance programme of the WTO was carried out in a balanced
manner. The coordination of technical assistance activities with other international organizations was
of primary concern not only for the Members, but also the Secretariat and the Director-General, who
was active in that area. The Secretariat was discussing the issue of coordination with a number of
organizations, in particular with UNCTAD and ITC, and would make all efforts to ensure the highest
level of cooperation. Concerning synergies with UNCTAD, the Secretariat was exploring ways to
make use of their regional programmes to give technical assistance in the areas where the WTO had
competence. Some positive results had been obtained in Latin America and discussions were being
held concerning Africa, which was to receive priority in the WTO's technical assistance programmes.
With respect to the lack of financial resources, he indicated that the Secretariat was ensuring whether
other organizations could, in the context of their programmes, finance technical assistance programmes
of the WTO. He stated that positive responses had already been received from UNCTAD and ITC.
Another initiative being pursued by the WTO was to request countries to make direct contributions.
Limitations with respect to human resources were also a reality, particularly when the assistance was
to be provided by officials from other divisions of the WTO who had their own responsibilities to meet.
He said that the Secretariat was aware, and would be doing everything within its means, to assist
delegations and capitals to comply with their notification obligations within the permitted time frames.
In the future, the Secretariat would be including notification-related activities in its country programmes.
As regards trade policy courses, he highlighted two limitations: the number of people each class could
hold and the fellowships available (currently 24). He explained that as a result of informal consultations
on the special circumstances of Eastern and Central European and Central Asian countries, the Secretariat
had to reduce the duration of the regular training courses in order to make space for the special courses.
He was of the view that these limitations could be partially countered either through voluntary
contributions by Members, or by individual countries agreeing to bear the full costs associated with
the participation of additional officials from their own countries. Finally he said that there should be
an attempt in the near future to see how these limitations could be removed definitively. In response
to questions raised by the representative of the Philippines, the Director of the Technical Cooperation
and Training Division indicated that a plan detailing the technical cooperation activities of the WTO
for the rest of the year was in the process of being drawn up. He indicated that the decision whether
or not to grant technical assistance to a country depended on factors such as the last time the country
received assistance, the level of participation of the country in WTO activities, and whether non-WTO
funding was available for a particular type of activity. To ensure that many countries derived benefit
from WTO's technical assistance programmes, the Secretariat favoured granting assistance at a sub-
regional or regional level.

18. && The Chairman said that this subject always provoked an interesting debate. Delegations could
revert to it at any future meeting of the CTD, particularly if constructive suggestions would be made
to enhance the technical assistance programmes of the WTO. Any suggestions that could streamline
the costs and strengthen cooperation with other international organizations would be very welcomed.
The Committee took note of the comments made.

D. Review of the Impact of the Results of the Uruguay Round on Developing Country
Members, in particular on the Least-Developed Country Members

19. && Referring to notifications under the WTO Agreement, the Chairman stated that
WT/COMTD/W/1/Add.1 complemented WT/COMTD/W/1 which was presented to the CTD at its
previous Session in April. He said the document contained additional information which delegations
would find useful such as the formats to be followed and the bodies to which the notifications were
to be addressed. He referred to the two-day Workshop on Notifications, held in Geneva on 16 and
17 May 1995, at which presentations were made by WTO officials on all the relevant Uruguay Round
Agreements. This was followed by bilateral discussions between participants of the Workshop and
Secretariat officials. The Secretariat prepared a summary of the presentations made at the Workshop
and sent it to all Members. It was believed that the document would enhance Members' awareness,
especially those who could not attend the Workshop.

20.&&  Turning to the impact of the Round on developing country Members, the Chairman indicated
that a number of background documents, which complemented other documents prepared by the
Secretariat, had been made available to the CTD. These documents assessed the results of the Round
from both a quantitative and a qualitative perspective. He said documents that analyzed the results
from a qualitative perspective discussed issues such as the rights and obligations of developing country
Members under the WTO, dealing in particular on any special and differential treatment afforded to
them. He was of the view that the documents should enable the CTD to make a qualitative assessment
of the impact of the Round on developing country Members. He indicated that this agenda item was
of relevance to the issue of participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system,
which would be discussed in the next Session of the CTD. Given their complementarity, he said
delegations could have a preliminary discussion on this issue and tackle it thoroughly at the next Session.

21.&&  Introducing document WT/COMTD/W/5, the Chairman stated that it lucidly demonstrated
in an analytical manner what was required to implement the commitments undertaken by developing
country Members. He said that the approach used by the Secretariat was to classify the obligations
according to their nature or effect. It did not cover all agreements individually, but rather a
comprehensive list of the nature of the obligations involved was given and illustrated by a number
ofexamples. Turning todocuments WT/COMTD/W/6 and its addendum, he stated that they attempted
to address the needs of developing country Members by assisting them to identify which new obligations
required legislative action on their part. Whereas the two documents were complementary, the matrix
provided a quick overview of the requirements in each area. Finally, he added that he considered
document COMTD/W/510 prepared last year to be of relevance to the debate.

22. && The representative of Morocco required some clarification on the Central Registry of Notification
(CRN) which was established by the General Council but was not mentioned in WT/COMTD/W/1/Add. 1.
He suggested that the Secretariat compile all the formats for notifications in a single document. In
response, the Director of the Technical Cooperation and Training Division indicated that the notifications
should be sent to the relevant bodies, which would in turn pass them on to the CRN. A compilation
of the notification formats was circulated as an informal document at the Workshop held in May, and
would be issued as a WTO document in the near future.


23. && The Chairman said that the point raised by Morocco was important and that this could be taken
up in a higher body, maybe the General Council. He urged the Secretariat to raise the matter at the
highest level of Administration. Recalling that the agenda item was closely related to point B of the
programme of work, to be discussed in November, he proposed that the CTD agree to revert to this
issue at its next meeting. He also indicated that those documents which required updating would be
accordingly updated. The Committee took note of the comments made and agreed to revert to this
item at its next meeting.

E. Examination of Credit and Recognition for Autonomous Trade Liberalization Measures

24. && The Chairman stated that, at the time of the adoption of the terms of reference for this
Committee, it was also agreed that "the programme of work of the WTO Committee on Trade and
Development for 1995 would ... also include consideration of the question of credit and recognition
for autonomous trade liberalization measures”. It was his view that the CTD would be able to achieve
a meaningful result in this area. Without wishing to pre-empt the results of the CTD discussions, he
stated that as one of the mandates of the WTO was to ensure increased coherence in global economic
policy-making and intensify cooperation between the WTO and the two Bretton Woods Institutions,
concrete results on the question of credit and recognition would demonstrate the carrying out of this
mandate. Document WT/COMTD/W/4 (and Corr. 1 in the English version), which attempted to
crystallize the issues involved under credit and recognition, would be a very useful guide for the debate,
not only because of its exhaustiveness in detailing how the issue was dealt with during the Uruguay
Round, but even more important, because of the identification of the context in which credit and
recognition should be dealt with in the WTO. Delegations expressed their appreciation for the document.

25. && The representative of Japan stated that his country welcomed any autonomous trade liberalization
measures adopted by developing countries; it was important for other countries to show appreciation
by encouraging developing countries to continue with their liberalization efforts notwithstanding the
domestic pressures that they may face. However, dealing with "credit and recognition” after the
conclusion of the Uruguay Round should be based a balanced approach. He supported his argument
by saying that first, discussions on "credit and recognition” during the Uruguay Round negotiations
were to some extent made to enhance the contribution of developing countries in the market access
negotiations on goods. These were made under circumstances where it was thought that consideration
should be given to the special situation of developing countries while, in principle, market access
negotiations should be conducted on a reciprocal basis. It would fly in the face of all established
principles if the same approach was to be followed after the Uruguay Round. Second, it was very
difficult to give an objective judgment to autonomous liberalizing measures taken by a country when
the appreciation of these measures was largely influenced by the interests of the respective trade partners.
For that reason, guidelines - as distinct from formal rules - were presented by the Chairman of the
Market Access Group, as a means to improve the contribution of the developing countries. They could
not be established as the general rule. Japan believed that within the framework of the WTO, developing
countries already enjoyed a "Special and Differential” treatment. If one allowed only developing
countries to have "credit and recognition” for liberalization measures, it could affect the balance of
rights and obligations between developing and developed countries.

26. && The representative of Mexico recalled that her delegation was interested in this issue and
particularly interested in the issues raised in paragraphs 14 and 15 of document WT/COMTD/W/4,
i.e. the mechanics of crediting a country for autonomous measures undertaken by it. The credit and
recognition of autonomous measures adopted by developing countries was a matter of great importance,
as it could have a positive effect on the trade policies of most developing countries, especially where
they receive improved market access without having to wait for any future multilateral negotiations.
Mexico was interested in reviewing this subject and hoped that at a future meeting it could contribute
effectively by advancing practical solutions.

27. && The representative of Malaysia, speaking on behalf of ASEAN countries, recalled that ASEAN
had been one of the sponsors of credit and recognition for autonomous liberalization measures, and
that they continued to strongly support this concept. Unfortunately, previous deliberations had not
advanced the implementation of this concept. As a result, ASEAN countries considered the issue as
being one of the unfinished business of the Uruguay Round. They were of the view that the time had
come to seriously think of ways of translating this concept into reality by finding a long-term solution.
There was the need to accommodate autonomous liberalization measures within the WTO, especially
considering that developing countries were now actively participating in the activities of the WTO.
He noted that developing countries were pursuing liberal policies and undertaking liberalization initiatives
with the belief that these measures would contribute towards their development efforts. These measures
did not stop with the conclusion of the Uruguay Round, but were continuing, for example, under the
programmes of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Developing countries
would feel more encouraged to liberalize if their initiatives were being recognized or given credit without
having to wait for another round of negotiations. To ensure that progress was achieved, the concept
of providing credit and recognition to autonomous liberalization measures should be operationalized.
Delegations could, as a starting point, seriously analyze the proposals previously presented and any
other new suggestions made by delegations.


28. && The representative of the European Communities stated that the EC considered that the question
of credit had been dealt with in the Uruguay Round negotiations, and that the results took due account
of the request for credit. Furthermore, the Agreements contained many other provisions which provided
for differential treatment in favour of developing countries. The EC appreciated autonomous
liberalization efforts, but it thought that, in the first place, liberalization benefitted the liberalizing country
itself. It would be difficult to see how the Committee could discuss further an issue that was largely
dealt with in the Uruguay Round.

29. && The representative of Morocco recalled his country's attachment to the issue of credit and
recognition. Surveying the world scene, he was struck by the paradox that has taken root in the
developing world. For the past ten to fifteen years or even longer, most developing countries have
been involved in reforming and restructuring programmes - under the aegis of the World Bank or the
IMF, or independently - with the view to integrating themselves more fully into world trade. Developed
countries restructured when it was politically and economically expedient. The WTO needed a
machinery, which would be parallel to Article XXVIII, for dealing with tariffs independently reduced
by Members. There was no logical explanation why a Member would be obliged to offer compensation
anytime it increased its tariffs, but would not get compensation when it reduced its tariffs. The current
situation could not be justified, especially considering that the benefits would mainly accrue to the trading
partners, and in certain instances the main supplier. Compensation would have to be provided by the
main beneficiaries of the liberalization measures undertaken.

30. && The representative of the United States stressed that, in the history of this debate, developed
countries indicated their unwillingness to give credit for unbound liberalization measures. His country
greatly appreciated and supported autonomous liberalization measures, as they were to the benefit of
the countries adopting these measures. He noted that the basic obligation in the WTO, and previously
in the GATT, was the binding of measures under the system. His delegation was of the view that
credit should only be given for bound concessions.

31. && The Chairman concluded that while there were divergent views on this subject, it was of
importance for many countries, and he would allow for further discussions of this item at the next
meeting. The Committee took note of the comments made and agreed to revert to this subject at the
next meeting.

F. Other Business

32. && The representative of the United States expressed his delegation's disappointment with the
cancellation of the scheduled 12-13 June meeting of the Working Party on MERCOSUR, particularly
since the Parties to the Agreement cancelled it with only two days notice. Considerable time and effort
had been put into the preparation of the meeting by the Secretariat, participating delegations, and the
Parties themselves. Further, cancellation on such short notice required the Secretariat to pay the
interpreters for the meeting. The United States had a strong interest in MERCOSUR and would like
to begin reviewing the Agreement as soon as possible. To that end, his delegation hoped that a date
in early September could be secured for such a meeting and asked that MERCOSUR members confirm
a time when they would be ready to respond to the questions of the Working Party. He indicated that
in the process of preparing for the scheduled June Working Party meeting, his government noted that
the Parties to the Agreement had failed to provide certain pertinent information. Specifically, information
necessary to evaluate MERCOSUR tariff commitments against the WTO obligations of the four
MERCOSUR members was being sought. This information would have to include three years of trade
data by 8-digit tariff line, specifying individual partner trade, bound, applied and preferential duty
rates for each country, as well as concordance between the nomenclature of each country's Uruguay
Round tariff schedule and the MERCOSUR common external tariffnomenclature. His delegation would
ask the MERCOSUR parties to provide that data to members of the Working Party and to the Secretariat
as soon as possible. Finally, his delegation would also ask the Secretariat to begin the tariff analysis
for customs unions required in paragraph 5 of the WTO Understanding on Article XXIV. He stressed
the importance of the analysis for the work of the Working Party. The representative of the European
Communities supported the intervention made by the United States, and expressed his delegation's
surprise and disappointment with this second cancellation of the meeting of the MERCOSUR Working
Party. He stressed the importance of respecting dates set for meetings.

33. && The representative of Uruguay, speaking on behalf of MERCOSUR countries, stated that he
had taken note of the concerns raised. He said that the countries of MERCOSUR wanted the process
of examination of the Agreement to be set in motion. He declared their preparedness to provide relevant
information through the Secretariat. He, however, stressed that the problems that had been encountered
with the MERCOSUR Agreement were not unusual. MERCOSUR was committed to work closely
together with the Secretariat, and he expected the Working Party to meet shortly after the summer
recess.

34. && The Chairman reminded delegations that under the CTD programme of work, it was agreed
that the next meeting would have on its agenda, first, "Review of the participation of developing country
Members in the multilateral trading system", second, "Annual review, in consultation with relevant
WTO bodies, of the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related
Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and in particular least-developed country
Members" and third, "Annual review of WTO technical cooperation activities as they relate to developing
country Members". The Committee took note of the statements made.
