NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 16 MARCH 2015
CHAIRMAN: H.E. MR. PIERRE CLAVER NDAYIRAGIJE (BURUNDI)
 TOC \O "1-3" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC415065628" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC415065628 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC415065629" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC415065629 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc415065630" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc415065630 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc415065631" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc415065631 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC415065632" C.	trade and development - work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (WT/MIN(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC415065632 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc415065633" -	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO - proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)	 PAGEREF _Toc415065633 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc415065634" -	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc415065634 \h 4
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc415065635" -	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: review of the application of S&D provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members - proposal from Ecuador (WT/COMTD/W/204)	 PAGEREF _Toc415065635 \h 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC415065636" D.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC415065636 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc415065637" -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc415065637 \h 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc415065638" -	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc415065638 \h 8
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc415065639" -	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement  between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc415065639 \h 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC415065640" E.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC415065640 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC415065641" F.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC415065641 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC415065642" G.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC415065642 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC415065643" H.	election of the chairperson of the sub-committee on least developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC415065643 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC415065644" I.	election of the chairperson of the committee on trade and development	 PAGEREF _TOC415065644 \H 11

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 93rd Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/1 circulated on 6 March 2015. He inquired whether any Member wished to add a matter under "Other Business".
&& The Representative of the European Union said that his delegation, on behalf of a core group of donors, wished to inform the Committee under "Other Business" of an upcoming evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance (TRTA).  
&& The Chairman said that he wished to add a matter under "Other Business" concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system. He proposed that the agenda item relating to "Other Business" be considered before the agenda items relating to the elections of the Chairpersons of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs and of the CTD.
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record. He indicated that if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status for any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed. 
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. On the agenda for the present meeting were three submissions containing proposals for work under the MC8 mandate. The first submission for discussion was a new proposal - by Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group - circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/208. After a consideration of this new proposal, the Committee would turn to the remaining proposals in the submission by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192, and in the submission by Ecuador contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204.
-	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO - proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)
&& The Chairman indicated that he wished to provide some background to the new proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208. He recalled that the November 2012 submission by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group in document WT/COMTD/W/192 contained a proposal for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO. A proposal with broadly similar aims was later circulated in October 2013 by Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho and Mauritius in document WT/COMTD/W/202. In light of the similarities in the objectives of these two proposals, Members were informed at the 92nd Session that the proponents of WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202 were working to combine their ideas for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO, so as to come up with a new, single proposal on this matter. The new proposal was essentially a joint effort by the two groups of proponents. He also recalled that the Committee had had the opportunity to undertake a preliminary consideration of the new proposal at the informal, open-ended CTD meeting held on 26 January 2015. On that occasion, he had encouraged the proponents to consult with Members in the lead-up to the present meeting. He invited the proponents to introduce the proposal and to brief the Committee on the status of the proposal.
&& The Representative of Egypt confirmed that the new proposal was a joint effort by the proponents of WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202. The objective of the proposal was to enhance intra-reporting among WTO bodies, and thereby operationalize the CTD's mandate as the focal point for development issues in the WTO. He noted that the proponents had tried to accommodate some of the concerns that had been raised in earlier discussions, and recalled that the proposal had been introduced at the informal, open-ended CTD meeting on 26 January 2015. His delegation looked forward to a constructive discussion on the proposal, and to satisfying the instructions given by Ministers at MC8.
&& The Representative of India associated his delegation with the intervention by Egypt. He recalled the mandate from MC8 and noted that the CTD had been reporting annually to the General Council even before MC8, as had other subsidiary bodies of the General Council. Therefore, in giving their instructions at MC8, Ministers had wanted more from the CTD than its annual report. The CTD was a special body in the WTO. It was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of development-related work, and therefore had an overarching mandate. His delegation believed that it was appropriate for the CTD to report regularly on the development-related work that was taking place in other WTO bodies and provide the necessary recommendations to the General Council on achieving better coordination within the WTO on development issues.
&& The Representative of the United States expressed his delegation's disappointment that the new proposal was not substantially different from the earlier proposals. The concerns that the US had previously raised therefore remained.
&& The Representative of the European Union shared her delegation's view that the CTD needed to further explore the positive link between trade and development in order to implement its mandate. This needed to be based on constructive discussions on clearly identified topics, in line with the instructions from MC8 to carry out focused work. With regard to the new proposal, she said that her delegation's previous concerns remained. The proposal, which was to instruct the CTD to review development-related activities and issues raised in other WTO bodies and provide the General Council with recommendations, would give the CTD an oversight function for development issues in all aspects of the WTO's work. The EU's view was that the CTD must deliver on its mandate to act as a focal point on development issues and carry out focused work. Members needed to debate what this focused work should be, and not re-open the CTD's mandate.
&& The Representative of Canada said that the language proposed in the new proposal did not substantially differ from what had been on the table for several years, and on which Members had not been able to reach agreement. In her delegation's view, requiring the CTD to report on the development-related work of other bodies fell outside of the Committee’s mandate. She encouraged the proponents to consider these concerns in moving forward.
&& The Representative of Egypt expressed his disappointment with the climate of the discussion in the CTD, in particular since there appeared to be a revival of dynamism elsewhere in the WTO. He said that when Ministers at MC8 had requested Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work, they had been of the view that at least some areas of the CTD's work needed to be strengthened. The proponents of WT/COMTD/W/208 believed that the CTD's reporting function was one of these areas. Furthermore, the proponents did not share the view that the proposed reporting went beyond the CTD's mandate. He highlighted his concern that some Members were not even willing to discuss the idea, and noted that if progress could not be made on this matter, it would also be difficult to make progress in the CTD on other issues.          
&& The Chairman encouraged the proponents to continue consulting with other delegations. Discussion could then continue at the next formal CTD meeting.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
&& The Chairman said that, while there were three proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192, the first two proposals had already been addressed by the Committee. The first proposal, which was for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its paper on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, had been agreed to by the Committee at its 87th Session. The updated Secretariat paper was circulated in June 2013 and had appeared on the CTD's agenda for a number of meetings. As for the second proposal, which was for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO, this idea was now being dealt with in the new proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 which had been discussed under the previous sub-item. The remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to regional trade agreements (RTAs) to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. On this proposal, he recalled that he had previously encouraged the proponents to continue their consultations with Members. He invited the proponents to brief Members on the status of the proposal.
&& The Representative of Egypt confirmed that there remained only one proposal in WT/COMTD/W/192 for the Committee to address, which was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. He recalled that divergent views remained on the way forward with respect to the three RTAs which were notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. The proposal had been put forward in an effort to address this matter. He emphasized that the proposal had been drafted in terms of a recommendation, and Members should therefore not see this as a binding obligation.
&& The Representative of the United States said that his delegation's concerns on this proposal remained.
&& The Chairman encouraged the proponents to continue consulting with other delegations, if they wished to continue pursuing this idea. Discussion could then continue at the next formal CTD meeting.  
&& The Committee took note of the interventions.
-	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: review of the application of S&D provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members - proposal from Ecuador (WT/COMTD/W/204)
&& The Chairman said that the proposal from Ecuador, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/204, was for the Secretariat to periodically update its paper on the implementation of S&D provisions. Some questions had been raised by Members on the proposal, and Ecuador had provided some responses. He recalled that he had also encouraged Ecuador to continue consulting with delegations. He invited Ecuador to brief Members on the status of the proposal.
&& The Representative of Ecuador informed the Committee that progress had been made in his delegation's consultations with Members that had requested greater clarity on the scope and purpose of the proposal. In this regard, he indicated that he wished to share a number of points which had emerged from the consultations. He recalled firstly that his delegation had stated on previous occasions that it was prepared to be flexible in terms of the frequency of updates to the Secretariat paper. In particular, after considering the matter, Ecuador believed that updating the paper every two years would be effective in meeting the information needs of Members, without overburdening the Secretariat. Second, his delegation believed that a permanent agenda item relating to this matter might not be necessary. Rather, it could be left to the discretion of Members to place the item on the agenda. Finally, he said that the main potential link between the proposal and the Monitoring Mechanism (MM) on S&D was that the updated paper could serve as an input to inform the discussion held in the context of the MM. A Member wishing to use the paper in this way would need to outline in its request the scope and purpose of the proposed discussion.
&& The Representative of Australia expressed appreciation to Ecuador for its flexible approach in working with Members on the proposal. He believed that bilateral consultations needed to continue, and that there was the real possibility of a way forward on the proposal if the spirit of flexibility continued. Australia had no philosophical objection to the core premise of the proposal, and believed that the flexibilities demonstrated by Ecuador thus far were bringing Members closer to a resolution. Although his delegation could not accept the proposal in its current form, he believed that there was a form of the proposal that could be acceptable.    
&& The Representative of the European Union said that her delegation supported the idea of regular updates to the Secretariat paper, although the ideal frequency was something that would need to be discussed. She recalled in this regard that her delegation had previously indicated that it was not convinced of the need for an annual update. However, an update on a biennial basis could be considered, and in this regard she welcomed the indication of flexibility by Ecuador. Regarding the format of the paper, she said that the existing format was appropriate and her delegation would not favour any change in this respect. She suggested that this could be indicated in the proposal. She added that the EU was wondering how the Secretariat paper could serve as a basis for a general discussion, since it was a very technical and dense document. Her delegation wished to have clarification on this point and to hear views from other Members. In concluding, she indicated her delegation's readiness to continue discussing this proposal. 
&& The Representative of the United States said that his delegation continued to have concerns with the proposal, including with respect to the proposed annual updates to the Secretariat paper. He expressed appreciation for the flexibility Ecuador had demonstrated on this issue. He recalled that his delegation had also questioned the relationship of the proposal with the MM, and in particular whether the proposal would be duplicative. In addition, his delegation had supported the suggestion of postponing the consideration of the proposal until more experience had been gained in the MM. He further recalled that the Secretariat paper circulated in June 2013 had not generated much discussion in the Committee, and in this light his delegation was still wondering how further updates to the paper would produce a different result. Nevertheless, he indicated that his delegation would be willing to meet in a small group with Ecuador and other interested Members to better understand Ecuador's specific objectives and how they would be addressed by the proposal. He expressed his hope that this would allow Members to reach an agreement on how to proceed.
&& The Representative of Canada expressed appreciation to Ecuador for the clarifications provided on the proposal and the flexibility that had been signalled with respect to the frequency of updates to the Secretariat paper. Her delegation saw the Secretariat paper as a useful tool and did not object in principle to regular updates, as required. However, she felt that further clarifications were needed on two issues. First, it remained unclear as to how such a technical document could facilitate a general discussion on the implementation of S&D provisions. Second, her delegation sought further elaboration from Ecuador on the linkages between the proposal and the MM. 
&& The Representative of Ecuador said that the comments from Members were constructive. He indicated his delegation's readiness to discuss these comments in consultations with Members.
&& The Chairman noted that there appeared to be a positive evolution with respect to the proposal. He encouraged Ecuador to continue consulting with delegations. Discussion could also continue at the next CTD meeting.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs. 
With regard to the agreement between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and India, he informed the Committee that the Secretariat had sent the draft factual presentation to the parties. While comments had been received from India, the Secretariat was still waiting to receive comments from ASEAN, which had been requested by 10 January 2014. The draft factual presentation on the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the East African Community had also been sent to the parties, and the Secretariat was still waiting to receive comments, which had been requested by 16 June 2014. In addition, the draft factual presentation on the India‑MERCOSUR Agreement had been re-sent to the parties on 12 December 2014, and the Secretariat had not yet received comments on the draft, which were requested by 13 February 2015. He recalled that the consideration of this agreement had been postponed at the request of the parties. For a number of other RTAs - namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, India and Bhutan, and Cuba and El Salvador - the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties. He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible. He went on to say that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update.
Turning to the listed sub-items under the present agenda item, the Chairman said that he wished to say a few words on these sub-items. He noted that the three sub-items had been appearing on the CTD's agenda for several years, and that divergent views had been expressed on the way forward. He informed the Committee that he had held some informal consultations with a number of delegations, including on an individual basis, on the issues surrounding the three sub‑items. While these consultations had helped him to better understand Members' positions, it was clear that further discussions - particularly among the concerned delegations - would be necessary before a solution could be found. In this light, he encouraged delegations to reach out to each other and discuss the matter with a view to finding a solution. He expressed his hope that Members would soon be able to find an agreeable way forward, and also indicated that he would be providing a briefing on this matter to his successor in the Chair. 
-	&& Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The Representative of India indicated that his intervention related to the three sub-items under the present agenda item, since the three RTAs referenced in these sub-items had been "dually notified" under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. He noted that the systemic concerns that were raised by China, Egypt and India over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV were pertinent even now, but they remained unaddressed. Some Members had expressed the view that the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 were outside the scope of the CTD, and needed to be discussed in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR). The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification. 
Pointing to the terms of reference of the CTD contained in document WT/L/46, he noted that the CTD was designated to serve as a focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO and its relationship to development-related activities in other multilateral agencies. He added that the Committee could consult with other WTO bodies in addressing the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175. This was in keeping with paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference which entrusted the Committee to review periodically, in consultation as appropriate with the relevant bodies of the WTO, the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and in particular least developed country (LDC) Members, and report to the General Council for appropriate action. In concluding, he indicated that the three sub-items under the present agenda item needed to remain on the CTD's agenda until the systemic and specific concerns arising from "dually notified" RTAs were addressed. He also requested the Chairman to hold consultations in this regard.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that systemic concerns had been raised by some Members, including Egypt, over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. He noted that a number of delegations had previously expressed the view that the Enabling Clause did not provide the appropriate legal basis to justify the formation of a customs union involving the reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures (NTMs). However, others had argued that the non-prescription of criteria or conditions for the elimination of NTMs did not exclude customs unions among developing countries from the coverage of the Enabling Clause. The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification. This originated from the CTD's terms of reference, which stipulated that the CTD was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO. In addition, paragraph 4 of the terms of reference mandated the CTD to consider any questions with regard to either the application or the use of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, which included questions relating to the invocation of the Enabling Clause to notify customs unions among developing countries. He hoped that Members could have a substantive discussion on the systemic concerns that had been raised. The present sub-item needed to be maintained on the CTD's agenda until a solution was found.
He expressed support for the intervention by India under the present sub-item, and also indicated that his delegation's position on this matter was well-known. He requested that the three sub-items under the present agenda item remain on the CTD's agenda.  
&& The Representative of China expressed support for the interventions by India and Egypt under the present sub-item. He requested that the three sub-items under the present agenda item remain on the CTD's agenda until the issue was satisfactorily addressed. His delegation also encouraged the Chairman to hold more consultations. 
&& The Representative of the United States emphasized that the three sub-items under the present agenda item were being addressed separately. He explained in this regard that, while some Members believed that all three RTA notifications referenced in these sub-items were dual notifications, the view of his delegation was that the GCC Customs Union issue was not an issue of dual notification. He added that his delegation continued to have concerns with the present sub‑item being listed on the CTD's agenda. The present sub-item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. He regretted that this matter had taken up so much of the Committee's time over the past years and expressed hope that Members could move forward constructively, recognizing that the GCC Customs Union was not an issue of dual notification, but rather something to be addressed in the CRTA under the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. His delegation looked forward to the transparency review of the GCC Customs Union in the CRTA. Turning to document WT/COMTD/W/175, he said that his delegation had not seen any specific issues relating to the GCC Customs Union. Rather, the paper appeared to be seeking a systemic discussion on RTAs, which was a discussion that was outside the scope of the CTD and belonged in the NGR. Finally, noting that some delegations had called for consultations on this matter, he expressed his delegation's concern, given that previous consultations had not been successful in changing Members' positions. Nevertheless, he indicated that his delegation was in the Chairman's hands in this regard.
&& The Representative of the European Union said that the present agenda item served the purpose of informing Members of the trade agreements and preferential schemes notified under the Enabling Clause since the previous CTD meeting. While her delegation agreed that the legal issues arising from an agreement notified under different provisions needed to be further clarified, a clear distinction needed to be made between the notifications of the ASEAN-Korea and India‑Korea agreements on the one hand, and the notification of the GCC Customs Union on the other. The EU was open to discussing a pragmatic solution, if this would allow Members to resolve the matter. However, a more substantive discussion would need to take place in the NGR. 
&& The Chairman noted that this was a complicated issue. Yet, he believed that a solution could be found. In this light, he encouraged Members to continue to consult with each other, and also encouraged the incoming Chairman to work with Members on this matter. 
&& The Representative of Egypt said that his delegation did not see a distinction between the three RTA notifications which were listed as sub-items under the present agenda item. He believed that it was a prejudgement to claim that the Enabling Clause did not provide the appropriate legal basis for justifying the formation of customs unions. He recalled in this regard that his delegation had indicated that it was seeking an interpretation of the second part of paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause in order to determine whether this paragraph could be used as a basis for the notifications of customs unions providing for the reduction or elimination of NTMs.     
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea
&& The Chairman said that the second sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the ASEAN-Korea agreement. 
&& The Representative of the United States said that his intervention related to both the second and third sub-items under the present agenda item. He said that his delegation continued to have concerns with these sub-items being listed on the CTD's agenda. The sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. The issue of dual notifications was directly linked to the functioning of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs and went beyond just the CTD.
&& The Committee took note of the intervention by the United States.
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement 	between India and Korea (Goods)
&& The Chairman said that the third sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the India-Korea Agreement.
No Member took the floor under this sub-item.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on PTAs. He firstly informed the Committee that the factual presentation on Chile's duty‑free and quota-free (DFQF) scheme for LDCs was circulated on 11 March 2015 in document WT/COMTD/PTA/2/1. Members had been requested by fax to submit any written questions on this PTA by 15 April 2015. The PTA would be considered at the CTD's 2nd Dedicated Session on PTAs, which was scheduled to be held in June 2015. However, with regard to four other PTAs notified since the establishment of the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs - namely, PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation and Chinese Taipei - the Secretariat had still not received the full set of data required for the preparation of the factual presentations. He urged the notifying Members to provide the data as soon as possible.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update.  
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered.
&& The Representative of Uganda, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that DFQF market access was one of the important initiatives taken in favour of LDCs at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference. This was reaffirmed and further streamlined by Ministers in Bali in December 2013. Recalling elements of the decisions taken at Hong Kong and Bali, he noted that DFQF was perhaps the most effective policy measure taken in support of LDCs to ensure market access for their products and enhance their competitiveness. If DFQF access was complemented by simplified, transparent and predictable rules of origin, LDCs could increase their share in international trade and achieve sustainable development through accelerated exports. Referring to the findings of a recent WTO report, he noted that most developed countries and a number of developing countries had extended DFQF market access to LDCs with various degrees of coverage and range. As a result, the number of dutiable lines for LDCs' products in most developed country markets and some developing country markets were gradually narrowing down. However, DFQF implementation remained mixed. While some countries had taken the lead by extending the coverage, in other cases many important items of LDCs' export interest were still not covered, and some Members maintained preferential schemes that discriminated among LDCs' products. In addition, stringent procedures to meet rules of origin requirements constrained the capacity of LDCs to fully enjoy DFQF, resulting in low utilization and further marginalization.
He went on to say that, while LDCs' exports of goods and commercial services had reached US$250 billion in 2013, which was the highest ever, the overall trade deficit of LDCs had increased from US$53.6 billion in 2012 to US$60.6 billion in 2013. The LDCs' share in global goods and services trade was only about 1.2%. This called for the full and faithful implementation of DFQF‑related decisions by all developed Members, and the provision of accelerated and targeted technical and financial support to LDCs to enhance their export competitiveness. He also observed that, while tariffs had significantly come down in many developed and developing markets, NTMs had been increasing in recent years. Attempting to meet requirements relating to sanitary and phytosanitary measures (SPS) and technical barriers to trade (TBT) was burdensome for LDCs. Furthermore, LDCs dependent on primary agricultural products faced challenges to enhance their exports due to high tariffs and, in some cases, tariff rate quotas. In concluding, he highlighted the importance of enhanced market access for LDCs. He additionally noted that addressing supply side constraints and enhancing productive capacity were equally crucial. In the view of the LDC Group, making DFQF a legally binding obligation needed to be one of the agenda items at the Tenth Ministerial Conference (MC10). The improvement of preferential rules of origin in line with the Bali Decision on this matter, the removal of NTMs, as well as capacity building, the strengthening of the Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF) and the mobilization of more Aid for Trade also needed focused attention.
&& The Representative of the United States said that the US was considering how to be responsive to the Bali DFQF Decision, in line with the timeframes laid out in the Decision. 
&& The Representative of China informed the Committee that, as of 1 January 2015, China was granting duty-free treatment on 97% of tariff lines for goods originating from LDCs.
&& The Representative of India updated Members on India's Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) scheme for LDCs. He said that, pursuant to the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, India had been the first developing country to announce a comprehensive scheme under the DFQF mandate in April 2008. The scheme – which was notified to the WTO in September 2011 – came into full operation in October 2012, providing duty-free access on about 85% of India’s total tariff lines and preferential access on about 9% of tariff lines. Subsequently, the scheme was expanded and - with effect from 1 April 2014 - provided duty-free market access on about 96% of India’s tariff lines at the 6-digit level of the Harmonized System, as well as preferential access on 2.2% of the lines. Only 1.8% of the tariff lines had been retained in the exclusion list with no concessions. He went on to say that India had issued revised rules of origin through notification No. 29/2015 - Customs (Non-Tariff) dated 10 March 2015. These rules further liberalized the determination of origin by stipulating that a change in tariff heading at the 6-digit level would be one of the criteria to confer origin. The verification procedures for the certification of origin had also been strengthened in order to facilitate the entry of beneficiary countries' exports into the Indian market. He mentioned that the scheme was open to all 48 LDCs, and 31 LDCs had so far become beneficiaries. He urged the remaining LDCs to finalize their internal processes and to intimate to India their willingness to benefit from the scheme.
He also noted that developed countries had a greater obligation than developing countries to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Referring to the Secretariat report contained in document WT/COMTD/W/206, he noted that one developed country provided duty-free access on 82.6% of tariff lines, which was about 15 percentage points below the minimum for developed countries mentioned in the Hong Kong DFQF Decision. Furthermore, the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme of that developed country had expired on 31 July 2013, and many imports from LDCs that would otherwise have received duty-free treatment were subject to most‑favoured‑nation (MFN) tariffs. In concluding, he said that India welcomed feedback from LDCs that would help iron out any difficulties they faced in taking advantage of the DFTP Scheme.   
&& The Representative of the European Union said that she wished to reiterate her delegation's strong attachment to the DFQF commitments made at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference, as well as its support for the Bali DFQF Decision. The EU welcomed the progress achieved on the Hong Kong commitments by both developed countries and developing countries, and in particular the considerable progress achieved by some emerging economies. However, she noted that further progress was also possible - both in terms of market access for LDC products, as well as in the context of the transparency, reliability and quality of data. The current UN discussions on the Post‑2015 Development Agenda and the 3rd International Conference on Financing for Development provided an opportunity to make commitments in this respect. Members also needed to be in a position to show tangible progress at MC10.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Representative of the European Union said that his intervention was being made on behalf of a core group of donors to the WTO’s TRTA, which consisted of Austria, Australia, Canada, the EU, Finland, France, Germany, Norway, Sweden and the US. The group wished to inform Members of ongoing work to prepare a comprehensive external evaluation of the WTO’s TRTA, including as provided through the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund. He noted that external evaluations had become routine for technical assistance. In the WTO context, the previous evaluation - called the Strategic Review of the WTO's TRTA - was conducted in 2006. The overarching purpose of the present evaluation was to look at how resources were being used, so as to ensure that the WTO's TRTA was geared in a way that had the best possible impact on developing countries' ability to make use of the multilateral trading system. The evaluation would be funded through extra-budgetary resources from a number of donors. Planned TRTA activities would therefore be unaffected. At this stage, the donors funding the evaluation were Australia, the EU, Finland, Norway and Sweden. 
He went on to say that the Secretariat would be involved in all stages of the evaluation. As a first step, the Secretariat had been asked to prepare draft terms of reference. The evaluation would be guided by the terms of reference, and an inception report would specify the detailed evaluation issues and methodology. He also informed the Committee that the evaluation would be carried out by a team of consultants with the required expertise, selected using standard WTO procurement practices, and would be undertaken in accordance with internationally accepted norms and standards. The consultants would involve all stakeholders in their work.  The entire evaluation process, including the preparation and procurement, was expected to take almost a year, with a final evaluation report expected in February 2016. The aspects and scope of the evaluation were to be outlined in the final terms of reference. The scope was expected to be broad, covering all the WTO's TRTA in the 2010-2014 period, irrespective of the funding source. The evaluation would be overseen by a steering committee, the exact composition of which was still to be worked out. He noted that it was important for both donors and beneficiaries to be represented. The steering committee would regularly update the CTD on progress made.
&& The Chairman said that a matter was being raised under "Other Business" concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  It had been the CTD's practice to hold a discussion on this subject every two years or so. On previous occasions when this item was placed on the CTD's agenda, the Secretariat had updated its statistical background paper on the participation of developing countries in global trade, in order to assist Members in their discussion. The last such discussion by the CTD on this subject had taken place in October 2013. He proposed that the CTD have another discussion on the subject at its last meeting of 2015, for which the Secretariat would once again update its background paper using the most recent statistics.
It was so agreed.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that, on the basis of consultations, he wished to put forward the name of Ambassador Roderick van Schreven of the Netherlands to serve for another year as Chairman of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador van Schreven as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs for 2015.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
&& The Chairman said that at the General Council meeting of 20 February 2015, the names of the Chairpersons for 2015 had been announced. He was pleased to inform the Committee that Ambassador Bassirou Sene of Senegal had been chosen as the new Chairman of the CTD. He invited the Committee to formally elect Ambassador Sene.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Sene as the Chairman of the CTD for 2015.
The meeting was adjourned.
__________


 The points in this paragraph, made by Egypt at the 90th Session and also reflected in the minutes of the 92nd Session, are reflected once again in the minutes of this meeting at the request of the Egyptian delegation.









WT/COMTD/M/93

-  PAGE 10 -


WT/COMTD/M/93

-  PAGE 11 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/93

26 March 2015
(15-1697)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/11
Committee on Trade and Development
Ninety-Third Session
 






