WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/29
14 November 2000

(00-4821)

Committee on Trade and Development
Twenty-Ninth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 28 JUNE AND 10 JULY 2000

Chairperson:  H.E. Mr. Ransford Smith (Jamaica)


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said he had one addition to the agenda, contained in airgrams WTO/AIR/1317/Rev.1 (9 June 2000) and WTO/AIR/1317/Rev.1/Add.1 (30 June 2000), to propose.  Under Item G, Technical Cooperation, he proposed to include as Sub-Item VI:  "Trade-Related Capacity-Building Proposal" a communication from Japan (WT/COMTD/W/75) which had recently been submitted to APEC.  He proposed that the draft agenda be adopted as amended.
It was so agreed.

OBSERVER STATUS
(i)	Request for Attendance of Ad Hoc Observers

&& The Chairman recalled that at the 25th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD), it had been agreed to invite 11 Intergovernmental Organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These organizations were: the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO);  the Inter-Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);   the Organisation of African Unity (OAU);  Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the South Pacific Forum; the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).  The Chairman proposed that these organisation be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
	(ii)	Further Consideration of Request for Observer Status by League of Arab States

&& The Chairman recalled that there was an outstanding request for Observer Status from the League of Arab States.
&& The representative of Israel said that consideration of the application should be postponed until the discussions in the General Council on questions related to the granting of Observer Status were concluded.
&& The representative of Egypt stressed the importance of giving favourable consideration submitted by the League of Arab States.  As could be seen from the request circulated to Members, the economic and trade role of the League of Arab States was self explanatory, and would undoubtedly facilitate the work of the WTO in dealing with Arab states in economic and trade fields, and would be a means of addressing issues connected to trade liberalisation in these countries and their integration into the multilateral trading system.
&& The representative of Kuwait, speaking also on behalf of Qatar, welcomed the application submitted by the League of Arab States, as well as OPEC, and supported the statement made by Egypt.  He said that the objectives of both OPEC and the League of Arab States were to raise the living standards and improve the level of economic development of their member states.  He urged Members to give positive consideration to the requests for ad hoc Observer Status submitted by both these organisations.
&& The representative of Pakistan said his delegation associated itself with the intervention made by Egypt with respect to the granting of ad hoc Observer Status to the League of Arab States, Economic Wing.
&& The representative of Egypt asked that all the interventions made by Member countries in respect of the request by the League of Arab States be duly noted.
&& The Chairman said that, while it was true that discussions were on-going in the General Council regarding Observer Status, subsidiary bodies and committees had the authority to consider applications submitted to them.  The CTD had agreed to admit, on and ad hoc basis, a number of participants.  He therefore asked the representative of Israel whether his delegation had an objection to granting the League of Arab States ad hoc Observer Status to the CTD.
&& The representative of Israel said that his delegation had no specific instructions and was therefore not in a position to join a consensus.  He added that the League of Arab States sponsored activities that were against the core WTO principles of non-discrimination, and this was why Israel was not in a position to take a decision on the request made by the League of Arab States.
&& The representative of the United States said that the request submitted by the Economic Wing of the League of Arab States was one that could meet her delegation's interest as far as the granting of ad hoc Observership was concerned.  However, her delegation insisted on the right of Members to postpone consideration of requests for ad hoc Observership, and she hoped that by the time of the next meeting of the CTD, Members might be in a better position to deliberate on the economic content of application submitted by the League of Arab States.
&& The Chairman proposed that the CTD revert to the consideration of the request for observer status by the League of Arab States at its next meeting.
It was so agreed.
	(iii)	Request for Observer Status by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries

&& The representative of Nigeria spoke in favour of the application made by OPEC.  He said that OPEC had made its request in view of its interest in the activities of the Committee.  He said that OPEC Members were heavily dependent on income from oil, and as such, was heavily concerned by development issues addressed by the CTD.  He said that OPEC played an important role in global trade, and the consequences of such trade for development could not be overestimated.  He said that  some OPEC member countries were in the WTO, while other were in the process of accession.  He said that OPEC had also applied to the Committee on Trade and Environment (CTE), and that by applying to both the CTD and the CTE, it wished to correct the impression that it was only concerned with price and quota fixing, which were the most visible parts of its activities.  He said that OPEC was also seriously concerned with the environmental impact of oil resources, as well as the equilibrium between oil producers and oil exporters.  OPEC therefore sought ad hoc Observer Status with the CTD and the CTE, in order to benefit from the work of the Committees in these areas.  He said that the Nigerian delegation strongly supported the application by OPEC for ad hoc Observer Status, and called on members to give the application favourable consideration.
&& The representative of Indonesia said his delegation supported the request for Observer Status made by OPEC, and supported the statement made by Nigeria.
&& The representative of Venezuela put on record his country's support of the request made for ad hoc Observer Status made by OPEC.  He said that OPEC could become an instrument in helping Members analyse the new dimensions of development which the WTO was reviewing.  He said that OPEC was in fact reviewing its own role, and he believed that granting ad hoc Observer Status to the OPEC would enhance debates on questions related to development in the WTO.
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation had no strong views in respect of any of the organisations whose application was under consideration, though Canada did have a preference that any decision on Observer Status be postponed until the General Council had issued guidelines.  He sought clarification as to whether the proposal was to grant ad hoc or permanent Observer Status. 
&& The Chairman said that Observership was granted on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  This was the procedure that was to be followed until such time as the General Council had issued guidelines.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had examined the material provided by OPEC which explained that organisation's interest in the CTD and its interest in trade.  She said that unlike the submission made by the League of Arab States, her delegation was unable to go along with granting ad hoc Observer Status to the OPEC, but hoped to be in position to do so at the time of the next meeting, provided further material was provided which could substantiate both the interest of the OPEC in the CTD and its trade function.
&& The Chairman proposed that the CTD revert to the consideration of the request for observer status by OPEC at the next meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
	(iv)	Request for Observer Status by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)

&& The Chairman asked whether Members had any comment on the application submitted by UNEP, and, noting that there were none, said that there appeared to be a consensus to grant ad hoc Observer Status on a meeting-by-meeting basis to UNEP.  He therefore proposed that the CTD grant UNEP ad hoc Observer Status on a meeting-by-meeting basis.
It was so agreed.

REPORT BY THE CHAIRPERSON ON THE SEMINAR ON IMPLEMENTATION OF WTO AGREEMENTS HELD ON 26 JUNE 2000
&& The Chairman said that his written report on the seminar was available in the room.  (An edited version of the Chairman's Report is included in the Annex to these Minutes).  He was of the view that, despite difficulties of scheduling, Members had had a very interesting and useful day, adding that he was interested in hearing from Members whether they had any further comments or observations about the seminar.
&& The representative of the United States said that, regarding paragraph 12 it would be preferable to reproduce exactly the language used by the General Council Decision on the special mechanism regarding implementation, in respect of paragraphs 21 and 22 of 19 October 1999 draft ministerial text.  She said discussions on implementation were to include paragraphs 21 and 22,  and it was preferable to use such language rather than to state, as the Chairman's report on the seminar on implementation did, that discussions were to be based on paragraphs 21 and 22, as this created an impression that the two paragraphs were the exclusive basis for discussions, which was what had been agreed.
&& The representative of India thanked the Chairman for his Report, and said that his delegation wished to return to the report at a later date.  The Seminar had been useful in bringing out implementation issues which needed to be dealt with.  His delegation was happy to note that the issue of implementation was receiving serious attention and, referring to the General Council meetings of 22 June and 3 July, expressed the hope that the concerns raised by India and other developing countries would be addressed and resolved in a time-bound manner.  He quoted the concluding two sentences of the Chairman's report, which stated that "a good start had been made in the Special Mechanism but it was necessary to move beyond the restatement of positions.  Both the seminar and the General Council discussions had demonstrated that while different views persisted in some areas, there was full recognition of the importance of implementation issues and the need to resolve them."  He reiterated India's view that implementation issues be resolved in a time-bound manner.
&& The representative of Cuba said that the Seminar had been useful, but that nevertheless, it would be useful if the translation of all relevant documents into Spanish and French could be ensured.  His delegation emphasised the importance of special and differential treatment, and the need to find a better and practical manner of implementing special and differential treatment, in order to ensure tangible results for developing countries.  He said that from a policy perspective, it was necessary to introduce more equity to enable fair competition from developing countries in world markets.  He said that close analysis revealed that the economic and social structures of developing countries were very different from those of developed countries.  It was thus necessary to develop a better type of special and differential treatment to avoid distortions which arose from the existence of different negotiating powers between developed countries and developing countries.  He said that further seminars on this subject should be held in the future.
&& The representative of Pakistan said the Chairman's summary was a just and balanced report, and added that his delegation concurred with the view that it was necessary to move beyond discussions and take actual decisions.  He sought clarification regarding paragraph 12, where it was stated that there was a need to take into account further developments.
&& The Chairman said that paragraph 12 reflected views of panelists, and added that in his view the references were to decisions taken in the General Council and the special mechanism on implementation which had been set up. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the seminar had been useful, and that the momentum that had been developed in the debate needed to be exploited.  His delegation wished to emphasise the concrete aspects of the debate, in particular the presentations made by the World Customs Organisation.
&& The representative of Mexico said the Seminar had been useful and that the report was well‑balanced.  He said that at the end of paragraph 12, there was a full recognition of implementation issues and the need to resolve them.  Regarding references made in the Chairman's summary to paragraphs 21 and 22 of 19 October 1999 draft text, his delegation suggested that these paragraphs be refered to as the "main basis" for the discussion of implementation issues.
&& The representative of Barbados said that issues of implementation were crucial to small economies.  Her delegation welcomed the continuation of work on implementation in the CTD and under the aegis of the General Council.
&& The representative of Djibouti said the Seminar had been a useful and important exercise and should be repeated in the future.
&& The representative of Egypt said the Seminar had been useful and should be repeated in the future.  Her delegation looked forward to the continuation of work on implementation in the General Council.
&& The representative of the Arab Maghreb Union said the seminar and the chairman's Report had been very useful in elucidating the issues faced by WTO members which were part of the Arab Maghreb Union.
&& The representative of Zambia said that the Chairman's text was welcome.  He asked which paragraph of the report covered the specific concerns that LDCs faced in relation to the implementation of WTO Agreements.
&& The Chairman said that a point had been made in the seminar underscoring the importance of technical assistance for capacity building with regard to LDCs, and this was reflected under several points in the text.  He said that, for instance, under paragraph 7, reference was made to the onerous nature, especially from a budgetary point of view, of implementing WTO Agreements, particularly from the point of view of LDCs.
&& The representative of Zambia requested the Chairman to take into the account the specific concerns of LDCs by either adding an extra point to the report or expanding on an existing point in the text.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that the question raised by Zambia said that it would be useful, in future, to treat the concerns of LDCs separately in order to give them proper emphasis.
&& The representative of Nigeria said his delegation hoped that efforts currently being deployed to resolve implementation issues would yield concrete results.
&& The representative of Saint Lucia said the report by the Chairman was a balanced account of the deliberations held in the seminar.  She said that perhaps there should have been a specific topic on the LDCs in order to highlight their particular perspectives.
&& The representative of Guinea said that said her delegation looked forward to modifications to the report which took into the account the specific difficulties faced by LDCs.  Her delegation looked forward to the continuation of work on implementation under the auspices of the General Council.
&& The Chairman reiterated that the report of the meeting had been prepared under his own responsibility, and that he would reflect on and take into account comment made by members, though he did not intend to make wholesale modifications based on these comments.  He said that the Report and comments made by Members would be part of the records of the CTD meeting.
&& The representative of Senegal said that, given the importance of implementation issues, it would be necessary to repeat this seminar.  He suggested that workshops be held, targeted to specific groups of countries.
&& The representative of the United States said that, amongst others,  the discussion conducted in the seminar by Mr. Finger of the World Bank on the Integrated Framework, along with the presentation by Mr. Chisanga of Zambia, were focused specifically focused on the concerns of LDCs, and these could be used as a starting-point in elaborating in the report the concerns of LDCs.
&& The representative of Bolivia said that her delegation regretted the fact that the scheduling of the seminar had clashed with the holding of the "Social Summit", and she suggested that in scheduling events, account be taken of major events held outside the ambit of the WTO.
&& The representative of Madagascar said that seminars such as the one held on implementation should be held for the benefit of experts from capital, in the same way as seminars on dispute settlement were organised.
&& The Chairman said that cost considerations often posed constraints for the holding of seminars in Geneva from capitals.  He said that decentralisation to the regional level was one possibility.
&& The Deputy Director-General, Mr Ablassé Ouedraogo, said that that Members were well aware of the extent of funding they themselves had allocated for technical assistance activities, and consequently that it was not yet feasible to provide the type of service for national experts along the line requested by, amongst others, the representative of Madagascar.  He said that it was nevertheless recognised that the question of implementation was critical, and that, with the support of Members, it should be possible to organise focused technical assistance activities for targeted groups of Members. 
&& The representative of CARICOM said that the implementation of WTO Agreements was a challenge for CARICOM Members, and the Heads of Governments of CARICOM had mandated the CARICOM Secretariat to assist CARICOM countries in this respect.  CARICOM looked forward to working with the WTO and other organisations willing to provide assistance in respect of implementation.  CARICOM looked forward to the continuation of work on implementation, and the holding of further seminar.

SPECIAL AND DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman recalled that at its 28th Session, the CTD had discussed the Seminar on Special and Differential Treatment held on 7 March and the Secretariat paper WT/COMTD/W/66 entitled "Concerns regarding Special and Differential Treatment Provisions in WTO Agreements and decisions".  Following those discussions, it had been agreed that the item relating to special and differential treatment be kept on the agenda of the CTD, and that the further thought be given on how to take forward the work on this subject.  The Chairman said he wished to devote the present Session of the CTD, at least in part, to discussing how this should be done, and noted that a number of suggestions had already been made by Members.  Some called for a special working mechanism on special and differential treatment, while a number called for more detailed work to be carried out.  It was important that the CTD recognise that since the 28th Session there had been a number of developments.  Most notably, a special process on implementation had been established under the auspices of the General Council.  Since concerns relating to special and differential treatment were an important part of the implementation question, it was important that the work of the CTD be sensitive to direction by the General Council, and that it did not prejudge the conclusions that might be reached through the General Council process.  It was also necessary to recognise that the question of special and differential treatment was also being pursued at a very detailed technical level in relation to some specific agreements in the different subsidiary bodies of the WTO.  The most recent example was the meeting of the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures held on 21 and 22 June 2000.  The Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) was due to organise a workshop on 19 and 20 July 2000 on technical assistance and special and differential treatment in the context of the TBT Agreement, and that in this context a questionnaire has been sent out inviting Members to identify any difficulties encountered in the implementation and operation of the Agreement, as well as any technical assistance needed.  It was therefore important to ensure that the work done in the CTD was fully aware of, but did not duplicate, that carried out by other bodies.
&& The Chairman said that, with these points in mind, it was nevertheless necessary to consider how to take forward the work of the CTD on the subject, as the oversight of the special provisions in favour of developing countries was central to the terms of reference of this Committee.  He threw out some pointers to allow the CTD to structure its thinking.  It was important to recall that the distinctive feature of the CTD was the horizontal nature of its work – this was well reflected in document WT/COMTD/W/66.  The Chairman suggested the CTD could continue with and update the type of stock-taking contained in that document, and collate information on ongoing work on special and differential treatment in the WTO.  Secondly, the Chairman said that the CTD could make use of the kind of typology of special and differential provisions was set out in document WT/COMTD/W/66 ‑ which classified special and differential provisions into:  (i) provisions aimed at increasing trade opportunities;  (ii) provisions that required WTO members to safeguard the interest of developing country Members;  (iii) flexibility of commitments;  (iv) transitional time periods;  (v) technical assistance, and  (vi) provisions relating to measures to assist LDC members.  He was not, however, suggesting that the CTD either endorse or tie itself rigidly into this typology.  The third consideration that needed to be borne  in mind in order to guide the CTD's work is that there appeared to be a near-universal acknowledgement that special and differential provisions had not contributed satisfactorily to the integration of developing countries into international trade.  He said that Members would all agree that that the provisions relating to special and differential treatment, and its application, needed to be refined so that they were more responsive to the particular problems faced by Members with respect to international trade and the multilateral trading system.  He noted that one of the CTD's tasks was to contribute to this process.  With these preliminary comments, the Chairman opened the floor for suggestions by Members.
&& The representative of India recalled the statement made by his ambassador during the Seminar on Special and Differential Treatment held in March 2000, which said that special and differential treatment was one of the major problems faced by developing countries in regard to the implementation of WTO Agreements, and that the major concern was the non-binding and non‑operational nature of special and differential treatment provisions in WTO Agreements.  His delegation reiterated that having provisions that were devoid of any operational significance or legal enforceability was unsatisfactory, creating a false impression that benefits were accruing to developing countries.  His delegation was of the view that, under the General Council process, special and differential provisions needed to be given an operational content and be made legally binding.  Recalling that another participant at the Seminar on Special and Differential Treatment had made comments to the effect that special and differential treatment constituted an exception to the rules of the multilateral trading system and that the costs of such an exception needed to be evaluated, the representative of India recalled that his ambassador had responded by calling for an evaluation of the costs of exceptions to the multilateral rules of two major areas of export interest to developing countries, namely agriculture and textiles.  India and other developing countries were desirous to see that binding and legally enforceable provisions for special and differential treatment were developed to reduce existing inequities in the multilateral trading system.  The representative of  India referred to paragraph 38 of document WT/COMTD/W/66, which reflected comments made by Egypt, and which stated that, "It is obvious from the preceding analysis that a number of special and differential provisions have not been implemented, others have been partially implemented and a number of them have been adequately implemented.  Numerous special and differential provisions are vague and aspirational in nature and it is the collective responsibility of developed and developing countries alike to ensure that these provisions are translated into concrete benefits to developing countries."  India supported this statement, though it was of the view that only a very few special and differential provisions had been adequately implemented.  Finally, his delegation was of the view that it would be useful to take into account proposals made in the preparatory process for the Seattle Ministerial Conference and in the special process of the General Council.  In this connection, reference could be made to paragraph 23 of the note of the 28th Session of the CTD.
&& The representative of Zambia said his delegation agreed with the statement made by India.  He underlined the importance of Article 66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement regarding the provision of incentives by developed countries to institutions and enterprises on their territory for the purposes of technology transfer to least developed countries.  He said that his delegation would expand on this issue under agenda Item K (as well as in the TRIPS Council).
&& The representative of Pakistan said that special and differential treatment was one of the crucial aspects of the Uruguay Round Agreements, and that these provisions had been introduced for a variety of reasons.  The prime reason was to provide developing countries with the opportunities to be on par with developed countries in terms of aspirations to development.  He said that Pakistan, along with other Members, was convinced that the provisions for special and differential treatment contained in the Uruguay round had not been operative.  The formulation of these provisions in a vague and ill-defined manner, largely in best-endeavour terms, had led to the problems now facing developing countries.  The onerous nature of commitments undertaken by developing countries through the Uruguay Round Agreement was recognised, partially at least, at the time of concluding the agreements.  The commitments were nevertheless undertaken in the belief that special and differential treatment would be provided, but unfortunately none of the provisions for special and differential treatment had been made operational.  He said that the seminar held in March to discuss special and differential treatment had been useful.  He echoed the Chairman in saying that, as work had begun on the question of Special and Differential Treatment in the context of the General Council, it was important to ensure that work undertaken in the CTD was not duplicative.  He said that the CTD should focus on refining and redefining special and differential treatment to ensure that such treatment was made mandatory and binding.
&& The Chairman proposed that the information contained in WT/COMTD/W/66 be built upon by collating information regarding the implementation of special and differential treatment provisions.  The Secretariat was requested to continue with its work on special and differential treatment, which was to involve an analytical component in respect of WTO Agreements, as well as a factual description of what was taking place in terms of the work undertaken by Members.
&& The representative of the United States sought clarification regarding the Chairman's instructions to the Secretariat.  It had been her understanding that the Secretariat would present a factual paper compiling the views of Members.  If the Secretariat was being requested to prepare an analytical paper, her delegation would have to await further instructions before it was in a position to agree.  She added that the question of special and differential treatment would be dealt with in the General Council, and that any proposals to change the nature of special and differential treatment would be a negotiating issue to be taken up by Members.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka echoed the sentiments expressed by Pakistan, saying that the concept of special and differential treatment was in need of refinement.  It was necessary to make provisions binding.  She said that there was no need to develop new rules as Part IV of the GATT already contained provisions, such as Article XXXVIII, where joint actions to be taken by Members were set out.  Article XXXVIII gave a mandate to the Secretariat to undertake an analytical study, and spelled out the type of analysis that needed to be undertaken.  The Secretariat's work needed to come up with clear recommendations.
&& The representative of the European Communities said it was not the understanding of his delegation that the Secretariat's work on special and differential treatment was to contain any recommendation.  The purpose of the work was to update and look for new information, and perhaps to structure the document to categorise the various thoughts contained in the document.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was interested in seeing provisions for special and differential treatment become more operational.  With respect to modifying provisions, which would require modifications to agreements, the presentation of suggestions made by Members would be useful, but suggestions or recommendations made by the Secretariat on the basis of these would be problematic.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka quoted from Article XXXVIII which stated that "[the Contracting Parties] shall keep under continuous review the development of world trade with special reference to the rate of growth of the trade of less-developed contracting parties and make such recommendations to contracting parties as may, in the circumstances, be deemed appropriate]."  She said it was in view of this reference to joint action that the Secretariat was requested to undertake analytical work on special and differential treatment.
&& The representative of the United States drew attention to the fact that it was for Members to decide and to make recommendations, not the Secretariat.  Her delegation did have a desire to examine where provisions for Special and Differential Treatment could be made more operational.  At the same time, her delegation did not wish the Secretariat to take on a role that belonged to Members.     
&& The Chairman said that it was the role of Members to engage in negotiations and to change provisions as needed, and the Secretariat was relied upon to provide factual and updated information which Members could use.  He said that the intention was that the Secretariat would update the document WT/COMTD/W/66 and provide further information.  He said that analysis did not necessarily involve recommendations, and could rather involve the structuring of information and the development of typologies.
The United States said that the Chairman's clarification was helpful, and that her delegation was agreeable to the proposal put forward by the Chairman.
&& The Chairman proposed that for the 30th Session of the CTD, the Secretariat should provide an update to document WT/COMTD/W/66, containing factual information reflecting on a horizontal basis discussions being held in WTO bodies at this time, and any other information that may have become available.  This update could then provide a basis from which Member could draw their own conclusions, and seek further analytical work to assist them.  The Chairman recalled that the questionnaire on which document WT/COMTD/W/66 was partly based still existed, and although responses had been disappointing, Members were free and encouraged to reply to questionnaires to facilitate the further development of the document.
It was so agreed. 

INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE (ITC):  REPORT OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP (JAG) AT ITS 33RD SESSION 
&& The Chairman said that Ambassador Seifert (Bolivia), Chairperson of the Joint Advisory Group (JAG) of the International Trade Center (ITC), would make a presentation on the Annual Report of the JAG on the ITC, to be followed by a presentation by Mr. Bélisle, the Executive Director of the ITC.
The Chairperson of the JAG said that the Joint Advisory Group on the ITC had held its 33rd Session in Geneva from 10 to 14 April 2000.  Its report was contained in document ITC/AG(XXXIII)/181.  The terms of reference of the JAG were to review the activities of the ITC and to formulate recommendations to the governing bodies of UNCTAD and the WTO.  The Group had examined the following matters during its session:  ITC's technical cooperation activities in 1999, based on its annual report; the report of the Consultative Committee on the ITC Global Trust Fund; the evaluation of ITC's trade information programme, a new ITC strategy for trade information services; and the report of the 1999 ITC technical meeting.  The JAG had also taken note of ITC's contribution to the Medium Term Plan of the United Nations for the period 2002-2005.  During the opening session, the Deputy Director General of WTO and the Officer-in-Charge of UNCTAD had praised the crucial role that the Executive Director of the ITC had played in developing and strengthening the ITC.  The three organizations had cooperated within the framework of JITAP (Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme in Selected Least-Developed and Other African Countries) and were also joining forces in electronic commerce, an area of vital importance for the participation of developing countries in international trade.  In his statement to the Group, Mr. Bélisle had given examples of ITC's contribution to capacity-building for trade development, which was the organization's overriding objective.  The ITC had already been involved in multi-country capacity‑building programmes such as JITAP and could build sustainable capacities cost-effectively in a large number of countries through global programmes like the World Trade Net.  During the review of ITC's technical cooperation activities in 1999, the JAG had noted that ITC's forward-looking orientation in technical assistance products and services had positioned it well to respond to the rising needs and expectations of partner countries.  The JAG had adopted the Report of the Committee on the Global Trust Fund as well as the new strategy for Trade Information Services and had taken note of ITC's contribution to the Medium Term Plan of the United Nations for the period 2002-2005.  As was practice each year, government representatives had announced or confirmed voluntary contributions to the ITC.  On behalf of the JAG, she expressed gratitude to the Governments of Canada, Cyprus, China, Denmark, France, India, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey as well as the Islamic Development Bank and the Agence Intergouvernementale de la Francophonie.
&& The representative of the United States expressed her delegation's appreciation for the report of the Chairperson of the last session of JAG, parts of which her delegation had attended.  She wished to congratulate Mr. Bélisle for the great work accomplished and applauded the new initiatives being targeted particularly in the area of electronic commerce, which was one of the tools for helping developing countries leap-frog using new technological opportunities.
The Executive Director of the ITC congratulated the Chairman for his election to chair the important Committee on Trade and Development and thanked him for the time and opportunity given to them to share with the Committee some of the work done by ITC to support that of the WTO in the technical assistance field.  His impression was that it was not known to all precisely how the ITC tried to complement the efforts of the WTO.  Given that the Committee was discussing technical cooperation from various angles that day, it was especially opportune to be able to elaborate on ITC's work following Ambassador Seifert's presentation.  First, the best of ITC's efforts were targeted towards exporting small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), particularly from LDCs.  Second, all of ITC's work relating to the WTO was done in very close collaboration and friendship with the WTO Secretariat.  He asked Mr. Badrinath, the Director of the Trade Support Services Division at ITC, to give a brief overview of what was being done to support WTO's efforts in technical assistance and elaborate on one specific tool to give the Committee an example of what it meant in everyday work.
A representative of the ITC said that ITC's work on technical cooperation complemented that of the WTO in three different areas: policy and rule-making work, normative and research work, and technical assistance activities.  The focus of ITC's technical cooperation was the business community and business support institutions, particularly SMEs in developing and transition economies,  with special attention paid to those in LDCs.  All activities were carried out in close consultation with the WTO's Technical Cooperation Division and other substantive divisions, be they field-based programs or preparation of business-guides or training and technical materials.  ITC's value-added was its experience of over 35 years in providing technical assistance, its institutional competence, tools, techniques and skills for delivery as well as its combination of approaches which had been developed over the years.  Broadly, the approach of the ITC involved needs assessments, using a mixture of global, regional, and country projects, concentrating on national capacity building, promoting partnerships and network building in the field, and making the fullest use of advanced technologies for delivering technical cooperation.  In the area of the multilateral trading system, the programmes had three major objectives: improving the trade performance of the business sector, especially the SMEs; building national capacity so that the business community could benefit from the multilateral trading system; concentrating on enterprises, associations, Chambers of Commerce, the legal community; and facilitating and enriching the dialogue between the public and private sectors so as to incorporate effectively the views of the business community in shaping the multilateral trading system.  ITC would present to the CTD more detail on some features of the World Trade Net, an important programme of ITC.  Members were welcome to visit them at the ITC or virtually on the web-site to obtain more information.  The World Trade Net was only one example of an entire range of activities covered by ITC's various programmes, including the Integrated Framework and JITAP, where the WTO was a joint‑implementer.  ITC had a large number of country programmes as well as sector and function specific programmes, covering areas such as services, SPS, TBT, public procurement, apparels, textiles and clothing among others.  The genesis of the World Trade Net programme had been the 1996-1999 Uruguay Round Follow-up Programme, which had been centered around a Business Guide to the Uruguay Round.  The Guide was an easy to read publication, published in English, French, and Spanish, explaining the Uruguay Round Agreements.  Some countries had also taken the initiative to translate it into other languages.  The Guide had been disseminated through 160 seminars in over 70 countries.  The rich experience gained, thanks to feedback and questions from the business community and government counterparts, had paved the way for the ITC to plan and prepare for the World Trade Net Programme.  Broadly, the output of the programme was easy-to-read business guides: the new Business Guide to the World Trading System, copies of which were available outside the meeting room, and the Business Guide to the GATS.  It also included training materials, including for training the trainers.  A web-site and web-based services had been developed, which would be the focus of a more detailed presentation that day.  All material of the World Trade Net, most of which was available in English, French and Spanish, was accessible for all members of the ITC, whether they were Members of the WTO or not.  At the moment, the web-site was only in English, but the French and Spanish versions would be ready by the end of the year.  In addition, there were some full members of the World Trade Net, which were the motivated and committed partners receiving additional assistance in the field under the programme.  At present, 15 countries were full members and 12 were waiting to be incorporated into the programme.  Other countries would be considered for full membership in a phased manner.
Following the general introduction, a second representative of the ITC said that she would take the Members on a guided tour through the more practical aspects of their work.  The World Trade Net provided information, training and advice to the business community on the whole range of WTO related issues and aimed to facilitate the integration of business sector views into national trade negotiation strategies.  Their main partners in the different networks were business associations.  While the composition of network partners differed in every country, they included WTO focal points in different ministries, trade promotion officials, academia, consultants, lawyers, business trainers.  WTO Reference Centers and regional institutions were also partners in the networks.  All interested players were invited to join the network and were encouraged to interact, exchange information, and cooperate among themselves.  The basic condition for a country to participate in the World Trade Net was simply the active interest expressed by the public and the private sectors in that country. Considerations for extending the network included the potential for synergy affects with other ITC activities and with activities by other donors as well as the intention to create a geographically diverse network with member countries at different levels of development.  The training and reference materials provided to all ITC members comprised practical training packs, business cases written by members based on their experiences and concerns in trying to adjust their business strategies to the changes in the multilateral trading system.  ITC provided a service answering questions related to the changes concerning business operations emanating from the multilateral trading system.  Last but not least, the web-site of the programme was an additional tool, not replacing the other tools, but helping to create another channel of better communication and access to information by network members.  Using a power-point presentation, the representative of the ITC demonstrated the various features of the web-site.  The web-site had been utilised to provide information about video-conferences, which had provided opportunities for network partners to comment on and update their knowledge about the on-going negotiations on the GATS and discuss developments in their respective countries.  The up‑coming video conference on the GATS and the export of services was organized in cooperation with the World Bank Distance Learning System and would be hosted in Bangkok, Thailand, with participation from Malaysia, Philippines and experts from Switzerland.  Another one had already been hosted out of Sri Lanka with participation from Pakistan, Nepal, and Bangladesh.  The "what's new" section of the web-site included a newsletter on developments in the WTO and was sent monthly to about 400 e-mail addresses.  Overviews of the Business Guides were also available on the web-site, including a section on most frequently asked questions, which had been compiled during seminars with business representatives.  The most important part of the web-site was the information about the networks and member countries, which allowed partners from different networks to interact, exchange information, and cooperate.  The core of the World Trade Net Programme was the action plans and activities implemented by its members through the networks.  ITC helped with those activities through kick-off meetings and joint-planning.  The World Trade Net was neither a web-site, nor mere support from Geneva, but was the accomplishment of network members.
The Executive Director of the ITC thanked the Members for their attention to the presentation and suggested that they take a look at the web-site and visit them at ITC.  There were more aspects to the programme than the ones presented during the session.
&& The representative of Mexico thanked the ITC, particularly Mr Bélisle and his team for the advanced programmes they were developing, particularly by using electronic media.  In November 1999 his delegation had suggested that ITC use video conferencing and had been told at the time that there were obstacles, which seemed to have been resolved in the meantime.  His delegation welcomed the use of video conferencing, which would support the technical cooperation work of the ITC, complementing the work of the WTO and UNCTAD.  He hoped that ITC's work in the area of technical cooperation would be discussed further during the forthcoming Days of Reflection on technical cooperation. 
The Executive Director of the ITC said that video conferencing had seemed difficult to arrange at the time the Mexican delegation had suggested it; however, since then ITC had made an arrangement with the World Bank Institute whereby ITC used their infrastructure at no cost and paid only for the telephone connection.  The first conference, which had lasted almost two hours, had cost US$459.
&& The representative of Zambia said that the LDCs were benefiting most from ITC activities.  His delegation had always commended the role of the ITC especially in capacity building for trade focusing on enterprises.  They applauded the work of Mr. Bélisle and his team on special programs for LDCs such as JITAP.  While the WTO focused on rule-making and implementation, ITC had a complementary role, coaching enterprises in producing the right products, taking them to the right market, and helping them to integrate multilateral rules into their work.  His delegation urged the ITC to continue its good work on linking multilateral rules with elements of capacity building.  However, without increased financial support ITC would not be able to sustain its operations.  He therefore thanked all donors supporting ITC and asked those with the means to join them.
&& The representative of the European Communities asked how resource intensive setting up the World Trade Net had been.  There were at that moment 15 members and many more would be interested in joining.
The Executive Director of the ITC replied that designing and developing the content had been the most labour-intensive aspect and had taken three years, beginning with the Uruguay Round Follow-up Programme in 1996.  At present, it occupied the time of about one person and a half of the time of another, along with occasional consultancy contracts, for developing the materials and refining and updating them regularly.  The massive investment at the beginning had been paid for through the Global Trust Fund.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that he had been working directly with the co-ordinators of six agencies in the preparation of a round table in Djibouti in the context of the Integrated Framework.  He thanked Mr. Bélisle for the good collaboration of the ITC and the Agence Francophonie de la Cooperation for the financing of the preparations.  As some other delegations had stated, it was important to review and ensure the financing of the ITC.
&& The Chairman thanked Ambassador Seifert as well as Mr. Bélisle and his team for their presentations.  It was reassuring to find out that such excellent work was being undertaken in support of concerns and interests of developing countries, especially of LDC with respect to improving trade performance and building national capacity.  

PARTICIPATION OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN WORLD TRADE
&& The Chairman recalled that Item F had been on the agenda of the 28th Session of the CTD, but a number of Members had indicated that they would also like to revert to the matter at the 29th Session.  He also recalled that  a Note by the Secretariat on the Participation of Developing Countries in World Trade (WT/COMTD/W/65) had been prepared and circulated to members.  He opened the floor for further discussions on this issue.
&& The representative of Bolivia said that the document WT/COMTD/W/65 called for a serious reflection by Members regarding the multilateral trading system they had created, and on the responsibilities which lay with different Members.  For the small and vulnerable economies, whose exports were dominated by raw materials and agricultural products, the slow – or absence of – liberalisation in the agricultural sector and the textiles and clothing sectors had retarded the development of these sectors.  Slow reforms in areas of export interest to small and vulnerable economies meant that there persisted tariff structures which acted as a disincentive impeding a better diversification of products.  She said that the ultimate results of fluctuations in trade shares or the lack of market access were opportunities lost forever; lives cut short; underprivileged children, and excessive urbanisation.  She said that  said that these considerations seriously affected rural and urban environments, and made it difficult to do anything about enhancing the welfare of animals, since it was difficult to explain to the populace why the welfare of animals should be given consideration before its own.  She said that Bolivia had adopted structural adjustment programmes and trade liberalisation policies, and had made many sacrifices, in order to generate much-needed growth.  However, Bolivia had not received as a counterpart to its efforts, the opening of markets which would have lead to an increase in exports, and had indeed experienced chronic balance of payment deficits, making policy openness unsustainable, and politically unacceptable to the population.  She said that in this era of globalisation, it was necessary that each player assume his responsibilities.  She asked how one could justify the resistance to change and opening up of access opportunities in favour of those economies that most needed such opportunities, which, if seized, could enable small and vulnerable economies to move out of their present condition.  It was necessary to ensure that small and vulnerable economies received sufficient export revenues, in order for them to sustain their reforms.   
&& The Chairman said that the trends in the trade of developing countries were evolving, and added that the CTD certainly needed to come back to this topic at a later date.  He said that some time needed to pass before there was information on the trends the CTD had been discussing.  It would be useful to come back to this in the middle of next year when Members could can have a meaningful update of the Secretariat paper.  Of course, if there were to be any important rapid developments, the option was also open to revert to the issue earlier.  It was proposed that the next update of the paper could be planned for sometime in 2001.
It was so agreed.

TECHNICAL COOPERATION
(i)	Report on Technical Cooperation 1999 (WT/COMTD/W/70)

&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division, Mr. Léger, indicated that in 1999 the WTO carried out some 382 technical assistance activities, representing a 24 per cent increase over 1998.  In 1999, such activities took place in 127 countries of which 100 were WTO Members, 20 countries and territories negotiating their accession to WTO, and seven were countries expressing an interest in joining WTO.  The activities conducted in 1999 respected the guidelines for WTO technical cooperation issued by the CTD in October 1996, that is to say, the Secretariat followed a demand-driven-approach, ensured as much as possible a geographical balance among the different regions of the world, and also gave a priority to LDCs.  However, regarding the number of activities identified as part of the three-year plan for the year 1999, only 52 per cent were actually carried out (79 missions).  These in turn represented only 21 per cent of the total technical cooperation activities carried out in 1999.  If the activities planned for 1998 that were in fact carried out in 1999 were added, the percentage increased from 21 to 30 per cent.  Therefore, 70 per cent of all technical assistance activities carried out by the WTO  in 1999 were not identified in the three-year plan.  Concerning activities undertaken by WTO together with other international organizations, 41 per cent were fully organized by the WTO;  an additional 23 per cent were organized jointly with another international organization;  and invitations for WTO to conferences, seminars and workshops represented 36 per cent of activities conducted in 1999.
Mr. Léger noted that, in 1999, the largest number of activities took place in Africa with 106;  the largest percentage increase, however, was in Latin America and the Caribbean, where 100 activities were undertaken.  This was due in large part to WTO's collaboration with the Institute for the Integration of Latin America and the Caribbean, the training arm of the Inter-American Development Bank, and cooperation with the Organization of American States.  Regarding mode of supply in 1999, WTO undertook more national seminars than regional seminars, indicating a tendency for subjects presented to be more narrowly focused.  There was a sharp drop in regional seminars, from 71 to 51, and a sharp increase in symposia, workshops and training courses, from 106 in 1998 to 173 in 1999, again underlining the trend towards more specialized activities.  Finally, in 1999 there was an increase in both general-type seminars and more focused technical missions, although the rate of increase was larger for more specialized types of missions.
&& Mr. Léger referred to Annex 2 of the report identifying the activities held under the Integrated Framework and under JITAP, a joint programme with UNCTAD and ITC.  In 1999, 67 missions were related to these two programmes.  Regarding budgetary aspects, he noted that voluntary extra‑budgetary contributions accounted for more than 90 per cent of funding, and stressed that this heavy dependence on voluntary contributions made it difficult to plan technical assistance.  Thus increasing the regular budget for technical assistance remained a major priority.  He also noted the shortage of human resources for technical assistance.  This, he said, was a very urgent problem in view of the fact that more requests were being received from developing countries to assist them in the negotiations on agriculture and services.  Finally, he said, one element that should not be forgotten was the process of continuous renewal of developing countries' administrations, with a steady stream of new government officials requiring training on WTO Agreements.
Referring to the budget, Mr. Léger noted that money spent so far in 1999 (i.e. up to July) amounted to SwF6.05 million against projected expenditures of SwF10 million for the whole year.  A large number of activities could not be carried out because of a shortfall in financing;  human resources were also stretched to the limit.  He recalled that five years ago the WTO conducted 79 missions, compared to 382 last year;  the increase in human resources that the organization had received over the years for technical cooperation, not only in the Technical Cooperation Division, but in all divisions, was not commensurate with the increase in the number of activities.
&& The representative of Egypt noted with approval a certain tendency to holding more national than regional seminars and more specialized ones rather than those of a general nature.  Coupled with this issue was the relationship with the limited financial and human resources of the Secretariat.  Some requests submitted to the Technical Cooperation Division for holding national seminars or specialized training courses were still pending, possibly due to lack of human or financial resources;  while others were being addressed through regional or general seminars.  The representative had doubt that regional or general seminars were very important and of very considerable benefit to some countries, but such seminars should take place among "harmonized" countries in terms of their levels of economic development, so that the exchange of views could be beneficial to all.  Finally, the representative stressed that technical assistance was an educational process that should be done through the means identified by the requesting country, which was in the best position to know its needs.
&& The representative of Switzerland first referred to the report's conclusion, once again, the financing basis for technical assistance was insufficient and not stable enough, due to the fact that no solution had yet been found with regard to using funds from the regular budget.  Switzerland regretted this situation, believing firmly that strong support for technical assistance in the regular budget was necessary and for that reason it should be increased.
Commenting on the report presented by Mr. Léger, he reported a criticism made previously that it was too much geared to a purely quantitative presentation.  The value of this information may be interesting for statistics, but was of limited use for determining the value of technical assistance and for deciding future policy on technical assistance.  On the other hand, he would have expected to find some indication in the report of the money spent while executing individual activities, i.e. some indication on where, in what areas, and on what activities the SwF6.05 million francs mentioned had been spent.
Turning to planning, he noted that 70 per cent of all activities carried out in the previous year did not have a reference in the three-year plan.  On the one hand, this was a clear sign that the three‑year plan, as a potentially useful working and planning instrument, was not yet where it should be.  On the other hand, Members as demandeurs should take much of the blame because the WTO Secretariat was not necessarily in the position to reject ad hoc requests.  In that context, he wondered whether the term "demand-driven" was not confused with the term "ad hoc".  He was not convinced that it should be "understandable" that "countries often cannot anticipate a specific need long in advance".  This might have been understandable in the first couple of years after the WTO came into being;  however, now it should be possible for Members to estimate their needs in advance and to organize technical assistance in a longer perspective.  He suggested that the Secretariat could also do more against this "ad hocism", through a well-designed technical assistance programme with a longer and sustainable perspective.  This would assure that assistance teams were not constantly called into countries on an ad hoc basis.  By designing longer-term technical assistance programmes it would easier to reject ad hoc calls;  in addition, such long-term programmes would certainly also yield longer lasting benefits than just ad hoc interventions.
&& The representative of the European Communities first announced that the Kingdom of Sweden had decided to give additional funding this year to the Global Trust Fund of SwF1.3 million or Skr7 million.  He thanked the Secretariat for the report, which gave a good overview of what was being done in the field of technical assistance.  Positive aspects were that the call for greater regional cooperation and for outsourcing of activities seemed to have been heard, at least through involving more organizations - although he noted in passing the WCO was not mentioned while WIPO and other regional organizations received attention.  He encouraged the Secretariat to pursue this particular avenue as far as possible. Building on a question raised by Switzerland, he said that it was not a very good basis for a discussion with donor agencies to say that "the number of activities has increased by 24 per cent".  Some of these activities might be very short, involving one official, while others may be very long involving several officials.  It would be better to argue how human resources needs have risen, or how needs have been diminished by using outsourcing.  He also asked why countries could not foresee their needs in advance, and why there was so much "ad hocism".  If 48 per cent of planned activities could not take place, something was wrong.  A more structured approach to technical assistance should be taken.  Thirdly, he noted that the training packages developed by WTO should play a bigger role.  Fuller use should be made of these and even more could be done.  Lastly, regarding the funding and human resources, he asked whether activities that had not been carried out because of lack of funding could have been done if the money had been there, in other words, there were adequate human resources?
&& The representative of India said that his Government had participated in several activities organized by WTO or with other organizations.  He felt that much more could be done in the field;  the main problem was lack of manpower and funding to cope with the increased demand.  If technical cooperation was to be effective, it should go beyond the present endeavour to organize workshops to explain the provisions of the agreements, and instead focus on the exchange of technology and scientific know-how to help developing countries better access the global markets and integrate themselves into the world economic order. He agreed with the parts of the report on Agriculture, SPS, and Services.  For TBT he agreed that technical cooperation seminars should focus on assisting developing countries in meeting the requirements of standards, technical regulations and conformity assessment procedures in their main export markets.  He also emphasized the need for help for developing countries to develop their human and institutional resources;  and finally, he stated that support to regional coordination and cooperation in assistance to small and medium-size enterprises in developing countries  to benefit fully from the WTO system were also necessary.
&& The representative of Japan thanked the Secretariat for the two excellent reports on technical assistance activities and on evaluation.  She would comment once full remarks were received from the Capital.  Japan considered that developing countries fully recognized and were convinced that they can benefit from the multilateral trading system.  Japan supported technical assistance to help the developing countries integrate better into the multilateral trading system and acknowledged the importance for WTO to coordinate its work with the bilateral donor countries and other international organizations that provide technical assistance in the field of trade, in particular World Bank, UNCTAD and ITC, to make it more efficient and effective.
&& The representative of United States welcomed the improved organization and format of the reports and emphasized that the evaluation of the effectiveness of technical cooperation activities would be an important complement to the discussion of the reports.  She emphasized the importance of coordination in technical assistance; recognizing that there could be some difficulty in internal coordination at the national level in countries receiving assistance, she also sought more information about coordination within the WTO Secretariat, particularly since a number of Divisions are involved;  in particular, how technical cooperation was coordinated and whether there was a specific strategy for avoiding overlap and duplication of internal activities.  She also reiterated the importance of coordination with other organizations.  Noting that ITC had maximized outsourcing possibilities, she sought a better strategy for dealing with WTO's technical assistance.  The United States had made suggestions in the Sub-Committee for Least-Developed Countries and the General Council in respect to improvements in technical cooperation and on the Integrated Framework.  Her delegation would look very carefully at the review taking place and would comment on that, as it would be very significant for future technical cooperation activities.  She also recognized the need also to be more informative about the bilateral technical assistance the United States and other donors were providing, and hoped that a better picture of the effective use of technical cooperation would emerge.
&& The representative of Norway expressed his delegation's agreement to seeking an evaluation of technical cooperation.  However, a thorough consideration by the CTD would have been facilitated if all the reports had been available well in advance of the meeting.  As a general comment, he stated that it would have been useful if the report had included an explicit reference to the strategy behind WTO's technical assistance activities, with objectives and priorities clearly stated.  With this, the CTD would have been better able to undertake a comprehensive review of the 1999 report and to consider the different elements to which reference was made in the report.
He also stated that WTO's comparative advantage in technical assistance was its detailed knowledge of the different Agreements and provisions of the multilateral trading system. However, he also appreciated that WTO recognized the need to work with the other relevant organizations and bilateral donors to integrate trade-related technical assistance in general development projects and programmes.  In the introduction of the 1999 report, reference was made to the two questionnaires for evaluation and to the production of an evaluation report.  This gave the impression that one intended to integrate a summary of different technical cooperation activities with an evaluation of results obtained.  Norway would have welcomed this approach and requested the Secretariat to ensure that next time similar information was prepared for the CTD.  He noted with interest that, in the section on Services, certain comments on the utility of different types of technical assistance had been included.  He agreed that it was necessary to secure regular and stable access to financial resources for Secretariat activities;  in Norway's opinion, the best way to achieve this would be to make technical cooperation activities part of the regular budget of the WTO.  This would not exclude voluntary contributions, but would relieve the reliance on ad hoc financing.  In addition to the regular budget and voluntary contributions, outsourcing of activities was a possibility.  He sought an update on Memoranda of Understandings (MOUs) that had been signed with other bodies.
&& The representative of Norway said that he was struck by the relatively low share of technical assistance activities covered by the Three-Year Plan.  The high proportion of activities of an ad hoc nature complicated planning.  To the extent possible, requests for technical assistance should be made well in advance.  Norway agreed that technical assistance should be demand-driven, but also believed that the Secretariat should seek to apply a more pro-active policy by informing potential beneficiaries of the existence, objectives and modes of delivery of its technical cooperation activities.  It was important that these activities should be seen in a comprehensive context by beneficiaries, and not undertaken in isolation from other capacity building efforts of a more general developmental nature.
&& The representative of Zambia shared expressed concerns about financial constraints and appealed to donors to expand the regular budget.  He noted that, in the Seminar on Implementation, his delegation had highlighted several problems regarding the implementation of the TRIPS agreement.  If these were to be solved, contributions should be enhanced to expand activities and staff involved.  He felt that technical assistance should come closer to capacity-building particularly through Article IV of GATS and Articles 9 and 10 of the SPS Agreement.  This could also be a basis for greater confidence-building.
&& The representative of Kenya noted that most technical activities concerning Kenya had been undertaken through JITAP.  It is not by coincidence that the only activity outside this framework was funded by the Swedish Trust Fund, and Kenya appreciated this extra-budgetary contribution.  Even if the WTO were to get the SwF10 million that it had been seeking before Seattle, there would still have been an element for extra-budgetary resources.  He wondered what was the problem in trying to add the modest sum of SwF10 million for the regular budget.
&& The observer from CARICOM expressed her appreciation for the help given through the Reference Centre at the CARICOM Secretariat.  She noted that all regions had seen an increase of activities in 1999.  It would have been useful if there could have been some more detailed information for the Caribbean, as in the case of Asia and Pacific, on where some of the seminars and workshops had been held.  She noted the importance of holding separate activities in the two sub-regions of the Caribbean on a linguistic basis.  The CARICOM Secretariat was happy to work with the WTO Secretariat to organized workshops/seminars etc. in the region.  She noted the importance for small countries being exposed to information and knowledge on the WTO Agreements.
&& The representative of Senegal said that the importance of technical assistance had been demonstrated as a very important activity of WTO.  He noted the scope of activities directed towards Africa.  However, this also showed a lack in technical cooperation activities, because African countries were the least integrated in the multilateral trading system.  He hoped that the report would help in carrying out an exhaustive examination to reorient technical assistance to be more centered on implementation, so that all elements in connection with the different Agreements concerning special and differential treatment became compulsory.  Precise indicators should be provided to show the progress achieved by developing countries in their integration into the multilateral trading system.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that his Government had taken good advantage of technical assistance at the national and regional levels.  He proposed that a follow-up system to reports should be established so that donors and beneficiaries could judge the results of technical assistance on the basis of these reports.
&& Mr. Léger took note that some Members felt that the report was too quantitative in nature and not enough in terms of quality of activities conducted.  A decision had been taken a few months earlier to separate the Evaluation Report (WT/COMTD/W/72) from the Annual Report (WT/COMTDW/70),  The evaluation report was based on two questionnaires discussed in 1999 in the CTD, and follow-ups with numerous countries.  Mr. H. Aboutahir of the Technical Cooperation Division (TCD) would present the interim evaluation report.  Additional information on individual missions by mode of delivery and subject matter, and money spent, was available in the Secretariat database and could be provided.  The Secretariat could also provide tables on person-month inputs for each mission and how much of this was outsourcing.  Concerning internal coordination, he stated that each request received for a technical assistance mission went through the TCD.  No request was signed until the cost associated with the mission had been identified  and the necessary funding provided.  Information was gathered on the destination, names of the official(s), the number of days and the objective of the mission.  This information, available in the database in TCD, was updated on a daily basis.  He took note that the Committee wished to see in 2001, before reviewing the activities for 2000, the Secretariat's specific strategy, objectives and priorities so that Members could compare these against the results.  Regarding outsourcing, he noted that the WTO was negotiating a number of MOUs with other organizations, including UN regional commissions.  MOUs with the ECA, ESCWA, ESCAP, and others, had as their objective to assist WTO in organizing regional seminars whereby the regional bodies would undertake responsibility for logistics and administrative matters.  The WTO would in future extend cooperation with these organizations from the point of view of assisting in delivering some of the presentation materials and with the more general types of presentations.
(ii)	Interim Evaluation Report on WTO Technical Cooperation Activities (WT/COMTD/W/72)
(iii)	The Framework for Monitoring and Evaluating the WTO Technical Cooperation Activities (WT/COMTD/W/73
(iv)	Manual for WTO Secretariat Staff dealing with Technical Cooperation Activities (WT/COMTD/W/74)
Introducing documents WT/COMTDW/72, W/73 and W/74, Mr. Aboutahir said that WT/COMTD/W73, in proposing a framework for evaluation of WTO technical assistance, put forward an approach and tool which the WTO Secretariat could use to assist and support the Committee in its evaluation and monitoring activities.  The objectives of monitoring and evaluation were threefold:  first, to evaluate the performance of technical assistance activities;  second, to contribute to improving the content and format of technical assistance;  and, third, to optimize the use of resources.  The scope of the evaluation proposed by the framework related to:  (i) individual activities, evaluated through questionnaires circulated to participants at the end of each event;  (ii) regional projects and programmes in which WTO participated actively;  (iii) specific  topics, such as notifications or customs valuation, to evaluate for each subject the relevance of technical cooperation activities;  and (iv) activities as a whole, where technical assistance could be assessed through their impact by region and by subject.  The scope of monitoring and evaluation had three dimensions:  the relevance of the activities, namely, whether or not they met the needs of beneficiaries and how WTO used its comparative advantage vis-à-vis other organizations;  performance, particularly the effectiveness and efficiency of activities (reaching the best possible result with the least possible cost)  and impact on beneficiaries, measured by indicators which should be identified in the planning phase.  Mr. Aboutahir stated that the framework presented had suggested a number of concrete indicators relating to WTO's technical assistance activities.  To give structure and analysis to this framework, it was proposed to use a matrix, as shown in the document.  He emphasized that the process would only be successful when the direct beneficiaries of technical assistance as well as the donors are involved.  
Document WT/COMTD/W/74, the Manual for Technical Cooperation, was a tool that could be used in the first stage in the process of monitoring and evaluation.  The objective was to contribute to developing an evaluation culture in the Secretariat.  Page 19 of the document contained a number of indicators directly connected to technical assistance objectives.  The list was not exhaustive but was a set of examples, giving an indicative list of possible indicators, which could be elaborated in collaboration with beneficiaries.
Lastly, Mr. Aboutahir presented the interim evaluation report (WT/COMTD/W/72).  This  kind of interim evaluation of technical assistance was a first attempt.  It should be further developed and improved following Members' suggestions at the meeting and through contacts with representatives of beneficiary countries in Geneva and in the capitals.  The aim of the report was to provide the CTD with an evaluation of the relevance and performance of technical cooperation activities and to try to measure the impact of technical cooperation activities on beneficiaries.  The report also proposed a number of recommendations aiming at improving the content and format of WTO's technical assistance.  Mr. Aboutahir emphasized that all the information in the report reflected the opinions of beneficiaries both in their capitals and in Geneva on the technical cooperation activities conducted, and was also based on the questionnaires that participants fill out after each activity.  As far as possible, the Secretariat had used the instruments proposed in document WT/COMTD/W/73.  In a number of cases, in particular on impact measurement, this report did not draw definite or final conclusions, because impact could only be measured over a long period, the evaluation process was in a very preliminary stage and a number of tools were just being developed.  The methodology used was an analysis of documentation given by the technical assistance lecturer/official, as well as contacts with various officials from the Secretariat.  At the second stage, field visits were made to beneficiary countries;  the final stage was an analysis of questionnaires filled out by participants in technical assistance activities, by according to a random sampling, so that the questionnaires could be analysed in-depth.
&& Mr. Aboutahir stated that, during the process of the interim evaluation, drawbacks were pointed out by a number of delegations particularly in terms of programming.  Integrated programming should normally secure logical links between activities, clarify activities for a given period and identify the evaluation indicators and the basis for monitoring.  At present, the implementation of technical assistance activities was basically carried out on an ad hoc basis.  Concerning the content of activities, a number of fundamental elements appeared to be missing in the eyes of developing countries and economies in transition, such as evaluation of the use of funds and mechanisms.  A full understanding of the WTO rules was not enough to ensure the possibilities of taking advantage of the WTO system; more emphasis should be put on practical means of applying the rules and mechanisms.  In addition, it was suggested that technical assistance should provide greater support for a number of concrete and specific tasks;  an example was the method of drafting laws and establishing technical regulations relating to a number of Agreements.  New issues arising from the Singapore programme, and training in techniques of negotiation, should also have a place in the WTO's activities.
&& Mr. Aboutahir said that he had been told on repeated occasions that many developing countries, and particularly African countries, were not in a position to participate fully in the WTO system.  They could not even manage better implementation without an ability to negotiate rules and without the possibility of participating in the decision-making process.
Concerning training, it was noted that the "training of trainers" approach should certainly have priority because of its multiplier effect.  This is an approach which most other international organizations use.  It was suggested that WTO should try to set up trainers' networks in order to ensure a solid basis for the transfer of knowledge.  The Secretariat was also told that in certain cases its training material was not well adapted to the needs of participants. Mr. Aboutahir suggested that WTO should consider dividing the content of this material into two or three levels so that participants can be better targeted.
Use of WTO Reference Centres was reported as very high.  However, approximately one‑third of the Reference Centres were not operational for a whole set of reasons;  for example, connection cost and a number of other reasons contained in the report.  The assessment of impact  had focused on Africa and revealed a number of positive indicators, namely better access to information and increased requests for detailed information after each activity.  It appeared that the message was passing successfully.  On-line contacts had also increased through the establishment of Reference Centres.  There had been great interest on the part of African countries on participation in the WTO system, and particularly in technical cooperation activities with WTO.  However, few participants could manipulate databases, a very important element if they were to negotiate new rules and take advantage of WTO systems.  It was suggested that the Secretariat could do more in this area.  Concerning the use of consultants, the Secretariat was told that it would be advisable to resort to national/regional competence alongside international experts.  In this way, sometimes the message could be transmitted more rapidly and could sometimes contribute to efficiency and to the saving of resources.
&& In conclusion, Mr. Aboutahir recalled that less than ten per cent of technical assistance activities were financed by the regular budget, with the other 90 per cent through voluntary contributions.  On this inadequate and unforeseeable basis, technical cooperation activities will certainly continue to suffer on several fronts.  The Secretariat was now trying to do better with its present means, but a more solid basis for financing would certainly help the Secretariat carry out improvements.  A balance between the regular budget, extra-budgetary resources of Members, and resources from regional institutions should be encouraged.  Several of the ideas contained in the report could not be fully implemented if human and financial resources were not put at the disposal of the Secretariat.
&& The representative of the United States appreciated the presentation, but recognized that document WT/COMTD/W/72 was an interim report.  She asked whether the developing country Members who had participated in the interviews felt that it accurately reflected their views.  She noticed that five countries were interviewed either in the capitals or at the Mission in Geneva.  It was hard to tell whether some of the views expressed represented five or only some of the countries that were interviewed in Geneva, and therefore to get a clear idea quantitatively what views were represented in the report.  She also asked if, in the context of perhaps the "days of reflection" or an informal discussion, a better idea could be gained from the individual countries of what they thought about the evaluation and its recommendations.  She noted that in some areas there were very positive suggestions;  but stated that her capital was not so sure of the level of objectivity.  The vews of delegations that had contributed to the report would assist in assessing the objectivity of the report.
Concerning WT/COMTD/W/73, the United States wholly supported the concept highlighted regarding the culture of evaluation and would like to see it elaborated further.  Commenting on the technical mission feedback form, she noted that the second element spoke of whether or not objectives were met but did not ask what the objectives were.  The United States considered that should come before the question of whether objectives were met.  She also asked whether there was provision for advance written agreements between the Secretariat and the recipients on the needs, that is, the objectives of the assistance?  The United States believed that such a process was vital, not only for the delivery of assistance, but also for the evaluation of its delivery and effectiveness.  Concerning reporting to the Committee, she considered that the proposed process would convey information in a useful way.  The United States might also like to elaborate further, during the "Days of Reflection" on some of the questionnaires that had been presented at this meeting.
&& The United States representative also noted that in the "Days of Reflection" her delegation would have more to say on bilateral technical cooperation, because, regardless of the sources of funding and other resources, when providing bilateral technical assistance, Members needed to have a full picture of resources available, not only those from the WTO, but also from recognized institutions that worked with the WTO.   She cited U.S. funding for a WTO project in Egypt;  the United States would document more thoroughly the different projects in which it was involved and the amounts it was spending, but this would not foreclose U.S. interests in contributing to the WTO Trust Fund and other relevant projects that came under the WTO itself.
&& The representative of Australia welcomed the Secretariat's report as a very useful evaluation of WTO's technical assistance activities.  In particular, she noted the comments regarding the lack of technical cooperation activities in the area of negotiating techniques.  She announced that Australia was funding a two-week trade negotiations training course for African members of the Commonwealth, scheduled to take place in South Africa in late July and early August.  The recommendations and lessons set out on pages 19 and 20 of document WT/COMTD/W/72 appeared sound, providing a realistic "shopping list" of actions for the WTO to enhance the delivery of technical assistance.  Australia particularly agreed on the need for an adequate and predictable funding base and strengthened cooperation and coordination with other relevant organizations.  Australia also supported the use of local partners, initiatives to enhance the "demand-driven" approach and the promotion of a culture of evaluation within the WTO and beneficiary countries.  Australia considered that the documentation provided a good basis for careful reflection by the CTD on ways to strengthen the WTO's involvement in technical cooperation activities.  It was important that the CTD should ensure full discussion of these issues and that appropriate follow-up action was initiated.
Two issues deserving more detailed consideration were, first, how to ensure the durability of technical cooperation activities and second, how to strengthen the synergies between the WTO's technical assistance and efforts taken by other organizations, bilateral donors and the beneficiary countries themselves to strengthen trade-related capacities.  One should not underestimate the challenge involved in building stronger trade-related capacity in many developing countries, particularly the least developed, nor the time that this might take.  A key factor might be enhancing domestic ownership through ensuring appropriate and adequately resourced domestic partners able to play an active role in identifying needs, helping design programmes and ensuring follow-up.  Another important issue might be to recognize that short-term training programmes and missions might be of limited use if they were not adequately integrated into a longer-term strategic approach to developing capacity and appropriate skills.  Three areas in which Australia was particularly interested were:  how the WTO intended to enhance the effectiveness of its training packages, which currently were described as lacking an optimal pedagogical approach;  how problems associated with the maintenance and use of the resource centres were being addressed;  and the Secretariat's efforts to improve the programming of its activities.  Australia would also be interested in advice on the training that WTO staff undergo in the use of the evaluation framework. 
&& The representative of the European Communities, commenting on documents WT/COMTD/W/73 and W/74, said that on first reading, they seemed to reflect common sense.  The EC would want their experts in the development field to look at the documents and might come back with more substantive comment at some stage.  Commenting  on WT/COMTD/W/72, he was happy that it was an interim evaluation report which could give a chance to take on board suggestions and comments by Members, to improve the document.  He found the paper somewhat confusing:  it was not clear where information ended and analysis began.  He also found it confusing that the recommendations were spread out throughout the document, leading to a "shopping list" in which it was not very clear what the linkages were with the various parts of the analytical work of the report.  Some streamlining could be done.  He asked the Secretariat to shorten the report and bring it closer to WT/COMTD/W/73 and W/74.  Commenting on some of the recommendations, he noted the emphasis laid on the question of negotiating techniques (point 10).  He questioned whether this was a core WTO activity or whether it should be left to UNCTAD.  Regarding point 12, he felt it was not clear what the "involvement of the media" mean in promoting the image and profile of WTO.  Point 13 referred to the private sector and key players;  he noted that there was a discussion of voluntary contributions from the private sector in progress.  He would therefore suggest some caution in taking up such a recommendation at this point.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that the interim evaluation report was a good start, even though greater focus on the evaluation would be necessary. There was too much emphasis on description and too little in terms of evaluation.  In addition, he questioned whether lengthy explanations on the budgetary and financing problems belonged in such a report, even though they were important.  Third, while nobody could deny that technical assistance was an integral part of WTO, it should not be the purpose of an evaluation report to state this.  An evaluation report should look at the way actual technical assistance was provided, whether it was effective, and not on whether technical assistance was important or not.  Although the interim report was a start, a lot more work was needed, certain problematic areas had to be singled out and evaluated more in depth and some general recommendations would have to be further worked on in order to allow improvement; for instance, the recommendation to strengthen cooperation with relevant international organizations.  In a final report, areas where this could be feasible would have to be described, as well as the way such cooperation with other organizations could be carried out.  He hoped that the "Days of Reflection" planned for mid-July would provide another opportunity to go more into details.
&& The representative of Switzerland suggested that, as a next step, areas of technical assistance could be singled out and evaluated in detail, for instance, technical assistance in the dispute settlement area.  He suggested that for that purpose, dispute settlement could be regarded as a programme in itself and analysed with regards to its objectives, how success could be measured, positive points of the programme, weaknesses, plus, of course, detailed recommendations on how to improve the programme.  Such a detailed evaluation could be an example for how to proceed in other areas of evaluation on technical assistance and how to improve the report as a whole.
&& The representative of Kenya noted that the document recognized the efforts made by developing countries toward meeting their obligations.  He agreed with most of the general recommendations, including the proposal for training in negotiating techniques.
&& The representative of Morocco supported the comments made on African countries and agreed with the recommendations, in particular on financing.  Technical assistance depended on a foreseeable, balanced budget.
&& The observer from the Arab Maghreb Union noted that the reports were very well constructed and thanked the Secretariat for the establishment of a Reference Centre in the AMU Secretariat.  Referring to the establishment of a regional focus centre, he suggested that this should be taken up on the basis of two elements:  (i) training of trainers at the regional level;. (ii) participation in the logistics.  He also supported the proposal by Egypt and others regarding the organization of regional seminars.
At the resumption of the meeting on 20 July 2000, the representative of the United States proposed that a substantive discussion of document WT/COMTD/W/74 should be undertaken once a framework for technical cooperation was approved.
&& The representative of Zambia commenting on the Interim Evaluation Report on Technical Cooperation;  said that the report was a good basis to engage in a qualitative discussion of developments and the performance of technical cooperation activities.  It drew attention to positive aspects, as well as some short-comings that the Secretariat should address.  The recommendations should contribute to making technical cooperation a better instrument for the integration of developing economies into the Multilateral Trading System.  He suggested that technical cooperation should be reviewed and extended beyond its current form.  This included not only WTO technical cooperation but also the whole context of technical cooperation  in the area of trade and development undertaken by different organizations such as UNCTAD, UNDP and the World Bank.  The WTO should exploit its comparative advantage, i.e  its knowledge of the Multilateral Trade Agreements while improving its complementarity with the technical cooperation provided by other organizations such as UNCTAD.  WTO technical cooperation should focus on giving support to the establishment of the legal and technical infrastructure required to fulfil the obligations and to take advantage of the rights embedded in the Agreements.  He recalled that the WTO Decision on Measures in Favour of Least-Developed Countries stated that least-developed countries would be provided substantially increased technical assistance in the development, strengthening and diversification of their capacity for production and exports.  In this regard, he commended the EC and U.S. for their support to technical assistance and two proposals on improving technical cooperation in WTO for capacity-building.  While WTO technical cooperation targeted in the first place governments' capacity to participate in WTO activities and negotiations and to comply with the Multilateral Trade Agreements, the private sector was supposed to be targeted by ITC Technical Cooperation.  He mentioned one aspect of technical cooperation for the private sector that current efforts did not include, namely, the private sector's interests in the Dispute Settlement Mechanism.  He noted that technical cooperation should be both a target and an instrument that ensures efficiency, credibility and ownership.  Training of trainers and capacity‑building of national institutions was critical.  Local participation should also involve, for instance, the local media which needed to understand the challenges raised by participation in the WTO in order to disseminate accurate information to the public.  A key issue was active involvement in the design and implementation of WTO technical cooperation.  Technical cooperation could also provide support to the articulation between the regional trade agreements and multilateral rules.  Donor assistance was invaluable to enhance the competitiveness of LDC economies by supporting enterprise development in particular by facilitating access to new technologies.
&& Mr. Aboutahir, replying to the discussion concerning the U.S. intervention and the degree of objectivity in the sampling of opinion, recalled that the report's methodology was used by all international organizations, namely, in the first stage to study the documentation, and second to analyze questionnaires.  The third element was field visits.  The Secretariat had tried to visit a maximum number of countries allowed by its human and financial resources;  five countries was a number acceptable in other methods of evaluation carried out in other Organizations.  The conclusions drawn were to be approved by the Committee.  He noted that a certain degree of subjectivity would always exist in any evaluation report, since the evaluator, whether in-house, or external, would give his opinion and his interpretation.  He noted that, in preparation of the report, the Secretariat had contacted a small number of missions.  It would not be possible to contact all permanent missions unless the CTD asked the Secretariat to do so.  He agreed with the United States that there was room for improvement of the questionnaire on technical assistance;  and that the objectives should be identified before saying whether they had been achieved or not.  The Secretariat would make changes based on all the comments received.
&& Mr. Aboutahir also agreed with the Australian delegation regarding the way in which new training material and its pedagogical aspects should be introduced.  Reflection would continue within the Technical Cooperation Division and with other Divisions in order to achieve better adaptation of this material.  The idea was to adapt the material to the level of understanding and development of beneficiaries and to target groups, namely the final users of these training packages.  He had noted the EC's comment concerning changes to the structure of the report.  Future reports would be better targeted.  An attempt would also be made to make them shorter.  	On the EC's question concerning substance and in particular regarding negotiation techniques,  he agreed that this subject fell under the competence of UNCTAD.  However, the WTO, while being neutral, had long and extensive experience in negotiating techniques.  WTO also had databases that UNCTAD did not have, which could be of technical help to the developing countries helping them to negotiate better.  One conclusion that could emerge was that UNCTAD and WTO should cooperate closely, each on the aspect where it had comparative advantage, to help developing countries to negotiate and thereby learn how to apply these negotiations to international trade and the WTO process.  As for the private sector, the document suggested that there should be closer association of the private sector in the technical cooperation activities.  From first responses, it was clear that the "objectives and principles" of the guidelines (WT/COMTD/8) should be also studied by the private sector, as a beneficiary.
Responding to Switzerland's comments relating to budgetary and financial aspects, Mr. Aboutahir noted that there were different ways of drawing up these reports;  financial and budgetary aspects had been included to give a better in-depth evaluation of technical cooperation activities in relation to financing.  If the CTD decided that financial aspects should not be included, the Secretariat would comply.  He also said that the Secretariat would try to identify a specific programme every year, and make a more in-depth evaluation, if the CTD so decided.  The Secretariat would take note of all the comments made by delegations.
(v)	Report on Training – Trade Policy Course 1999 (WT/COMTD/W/68)

&& The representative of the Secretariat wished to correct an oversight in the report on training and offered, on behalf of the Secretariat, most sincere thanks to the Governments of Austria, Italy, Norway, Finland, Spain and Canada for having organized and hosted study tours for trainees.  The study tour in Spain had just been completed and the one in Canada would take place in the fall of that year.  He also thanked Switzerland for regularly hosting all groups of participants in Bern and for financing consultants for workshops on trade negotiating skills as well as courses for economies in transition.  The summary account of the content of the courses found in the report gave a fair and accurate picture of the activities carried out during each course.  He emphasized that the full programme was compulsory for the participants, although some flexibility could be applied in special circumstances.  Much attention was devoted to the consistency and relevance of the programme as a whole.  Delegations were not supposed to make use of trainees for official extra-curricular tasks and involve them in the regular activities of the WTO.  In accordance with the internal rules of the fellowship programme, the trainees needed to devote all their official time to the courses.  Starting with the previous course in 1999, a new feature of the selection process had been to include the economies in transition in the list of invited governments.  For several years they had not been invited since they had benefited from the special six‑week courses financed by Switzerland and the United States.  As a result of the change in the type of assistance provided by the Swiss and US authorities, it was decided to include those beneficiary countries in the framework of the regular residential three-month courses.  It had resulted in a much keener competition for the scarce number of fellowships each year.  The implication for the countries involved was that they were subject to a different, less automatic selection process by the Secretariat as opposed to the one by the sponsoring countries in the earlier courses.  Three years earlier, it had been decided to discontinue the practice of inviting applicants from the secretariats of regional organizations because of the large backlog of countries seeking participation in the courses.  The only modification to that practice was that they allowed participation of self-financed candidates from those secretariats, thereby not depriving WTO Members or Observers of the few valuable fellowships.  On course delivery and program assessment, the report described in some detail the delivery aspects of the courses as well as the efforts undertaken to assess their impact on the participants.  They had completed in less than a year the preparation of a rather voluminous training manual.  While the manual drew to a large extent from the Technical Cooperation Division's Training Package already available on the WTO Web-site, it had been complemented by reading lists represented in a user-friendly format.  It was available in the three languages of the WTO and was distributed to all the course participants.  Their intention was to make it available more generally, including on the WTO web-site, once the on-going in house verification had been completed.  They hoped that it would provide a useful tool to delegations and capitals as well as to other interested readers.  As to the follow-up and contact after the completion of the courses, the evaluation of the courses in Geneva was fairly advanced and elaborate.  There was a  need to improve the post-course evaluation by governments and participants themselves in capitals, which required closer cooperation from governments concerned.  Their recent attempts in this regard had not yielded all the expected results.  Indeed only about seventy percent of the ex-course participants' authorities had replied to their communication seeking to update their information as to the current location and job of their nationals.  Information about assignments upon return and improvements back on the job would provide a better idea of the impact of the training received.  They were thankful to those delegations which had submitted all the relevant information.  They would be reviving, most likely in the autumn, the alumni association in Geneva.   It was very comforting to the Secretariat to see so many ex-participants of the courses present in Geneva in various capacities.  However, they were often unaware of others who had shared a common background with them and with whom they could exchange ideas in the framework of an alumni forum.  The Secretariat would be contacting the ex-participants in the near future.  Since mid-1999, up to 50 countries where Reference Centers had been installed had participated in the courses.  Participants from those countries had been offered, as part of the curriculum, extensive computer training directly related to the use of the centers in their capital.  A number of Reference Centers also had a former participant in a training course as the person-in-charge.  Updating the figures provided in the report on the total number of participants to the courses thus far, he said that the most recent figure was 1,757 (and not 1,702), including 90 self-financed auditors.  Developing countries, least-developed countries and economies in transition shared the 144 fellowships and 36 auditor posts available over each two-year cycle, which guaranteed at least one fellowship to each applicant country or customs territory over that cycle.  The proposal by the Director-General to double the training capacity would make it possible to ensure the same frequency of participation but over one-year cycles, instead of two, thus providing a meaningful improvement.  This important initiative was being pursued by the Director General in the context of the preparation of the budget for 2001.  
&& The representative of Chile thanked the WTO and the Training Division for the opportunities his country had been given to send officials to the training courses.  In fact, two officials were completing the most recent course in Spanish.  They appreciated the fact that the Training Division was continuously updating and improving the curriculum in line with developments in the WTO.  For example, that year training in agriculture and services sectors had been reinforced..  The follow-up to the courses was also very crucial as it gave the Secretariat an indication of which activities ex‑participants were involved in.  In responding to the WTO questionnaire, they had investigated and found out that in Chile many of the ex-participants, including one from the class of 1956, were working in the field of trade policy.  Still, they had some comments and suggestions on how to improve the courses.  There seemed to be a lack of coordination between similar activities undertaken at the WTO.  For example, during the course of the latest three-month course in Spanish, there was a two-day seminar on GATS, an implementation seminar, and a dispute settlement course organized by the University of Geneva, in all of which the trade policy course participants could have participated.  It might be a good idea to negotiate with the University of Geneva so that the participants could take advantage of the three-day course on dispute settlement.  Study tours were regarded by some as superfluous trips, including touristic activities, which took away time from other activities and cost a significant amount.  They wondered if the trips fulfilled the objectives of the courses and asked for a more detailed study regarding the effectiveness of the trips.
&& The representative of Venezuela wished to thank the Secretariat for the information presented, the details of which were provided in the comprehensive Secretariat Note on Training.  The Days of Reflection would provide a good opportunity for further discussion.  They appreciated the extraordinary support offered by the Secretariat in training activities.  His delegation was one of the delegations that had benefitted from the courses regularly within the limits set for the equitable distribution of fellowships.  In response to the Secretariat request to reply to a survey on where former participants of the courses were at the time, they had made an evaluation.  It had shown that many of those officials had assumed important positions in trade policy decision-making and had participated in important trade negotiations, which demonstrated the importance of the courses offered.  Still, the courses were not perfect and some improvements could be made.  They needed to regularly take into account the changes taking place, not only in the framework of globalization, but also with respect to the requirements of the multilateral trade agreements.  As the Secretariat Note stated, one of the fundamental objectives of the courses was to prepare officials for the administration of trade agreements.  In addition, more attention needed to be paid to the level of knowledge and expertise of the participants.  At times, there were junior officials in the courses along with officials which had experience in negotiations.  It was important to ensure that the participants were of a similar level.  Furthermore, the participants needed to come out with a strengthened conviction on the multilateral trading system and the liberalization process.  They had noted that the dynamic of the courses was such that there was some discussion at the philosophical level, resulting in rhetorical conclusions about the utility of the multilateral trading system.  It was important not to lose sight of the main objectives of the courses.  Apart from being informed about the WTO Agreements, participants needed to be motivated about the importance of multilateral trade liberalization.  At times, the participants entered too early into a philosophical discussion regarding the benefits of being signatories to multilateral trade agreements, before reaching a good understanding of what the process of trade liberalization meant and why the multilateral agreements were crucial for benefitting in the best manner possible from the process.  With respect to the content of the courses, it was necessary to look at experiences elsewhere.  In Venezuela, thanks to the support of the Secretariat, they had made an effort to see if they could succeed in having a multiplier effect to the WTO Trade Policy Courses through cooperation with a Venezuelan University.  This could become a regular exercise where more universities would develop permanent modalities for training on WTO-related issues.  Such an effort would help in overcoming difficulties arising from limitations on time and budget.   Special training centres could be established in cooperation with important universities in all regions of the world in order to reach out to a wider audience.  It would provide those in the government and in the private sector, who could not participate in the courses in Geneva, with an opportunity to learn about important WTO issues.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that his delegation found the Trade Policy Course to be an important and highly regarded component of technical assistance.  They were glad to hear that the Director-General was trying to gather resources so that more opportunities would be available for training.  On behalf of the LDCs and particularly of his country, he said that the differing needs of developing countries, LDCs and economies in transitions needed to be taken into account for a better allocation of resources.  The fellowships needed to be awarded according to needs and not on a numerical basis.  He suggested that training courses be held on the field as well.  Some countries had fairly good institutes for their bureaucrats, providing training on various aspects of their internal governmental systems.  If the faculty in those institutes were trained, they could in turn develop a module which could become part of the curriculum for the officials.  Members as well as the Secretariat needed to insist on seeing that people who received training, either in Geneva or elsewhere, be posted in missions in Geneva.  They were grateful to the countries which hosted study tours; however, the resources from donors could be better used for increasing the number of facilities and fellowships in Geneva for LDCs rather than for taking the participants out on short trips.  He asked for clarification as to whether transition economies were benefitting from two channels of training, one through the trade policy courses and another through the training funded by the governments of the United States and Switzerland.  He wondered whether separating the courses for LDCs and transition economies would be more useful for these two groups of countries.  They appreciated the needs of transition economies; however, in view of the needs of LDCs, he asked that donors consider examining the whole situation so that money was well spent.
&& The representative of Barbados thanked the Secretariat for the informative and comprehensive report.  Her country, which had been granted fellowships in the past, considered the Trade Policy Courses to be very useful and they looked forward to benefiting from the opportunity to participate in them in the future.  She had taken note of the Secretariat commitment to offer at least one fellowship per Member or Observer over a two‑year cycle.  As a small economy, they had a significant need for technical assistance and their participation in capacity-building exercises, such as the trade policy course, contributed greatly to their economic development.  Sometimes they found themselves in a dilemma:  on the one hand, they needed to gain technical expertise;  on the other hand, they experienced difficulties in releasing officials due to lack of human resources.  Still, it did not mean that they were not going to take the fellowships they were offered.  Regarding the diversity of trainees, she was of the view that the interaction between participants from developing countries and transition economies with different experiences, different origins could be very beneficial.  However, the number of fellowships granted over a period of time should not be reduced as a result of the increase in the pool of invitees.  The issue was related to the resources available in the budget. 
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that her country attached high importance to the Trade Policy Courses.  Most of her predecessors as well as herself had benefitted from them.  It was her delegation's great concern that demand for the courses could not be met by the Secretariat.  Extra‑budgetary resources needed to be explored to allow for wider participation.  Her delegation welcomed the decision of the Director-General to explore the possibility of obtaining more resources for the endeavour.  With regard to the study tours, she found them to be very useful as it provided practical insights to how a Member had been implementing the WTO agreements.  Certain delegations had genuine concerns as the anticipated results might not have been reached due to the shortness of the programmes.  But Members needed to give a second thought with regard to the termination of the study tours.  Regarding course content, she was happy to hear that the Secretariat was establishing an alumni association, with which she wished to be associated.  She would be happy to provide suggestions with regard to the improvement of the courses.
&& The representative of Turkey, as a one-time participant of the Trade Policy Course organized by the WTO, expressed his gratitude to the WTO and the staff of the Training Division for their efforts.  The courses had always been beneficial for Turkish participants.  They wished to see a continuation of the courses as well as their extension.  The courses had not only provided practical knowledge about the WTO system but had also facilitated the opening of new horizons for better participation in world trade.
&& The representative of Canada said that her country had accepted to host the upcoming study tour for the English-speaking group at the request of the WTO.  The past evaluations of the programme were very positive.  During the study tour in Canada, there would be sessions with the most knowledgeable trade policy officials in the federal government and also meetings with departments, other than foreign affairs and international trade, including the Department of Agriculture and the Canadian International Development Agency.  There would also be visits to the private sector and meetings with representatives of two provincial governments.  The programme did not allow for tourism activities, except for one day over the weekend.  The study tours were meant to show participants how a specific country dealt with trade policy issues so that participants could observe concretely what they had learned.  The Secretariat needed to make a thorough evaluation to ensure that money invested was providing a worthwhile experience.  Her authorities would be interested in participating in the evaluation process.
&& The representative of Uganda said that the Trade Policy Courses were one of the best examples of how the WTO could provide capacity building.  The course content was based on WTO work and also provided practical information on what was happening on the ground in other countries.  Ex-participants from Uganda, with whom he had had the opportunity to interact in formulating position papers, played an active role in the Ministry of Trade and Industry.  He differed with the delegate of Bangladesh regarding the effectiveness of the study tours.  Judging from the experience of participants from Uganda, they were of the view that the trips provided an opportunity to gain practical, hands-on experience.  He wondered how they might be made more effective rather than being eliminated.  For that, one would need to look closely at the experience of the participants and the content provided.  He wondered whether the shortening of the Trade Policy Courses from the original 6 months had had a negative impact on the course content.
&& The representative of Senegal congratulated the Secretariat and he expressed his delegation's satisfaction with the interim evaluation for 1998-99, particularly for its comprehensive nature and pertinent recommendations.  Firstly, he noted with interest the proposal for creating sub-regional centers of excellence by training the trainers.  It was necessary to have the right synergy between the WTO and other international and regional institutions, the private sector and the beneficiary countries.  In addition, the stability and predictability of enhanced technical assistance activities was of utmost importance.  Furthermore, the difficulty of evaluating technical assistance activities in the Africa region had already been mentioned.  The Secretariat needed to encourage Members and sub-regional organizations to identify their own programmes so as to avoid overlap.  The main beneficiaries themselves did not always rationalize their own activities.  Moreover, all manuals and teaching materials needed to be in three languages.  Finally, they  wished that their country could benefit from internships. 
&& The representative of Mauritius said that his country had taken advantage of the Trade Policy Courses, which had been extremely useful.  Many of their participants were afterwards based either in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Trade or in the mission in Geneva.  The importance attached to the Trade Policy Courses was demonstrated by the large number of applications: there were 300 applications from 150 countries for the course.  It was important to enable developing countries to participate effectively in the world trading system.  The Trade Policy Course was one of the core elements of the technical assistance and capacity building programme, helping developing countries better integrate into the multilateral trading system.  The importance of avoiding duplication had already been mentioned.  Every Member was offered one fellowship every two years.  One could take advantage of impartial trade-related courses offered at other institutions and countries.  The possibility of offering courses at the regional level could also be explored.
&& The representative of Ecuador, as an ex-participant, said that many of the trade negotiators were bureaucrats with high qualifications but their interaction with the private sector was very limited.  The study tours allowed for a closer look at the real operators in the economy to see how they organized themselves to face the challenges of the marketplace.  It was very useful to see the administration and the management of private firms, be they big ones or SMEs, including in the field of electronic commerce.  The study tours could be improved but they were as valid as the theoretical training that participants received. 
A representative of the Secretariat said that he would focus on some of the many points raised by Members.  He was glad that some of the ex-participants of the trade policy courses had contributed to the discussion on study tours, which dated back 45 years and which had always been considered as an integral part of the programme.  It provided the participants with an opportunity to see in practice what the WTO or formerly the GATT meant for government officials.  The aim was to ensure that the programme offered during the study tours was directly relevant to the curriculum that had been followed during the trade policy course.  At times, it was impossible to avoid a certain departure from that, for example, when visiting a private enterprise which was not familiar with all facets of the WTO.  As for visits at the governmental level, it was a useful addition to the theoretical programme for the participants to see how policies were formulated, coordinated, and then implemented.  They had also been considering reallocating the funds possibly to finance additional fellowships.  However, the decision was not taken lightly because they were aware of the usefulness of the study tours, not only for the participants, but also for the host countries, which considered them as long-term investment.  They were far from being tourism activities even if that was at times part of the programme.  The host countries had themselves attached high importance to the tours and had committed a lot of money to it, expecting a return in the long term.  The representative of Chile had suggested that there be better coordination with other technical cooperation activities in the house, namely, with some of the other courses taking place, either on dispute settlement or on other selected issues.  They were not adjusting the course programme to fit other activities, which were meant to reach out to more people, not just to train the same people.  Whatever was being taught in the special courses was also covered in the regular courses.  With respect to the comment of the representative of Venezuela on having participants of the same level, he said that the selection was done on the basis of written application.  While certain participants might look alike on paper, that might not in fact be the case.  Besides, they were not aiming at uniformity in that respect, since their mandate was not to provide a specialized course to train experts, but rather to provide a better understanding of all the WTO Agreements and the multilateral trading system to participants, who would contribute to policy formation once they returned to their capitals.  There had been some problems in this respect in certain groups.  There was possibly a misunderstanding of the objectives of the courses, which were explained in the invitation letter.  The addition of economies in transition to the list of invitees had not been at the detriment of the other countries.  The economies in transition did not get priority in receiving fellowships.  They had just been integrated into the list of invitees.  There was also a mandate from the High Level Meeting on Least-Developed Countries that they should give priority to least-developed countries and they had done so.  They supported wholeheartedly the Director‑General's proposal which would reduce the fellowship cycle to one year.  It depended on the willingness of the Members to provide the necessary funding.  They had taken note of all the proposals and recommendations.
&& The representative of the United States referred to the issue of coordination, which the representative of the Secretariat had addressed in his very thorough response.  They too were interested in seeing more coordination in-house.  The way the agenda for that day had been structured certainly went quite far in the area of internal coordination.  It certainly helped them understand better what was going on with respect to WTO-specific technical assistance.  At times it was hard for them track down where a certain amount of their funding had gone.  It would be better if there were one central source for channelling all information on funding so that all technical assistance activities could be easily tracked down.  Further to recent legislative decisions in the United States, her delegation was looking into additional funding for technical assistance.  Comprehensive documentation on WTO technical assistance initiatives would help them get a better picture of which areas they should be targetting in addition to their bilateral assistance and WTO technical assistance.
	(vi)	EC Communication on Trade-Related Technical Assistance (WT/COMTD/W/69)

&& The representative of the European Communities said that in conjunction with the document WT/COMTD/W/69 on technical assistance, there was another document circulated in the Customs Valuation Committee with the symbol G/VAL/W/71.  The European Communities had circulated a document on Trade-Related Technical Assistance in the WTO in April of that year (WT/COMTD/W/69).  He wished to explain to the Committee the guiding concepts which had led them to introduce the paper, and also to explore with the Committee how to proceed.  The Community strongly welcomed the fact that one of the results of the Seattle Ministerial, which without ambiguity was positive, was the new approach by Members on technical assistance in the WTO.  The issue had been the subject of intensive debate in the CTD, but also in the General Council where various contributions by individual delegations and the WTO Secretariat had been put forward.  There was broad consensus in the organization that it was necessary to have more and better technical assistance.  The time had come to translate the consensus into concrete action.  It was not an easy exercise, as the delivery of technical assistance was complex, involved many players, required adequate financial and human resources, and a clear vision of what the Members wanted to achieve.  The first result of the EC's thinking was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/69.  The key principles governing their thinking, which they did not claim to have invented, but which they wanted to reinforce, were:  (i) ownership, a demand-driven approach, including full participation by the recipients to better target the actual needs;  and (ii) better cooperation between the donors to enhance coherence and better use of funds and serious follow-up once technical assistance measures had been implemented to draw the appropriate lessons.  These principles were well known to Members, as they formed the core of the Integrated Framework which had been agreed in 1997.  It was not the place to assess the work of the Integrated Framework, which would be done in the Committee in a different context.  Whatever the views were on the Integrated Framework, the principles governing it remained valid and were the appropriate starting-point for further reflection on technical assistance in the WTO.  The same conclusion had been drawn in different contexts.  The recent statement of the Chair following the Darwin APEC Ministerial contained an Annex B, which included capacity building in APEC related to the implementation of the WTO Agreements.  It was worth noting that their emphasis on the principles of the Integrated Framework did not mean that they wanted to expand the Integrated Framework in its present form to other countries.  It was premature, and had the inherent danger of lessening the attention they all had to pay to the difficult situation of the LDCs.  The EC attached importance to coherence in the international setting.  Many delegations had pointed out that technical assistance had to go beyond the mere implementation via domestic laws of the highly technical WTO Agreements.  Building domestic capacities and achieving supply-side reform required a large variety of measures, which were trade-related, but which the WTO Secretariat with its limited means could not tackle on its own.  The EC had witnessed progress in the effort to mainstream trade into development strategies but certainly more remained to be done in cooperation with all international development institutions.  The EC wished to inform the Committee that they had taken a first step in the Customs Valuation Committee to see how they could turn their good intentions to concrete action.  While the document circulated had qualified the approach therein as a pilot project, the EC were of the view that it was more adequate to talk of a renewed approach to customs valuation aiming at strengthening and reinvigorating the approach already taken in that Committee.  Looking at the activities undertaken in that Committee, the EC had found that a bottom-up approach to technical assistance in line with their own had already been taken.  It meant that the Committee had looked at the individual needs of countries which had problems in meeting certain deadlines and had identified the necessary steps which would enable countries concerned to implement the various provisions of the Customs Valuation Agreement.  It had also tried to coordinate the various actors which delivered technical assistance.  The EC had taken the initiative to systematise and generalise the principles underlining the approach, in order to strengthen and reinforce the direction of the ongoing work.  The initiative would also help gain experience in applying the general principle referred to earlier in a very important area of WTO work.  If successful, a similar targeted approach could be adopted for example in the areas of Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) or Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS).  The Chair of the Customs Valuation Committee had been mandated to consult informally and the EC hoped to have consensus on the concrete steps necessary to strengthen technical assistance in customs valuation very soon.  The CTD would be kept informed.  The EC hoped that the results of their efforts in the area of customs valuation, and soon after in other Committees, would allow the Committee on Trade and Development to evaluate the results of the EC's renewed approach in line with the CTD's responsibilities on technical assistance and capacity building.
&& The representative of Hong Kong, China was of the view that the new approach would improve the quality and effectiveness of technical assistance to the Members in need.  Capacity‑building could and needed to be addressed in a broader sense to ensure that technical assistance activities in the WTO were properly focused.  It was important to give consideration in parallel to improving the functioning of the Integrated Framework so as to contribute to the enhancement of the work in capacity-building.  As for funding, they appreciated that some Members, including the EC and their member states, had been making voluntary extra-budgetary contributions to enable technical assistance activities to be undertaken.  However, funding from the regular budget was the only way to secure stability and continuity of technical assistance activities.  The representative reiterated its strong support and intention to actively contribute to the work towards this goal, hoping that a satisfactory solution would be achieved in the near future.
&& The representative of Jamaica thanked the EC for their interesting paper and said that an integrated approach as proposed should prove to be a more efficient means of delivering technical assistance and ensuring that technical assistance from and the policies of international organizations were harmonized.  Full participation by recipient countries and a demand-driven orientation should realize great effectiveness and efficiency in the use of technical assistance funding.  There was a general impression that technical assistance was supply-side driven to a significant degree, resulting in a poor match between needs and resources.  In the recent seminar on implementation, her delegation had raised the point that the implementation needs of developing countries went well beyond a basic introduction to elements of the WTO Agreements as many difficulties were encountered in the actual hands-on or practical application of the Agreements.  Such had been Jamaica's experience.  Jamaica had benefitted from assistance in implementing the Customs Valuation Agreement;  however, it faced similar resource constraints in implementing other WTO Agreements, such as those relating to trade remedy rules.  Jamaica would not expect the implementation of a new approach to result in a reduction of the current total level of assistance to recipient countries.  The gap in funding to cover technical activities for the year 2000 and beyond was a perennial concern requiring a long-term, predictable and stable solution.  The solution was in providing funding from the regular budget.  Jamaica welcomed the fact that the importance of providing technical assistance for implementing WTO Agreements and for wider capacity building had come increasingly to the forefront of discussions in the organization.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that the EC delegate's introduction had outlined the basic ideas that the EC wished to follow in its technical assistance activities in the WTO.  Bangladesh welcomed the recognition by the EU that more needed to be done in the area.  There was consensus that adequate resources would need to be found.  There was a group of countries that needed to be brought into the mainstream of technical assistance activities.  They wished to see the principles of ownership, participation, coherence, a demand-driven approach, etc., played up in the new system.  If those principles were followed diligently, it would increase the value-added in technical assistance activities.  He welcomed the proposal that the Integrated Framework be brought into parallel play in the new system.  The IF provided a parallel but very important set of activities which donor countries, particularly important donors like the EC, would have to follow with more diligence.  Bangladesh also welcomed the fact that the EC was not in favor of expanding the IF at that stage.  His delegation was concerned sometime back that there were discussions about expanding the stillborn or not fully developed IF into other areas.  There was no question of expanding it to other countries than the LDCs until they had seen how it shaped up.  Bangladesh also appreciated the point made by the EC that they wished to see a trade and supply response as well as other trade-related activities mainstreamed into the WTO work, reflecting the development strategies of the poorest.  With respect to the Customs Valuation Agreement, he was sure that the EC would keep in mind the different needs of countries in the new programme.  For example, his country had already entered the new phase of the Customs Valuation Agreement commitments.  Therefore, his country's needs were different from those of a country which was awaiting transition.  If there was an overarching concern about being fair and equal to all countries, that in itself would be unfair. 
&& The representative of Canada supported the overall thrust of the EC paper, which advocated among other things a demand-driven and more coherent technical assistance approach.  Canada also expressed support for the Japanese paper on trade-related capacity building.  There were cross-links between the APEC work and the EU proposal.  Technical assistance was a priority and it was important to continue to reflect on it.  The various reports provided by the Secretariat were useful in that respect.  With respect to the funding of technical assistance activities, Canada maintained the view that a greater part should be financed through the regular budget of the WTO.
&& The representative of Malaysia joined other delegations in thanking the EC for their paper on technical assistance.  They acknowledged the commitment of the EC in providing resources for the initial pilot project.  Technical assistance in the area of building capacity needed to focus on improving expertise in trade policy formulation and not only on implementation.  Implementation was important but there were also other aspects of trade policy which needed to be given due consideration.  Countries needed to understand the principles and rationale behind the approach to the multilateral system: trade policy courses provided such an opportunity.  Funding was a major concern and they welcomed the initiatives of donor countries in contributing to technical assistance activities. 
&& The representative of Mexico said that the intention of the EC paper was to reach better coherence in the application of technical assistance in the organization.  The new focus of the EU was based on two pillars: technical assistance and capacity building.  There was a clear distinction being made between the two. The aim of the former was to promote the understanding and use of the WTO rules so that recipients were able to exploit to a maximum the opportunities offered by the multilateral trading system.  That approach was already being applied in various Committees and the Technical Cooperation Division.  The second, capacity-building, went beyond technical assistance and was implicit in the Integrated Framework, which emphasized administrative, technical and financial capacity building.  It would be important to follow and learn from developments in the IF.  In the area of Customs Valuation, there was already a technical assistance programme, coordinated with the Technical Cooperation Division.  There was a coherent approach since both the Committee and the Division carried out the administration of the programme and examined technical assistance support that was being provided by other IGOs, regional organizations and bilateral assistance.  Presenting the outcome of the pilot project in the CTD would be very useful.  The lack of funding was a fundamental concern in the exercise.  With respect to the Integrated Framework, according to information received recently, a fund had been set up at UNCTAD to be able to focus attention on the projects that had been presented in the framework of the IF.  However, at present, it seemed that no project had been implemented due to lack of funding.   In the WTO, there was a Global Fund, through which developed countries could make contributions in order to support technical assistance.  This was a good channel, a part from the possibility of having more funds available from the regular budget.
&& The representative of Norway joined previous speakers in thanking the EC for their constructive paper, which contained a lot of good ideas.  Norway shared the objective of better coordination and structuring of trade related technical assistance, including the formulation of objectives and monitoring and evaluation of projects.  Members could learn from UN organizations with vast experience in projects, including those which were not necessarily technical projects on WTO matters.  Nevertheless, the U.N. had something to teach on how to monitor and evaluate projects.  Her delegation fully agreed with the EC that there was need for more coherence in carrying out of technical assistance activities in the trade area in order to make it more efficient and to avoid overlap.  Norway was not convinced that coordination needed to be done within the WTO.  The WTO should not develop into becoming more of a technical assistance organization, but rather its technical assistance should aimed at helping Members to meet their obligations and benefit from their rights in accordance with the Agreements.  The challenge would be to find a modality on how to achieve coherence and coordination between technical assistance activities of WTO, other IGOs and donor countries.  Norway found the proposed pilot project on customs valuation to be a good initiative.  It was not meant to be exhaustive and other trade-related areas could be of interest as well.  She recalled an intervention by the Moroccan Ambassador at a meeting on implementation some time ago where he had underlined the need for LDCs in Africa to define their needs in the implementation area.  It all boiled down to financing, as had been mentioned by several speakers.  She fully subscribed to what had been eloquently stated by the delegate of Hong Kong, China, both with respect to voluntary contributions and to the financing of technical assistance through the regular budget.  
&& The representative of the European Communities thanked delegates for their appreciation of the paper.  They would take into account all comments made.
&& The Committee took note of the Communication from the EC and the comments thereon.
	(vii)	Japanese Communication on Trade-Related Capacity-Building Proposal as Submitted to APEC (WT/COMTD/W/75)

&& The representative of Japan said that he wished to expand on the Japanese proposal on capacity building as submitted to APEC related to the implementation of WTO Agreements, which was endorsed at the APEC trade ministers meeting held in Darwin on 7 June 2000.  He would explain his delegation's proposal based on the summary of the proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/75.  The full version submitted to APEC had been circulated as a room document that day.  The background of the proposal was clear and self-explanatory.  Developing Members of the WTO were facing difficulties in implementing WTO Agreements.  The question of implementation had been taken up as an important issue in the preparatory process and was one of the reasons why the Members could not reach consensus at the Third Ministerial Conference in Seattle.  In order to strengthen the multilateral trading system and also to integrate developing members within the system, capacity‑building related to implementation of WTO Agreements was a matter of priority.  In the WTO, the importance of confidence‑building measures had been confirmed in early May.  In APEC, Japan's proposal of capacity‑building as APEC's contribution to the WTO had been welcomed by senior officials earlier that year.  The draft proposal had then been circulated to all APEC members.  The revised proposal had been endorsed at the APEC Trade ministers meeting in Darwin, Australia on 6-7 June.  The purpose of the proposal was to facilitate the implementation of WTO Agreements and the integration of developing economies into the multilateral trading system and to alleviate the concerns and the burden of the developing economies of APEC to participate in a new round.  The WTO and other organizations were reviewing the IF, which was designed to support capacity-building of least developed countries.  The Director‑General and the Secretariat were engaged in discussions on capacity-building with other relevant international organizations, such as the World Bank.  On 6 July there would be a high-level coordination meeting on the improvement of the IF.  His delegation fully understood that least‑developed countries had major needs for capacity‑building and supported the IF.  However, more attention needed to be paid to developing countries in general, including developing economies in APEC.  That was the reason why Japan had introduced the proposal in APEC on strategy and on measures to help developing economies in APEC to support capacity building needs.  The gist of the proposal was that based on the needs of the individual economies APEC should have its own initiative for strengthening capacity‑building activities in developing economies, with the cooperation of developed economies in the area, the WTO and other relevant international organizations.  The Japanese proposal consisted of four elements:  (a) identification of needs and drafting of proposals and the APEC strategy;  (b) endorsement of the APEC strategy to be utilised as appropriate in the context of the development strategy of members and related international organizations;  (c) identification of possible sources of funding for the programme;  (d) creation of a mechanism for achieving and following up the programme.  Regarding the objectives to enhance capacity in developing countries, they envisaged the following six elements: (i) expanding knowledge and skills for implementation of WTO Agreements;  (ii) developing a legal framework for domestic implementation;  (iii) enhancing the physical infrastructure for domestic implementation;  (iv) enhancing the negotiation skills of those participating in international negotiations;  (v) building capacity to participate in the international dispute settlement mechanisms of the WTO;  (vi) contributing to support for accession to WTO by new Members.  Questionnaires would be used for the effective identification of needs of developing economies in these six categories, on the basis of which studies would be conducted.  Through such studies, the needs of developing countries in APEC would be identified in detail and concrete projects would be designed.  Two case studies had already carried out to assess the needs for capacity‑building, and there was a very ambitious schedule to carry out the project.  First, on 6-7 June, Trade Ministers had already agreed to develop further the APEC strategy.  Second, after the Trade Ministers meeting, Japan was to distribute the questionnaires to all APEC developing countries.  Third, by the end of August, interested economies would respond to the questionnaires.  Fourth, from September to October, a coordinating group of APEC members would coordinate further activities in view of the studies held in interested economies.  Next, on 12-13 November, on the occasion of the APEC Ministerial Meeting in Brunei and on the basis of the activities already explained, Ministers would be asked to endorse the APEC strategy to be utilised as appropriate in the context of the development strategies of members.  The investment liberalization fund would be allocated to possible pilot projects.  At the same time, it was hoped that Ministers would agree that Members would adjust their priorities as appropriate in their development programmes in the light of the APEC strategy.  Ministers would also be asked to invite relevant international development organizations such as World Bank and the Asian Development Bank to provide support for the programme.  APEC Trade Ministers supported the Japanese proposal to help developing members of APEC in capacity‑building related to the implementation of WTO Agreements.  Japan would continue to cooperate with all APEC economies, the WTO Secretariat and other relevant international organizations to achieve a meaningful result from the initiative. He hoped that his explanation would help Members understand the APEC initiative and that the initiative would complement efforts in the WTO to enhance capacity‑building for implementation of WTO Agreements.  As a supplementary point, another representative of Japan, said that it was an APEC initiative and did not directly relate to WTO.  The paper had been introduced for two reasons: for transparency purposes and to see if any lessons could be drawn from the APEC activities.  They found that the spirit of the APEC initiative had commonalties with the EC initiative.
&& The representative of Canada said that, being a member of APEC and being deeply involved in the initiative, they supported actively Japan's initiative in APEC and agreed with Japan that their objective in APEC was to complement and advance technical assistance activities of the WTO and other organizations.
&& The representative of the United States, referring to the Days of Reflection, asked whether the circulated agenda on the Days of Reflection on Technical Cooperation was a draft and whether there would be consultations with delegations on the content to allow for additions to the agenda.  The United States also hoped to see the draft agendas for the remaining seminars scheduled for that year and wondered whether there would be consultations with delegations on those.
&& The representative of the Secretariat said that the agenda for the Days of Reflection included a series of discussion items based on what was raised in the Committee and also on elements considered internally by the Secretariat.  If the United States delegation wished to make comments the Secretariat would welcome it, bearing in mind that time was short.  Broadly speaking, the programme had an introduction and seven working sessions, to be spread over the two days.  The Secretariat had invited developed and developing country speakers for different sessions to stimulate discussion.  The Chairman would subsequently make a report on his own responsibility.  In discussing a possible date for a special session of the CTD following the Days of Reflection, some delegations were of the view that 28 July would be too soon and had asked for a session in September.  As for the agenda of other CTD activities, the only upcoming event would be the Seminar on Small Economies, the programme of which would be circulated in due course and delegations would have a chance to comment. 
&& The Committee took note of the comments made.
	(vii)	Statement by the Representative of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)

&& The representative of UNIDO made a statement of UNIDO's technical cooperation activities in the field of trade promotion.  (The text of the statement is included in Annex II to these minutes.)

MARKET ACCESS FOR EXPORTS OF THE LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES – INFORMATION PROCEDURES
&& The Chairman refered to the statement made by the Director-General at the 3 May General Council meeting regarding provision of information on market access for exports originating in least‑developed countries, and said he wished to take up an issue of procedure.  He said that normally notifications and information provided on changes to the GSP were sent to the CTD under the provisions of the Enabling Clause.  He assumed, therefore, that information on any actions taken by developed Members under their GSP schemes in favour of LDCs would also be provided in this way.  On the other hand, steps taken by developing countries under the 1999 Waiver on Preferential Tariff Treatment for LDCs were to be notified to the Council on Trade in Goods.  There was clearly an inconsistency here.  What he propose was that, with Members' permission, he would consult with the Chairman of the CTG (and with the Chair of the Sub-Committee on LDCs) on how to resolve this inconsistency.  He proposed that informal consultations could be held once he had spoken to the Chairman of the CTG.
It was so agreed.

ACTIVITIES FOR NON-RESIDENTS
&& The Chairman said he wished to give some information on activities for non-residents that the Secretariat was undertaking at the initiative of the Director-General, and gave the floor to the Director, Development Division, to brief the CTD on this topic.
&& The Director, Development Division said that the Secretariat had initiated a number of activities in respect of non-resident members, of which there were 28, and non-resident observers of which there were nine.  Of these 37 countries, 17 were least-developed.  The first of these initiatives was the hosting by the WTO of the "Geneva Week" in favour of non-residents.  A first Geneva Week was held in November 1999, and the second Geneva Week was scheduled for a full week, running from 21 to 27 October 2000.  It would immediately follow the meeting of the  UNCTAD's Trade and Development Board, beginning with the holding of a seminar on small economies  under the auspices of the CTD, on 21 October, and finishing with the 31st Session of the CTD scheduled for 27 October.  He said that the proposed programme for Geneva Week 2000 gave emphasis to mandated negotiations; to implementation issues; to developments in the field of technical cooperation (including the new structure of the Integrated Framework); to developments in relation to market access and electronic commerce; and to development in the "Trade and…" topics, such as trade and environment, trade and investment and so forth.  It was hoped that other organisations could be invited.  It was intended to finance the participation of one representative from capitals, and one from the European-based Mission (where this existed).  The total cost of the week was estimated at approximately SwF570,000.  The Secretariat would be looking for assistance from Members to meet the costs of Geneva Week 2000.  The second of these initiatives was the preparation of briefing notes, which gave an overview of selected areas of WTO work.  The notes were sent out by e-mail and fax to non- residents.  The notes drew on material already available to Members, and were intended to provide non-residents with a concise overview of on-going activities.  The third set of initiatives lay in discussions held by the Director-General with non-resident Members and certain smaller resident Members in order to examine ways of enhancing the participation of such members in the work of the WTO.  In this context, some Members had proposed that there be established a centre to support the work of non-residents.  In considering such a proposal, it was necessary to avoid duplication with other facilities existing in Geneva, to ensure that there was ownership of the work carried out by the centre, and to ensure that the work was truly responsive to the needs of non‑residents.  Finally, the attention of Members was drawn to a questionnaire circulated on 24 May 2000 requesting feedback from Member on various aspects of WTO work.  To date, 40 replies had been received, out of which 33 were developing or transition economies.  Feedback was sought on the utility of different tools used by the Secretariat to facilitate the dissemination of information.  Responses received showed that the WTO web-site was found by delegations to be most useful, followed by press-releases, the Document Dissemination Facility and the Integrated Data-Base.  Members had suggested that improvements could be made to the Daily Bulletin, in terms of augmenting and standardising the information contained therein. 
&& The representative of Barbados wished to place on record the strong support of her delegation regarding the various initiatives taken by the Director-General on behalf of non-residents.  Her delegation was fully aware of the constraint faced by non-residents.  Her delegation had received favourable feedback from other Members from the Caribbean regarding Geneva Week and the Briefing Notes.  She said that the selected programmes outlined for Geneva Week 2000, and said that her delegation was of the view that statements made by non-residents be fully integrated into work that was on-going in Geneva.  Her delegation also looked forward to the concretisation of initiatives which were aimed at facilitating the participation of non-residents, which had not yet borne fruit.  Her delegation admitted to being one of those which had not yet submitted a response to the questionnaire, and this was partly due to the capacity constraints inherent to smaller missions – a somewhat ironic situation given that the questionnaire was aimed to a large extent to identify just such constraints.  Her delegation would make every effort to submit a response. 

DERESTRICTION OF DOCUMENTS
&& The Chairman recalled that procedures for the derestriction and circulation of documents had been adopted by the General Council, and these could be found in document WT/L/160/Rev.1.  Under paragraph 2(b) of the General Council's decision, the CTD has the right to consider any restricted document for derestriction at any time.  He said that it had be his intention to make a proposal to the CTD regarding the derestriction of documents.  However, he was aware that the issue was also being taken up in the General Council, and that consultations had been conducted by Deputy Director‑General, Mr. M. Rodriguez-Mendoza.  The Chairman's proposal to the CTD would be limited to proposing the derestriction of document WT/COMTD/W/65 on the participation of developing countries in international trade.  This document was first issued in February 2000.  He recalled that it had been agreed under agenda item F that the document would be updated in the course of 2001, should trends in the trade of developing countries warrant such an update.
&& The representative of Mexico sought clarification as to whether, once the document was derestricted by the CTD, it had also to be derestricted by the General Council. 
&& The Chairman said that it was his understanding that under provisions 2(b) of the General Council decision contained in WT/L/160/Rev.1 that the CTD had the authority to derestrict any document if it was so agreed.  It was not his understanding that the matter had then to be refered to the General Council.
&& The representative of India said it had been unclear from the agenda as to which document(s) were going to be proposed for  derestriction, and asked that in future this information be presented more clearly.  His delegation  did not have any objection to the derestriction of document WT/COMTD/W/65.
&& The Chairman formally proposed that document WT/COMTD/W65 be derestricted.
It was so agreed.

WORK PROGRAMME OF THE CTD FOR 2000
&& The Chairman drew the attention of Members to two documents: one entitled "CTD Work Programme for 2000" (WT/COMTD/W/71);  and "Proposed Work Programme for the Year 2000 – Communication from Zambia (WT/COMTD/W/67).  He recalled that CTD had held a number of formal and informal discussions on its work programme over the last year, including at an informal session on 21 January 2000 and the 28th Session of the CTD.  He said that the work programme contained in WT/COMTD/W/71 was already under way.
&& The representative of Mauritius placed on record the support of her delegation for the holding of a seminar on small economies, scheduled for 21 October 2000.
&& The representative of India said his delegation had no problems with the work programme, but wished to ensure that meetings did not clash with the meetings of the other main WTO bodies.
&& The Chairman, proposed that the wok programme be formally adopted. 
It was so agreed. 
&& The Chairman gave the floor to the representative of  Zambia to make a further statement in support of the Zambian proposal in connection with the CTD work programme, that was presented at the 28th Session.
&& The representative of Zambia thanked the staff of the Development Division for their full cooperation, and especially Ms Métivier and Mrs Vittori of the division's secretariat.  His delegation wished to thank all delegations of both developing and developed countries that had supported or showed a positive attitude to the proposal made presented by Zambia at the 28th Session of the CTD.  He said that such an attitude was a real motivation for smaller missions such as his to participate in the meetings of the WTO.  He said that the ultimate objective of the implementation exercise and of work in the WTO was to strengthen the supply capacity of developing countries, especially LDCs, by creating a sound technology base.  Because technology development was the basis for development, transfer arrangements tended to be economically and technologically complex.  It was important to develop capabilities within these countries to facilitate the acquisition of technology.  It was in this context that Zambia had presented a proposal at the 28th Session of the CTD, which received support from members, and which Zambia hoped would soon be an integral part of the CTD work programme.  He said that the Zambia proposal assumed that efforts by the WTO in the implementation of provisions on technology transfer needed to be complemented by other organisations.  The essence of the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W67 was to kick‑start the process of implementation of the provisions relating to technology transfer to developing countries, particularly LDCs, which all Members realised was at the heart of improving the integration of such economies in the global trading system.  The proposal was not about technical assistance, but about the exploration of a mechanism to implement these provisions. While technical assistance remained important in improving supply capacity, it was not a substitute for technology-content products that were essential for developing countries to compete.  He said that in order to compete effectively, products from developing countries needed a technology content, and its blending with current forms of capacity-building.  On its own, the current form of capacity building would not do much to salvage the trade position of LDCs.  Technology content was the dynamo and only hope for integrating LDCs in the world trading system.  He said that Zambia were aware of Uruguay Round Agreements that were supply-oriented.  In addition to TRIPS, other opportunities, that were refered to in the seminar on implementation issues, did exist for the WTO to spur the supply response of LDCs.  These included Agreements such as the GATS, SPS, TBT, TRIMs, Subsidies, Services, and issues such as coherence.  He said that at a later stage it would perhaps be possible to specify to the CTD the potential opportunities of other agreements.  What was needed was simply the political will among developed country trading partners.  This was why Zambia wished to put technology transfer at the centre of WTO activities.  Technology transfer required a series of steps, and the Zambian proposal was about starting that process.  He said that in this context, his delegation strongly supported the suggestion made by Norway in the 28th Session of the CTD that the international organisations listed in the proposal, namely the UNCTAD, the WIPO, the UNIDO, and the World Bank, and indeed any other organisation competent in the area of technology be invited to provide information on their work in the area of technology.  As was said in the seminar on implementation, approaches existed  through which technology transfer could be achieved.  The contributions of organisations such as those mentioned above, and individual experts such as Mr. Jeffrey Sachs, would go a long way in assisting the WTO to implement such important provisions.
&& The representative of the United States recalled that her delegation had expressed an interest in the Zambian proposal, at the 28th Session of the CTD.  Her delegation had received initial favourable feedback from capitals, and looked forward to further work and consultations on the proposal from Zambia, in the context of preparations of the CTDs work programme for 2001.  She also requested the Members be provided with an agenda of scheduled events of the work programme for 2000.
&& The representative of Barbados said that the issue of technology transfer was very important to Barbados, and therefore that her delegation had an interest in the Zambian proposal.  Her delegation was of the view that consideration of the issue not be restricted to TRIPs, but should be extended to other agreements and issues under discussion in the WTO.  
&& The Chairman said that it appeared that there should be consultations on how to move forward the on the proposal made by Zambia, and the issue of technology transfer.  He left it to the Secretariat to give some further thought on how to move forward on work in this area in the context of the CTD.  He said that there were two additional aspects which could be added to the current work programme:  the first was a possible resumption of work on electronic commerce, and the second was the possible input of the WTO to the United Nations High Level Initiative on Financing for Development.  These additions depended on the outcome of the General Council to be held on 17 July.  Both of these needed substantive attention both by the Committee and by the Secretariat.  

GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES: NOTIFICATION BY JAPAN
&& The Chairman offered the floor to the representative of Japan to introduce the item.
&& The representative of Japan said that the notification was contained in WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.9.  He said that there were four points in the document, and added that he wished to explain the first point.  From 1 April 2000, 19 economies had been excluded from the scope Japan's HGSP programme.  These economies were listed in the document.  Japan's intention to exclude these economies was first notified in WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.7 of 10 June 1998.  He quoted from the final paragraph of Annex 1 to that document, which read:  "starting from 1 April 2000, a beneficiary country or territory is to be excluded from the list of GSP beneficiaries if it is classified as a high income economy in the previous three years' World Bank Atlas in a row or, when it is not on the World Bank Atlas, recognized to have the same level of GNP per capita."  In setting such a criterion, Japan had considered the purpose and objectives of the GSP, and the level of development of the territory in question.  Also considered was the strength of domestic industry in Japan, the need to expand benefits to beneficiaries other than advanced economies, and modifications made by other  countries providing  preferences through the GSP.
The CTD took note of the information provided. 

OTHER BUSINESS 
&& The Chairman noted that there was no other business for the 29th Session.  He recalled that the next informal meeting of the CTD was two days of reflection on technical cooperation on 18‑19 July 2000. The CTD would also be organising a seminar on problems of small economies on Saturday, 21 October 2000, and the CTD would be informed in good time of the programme of this Seminar.  This Seminar was a precursor to the second "Geneva Week" of the WTO for non-resident delegations.  Finally, the CTD was to hold its last formal session of the year on 27 October 2000.
&& The Chairman declared the 29th Session of the CTD closed.

ANNEX I

Seminar on the Implementation of WTO Agreements, 26 June 2000

Report by the Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development


A seminar on the Implementation of  WTO Agreements was held on 26 June 2000 under the auspices of the WTO Committee on Trade and Development.  The seminar was opened by the Director-General, who said that implementation issues were among the main reasons for the failure to reach agreement in Seattle and remained a key to the launching of any new negotiations.  A special mechanism established under the General Council had just begun its work, and the seminar should provide insights which would help that process.  Developing countries had an interest in implementing fully WTO Agreements, but there were real problems that required time and technical assistance, while WTO resources were limited.  While some options for industrial development may be foreclosed through implementation, there were other WTO consistent measures for this purpose, and the Director-General indicated his interest in hearing Members' views on the options.  He believed the seminar would be a useful start in the process of resolving the difficult questions relating to implementation.
The seminar took the form of a series of panels covering (a)  an overview of implementation issues; (b)  policy perspectives on implementation; (c)  practical aspects of implementation (focussing mainly on TRIPs, Customs Valuation and TRIMs); (d)  difficulties of developing countries in the pursuit of their rights under the WTO; and (e)  a round-up session looking at the way forward on the issues.  Panelists included Geneva-based ambassadors and other delegates, as well as representatives of international organisations  and the academic community.
Presentations showed that the general theme of implementation covered a number of distinct, but inter-related, issues, including the process of bringing national policy regimes into conformity with multilateral rules and disciplines;  a perception by some Members that benefits expected from the Uruguay Round Agreements had failed to materialise; and a perception by some Members that there existed imbalances and asymmetries in Agreements.  One participant emphasised that there was a number of areas where implementation was proceeding as scheduled, and that a focus in the seminar on problems only could give a misleading impression.
Concerning the process of bringing national policy regimes into conformity with multilateral rules and disciplines, presentations made by panelists and from the floor drew attention to the magnitude of human and financial resources and technical and institutional capacity required to implement a number of the WTO Agreements and to ensure their proper enforcement.  This was perhaps most vividly illustrated by the case of the TRIPS Agreement and the Agreement on Customs Valuation.  The point was also made that failure to achieve conformity was not always primarily a result of resource or capacity constraints.  For example, in the TRIMs Agreement, lack of implementation could also stem from policy considerations, particularly in relation to the anticipated costs of adjustment associated with the phasing out of WTO inconsistent measures, notably in the automotive industry, where most remaining TRIMs were being used. 
A separate set of implementation concerns related to the perception by some Members that anticipated benefits had failed to materialise owing to insufficient action on the part of others. Members cited textiles and clothing, continuing market access barriers and domestic support measures in agriculture, insufficient "Mode Four" liberalisation in services, the cost of anti‑dumping actions for developing country exports, and a lack of operationalization of provisions relating to transfer of technology.  In response, it was stated that in some areas, developed countries had not realized benefits owing to the persistence of access barriers in the markets of developing Members for trade in both goods and services in which developed Members enjoyed a comparative advantage.
Some speakers pointed to perceived asymmetries in WTO Agreements, and a lack of balance in rights and obligations applying to developing country Members.  The view was expressed that, while there may have been imbalances, actions to achieve redressal and rebalancing of Agreements might best be taken as part of further trade negotiations.
The question arose whether the implementation of certain WTO agreements in some countries made economic sense from a policy perspective.  It was suggested that a negative answer could perhaps be given, particularly for certain least-developed countries, where the implementation of certain agreements was particularly onerous from a budgetary point of view.  However, the point was made that the implementation of Agreements which imposed heavy demands on resources could nevertheless yield significant benefits by improving the transparency and predictability of policy regimes and thus signalling the credibility of policy reform to foreign investors.  A positive outcome would also result where implementation required the phasing out of trade-distorting measures.
Technical assistance and capacity-building were cited as important factors in assisting implementation.  In the areas of Intellectual Property Rights and Customs Valuation, specialized agencies such as the WIPO and the WCO devoted considerable resources to supporting Members in the implementation process.  Speakers pointed to problems in WTO technical assistance resulting from difficulties in funding and a focus on the holding of seminars and workshops, which had limited impact in facilitating implementation.  Issues of concern to least-developed countries were raised, notably the severe capacity constraints faced by such countries, which hampered their ability to participate effectively in international trade and to implement their WTO commitments.  Emphasis was given to the need to facilitate access to technology, and to ensure that the Integrated Framework delivered tangible results.
Speakers pointed to the need for coherence in addressing issues related to implementation. One idea that was stressed was the need to develop an overall strategy that could match implementation objectives with costs, time-periods, and inputs of technical and financial assistance.  Some speakers pointed to the need to resolve an inherent tension between the horizontal rule-making approach pursued by the WTO and a case-by-case approach that took into account the specific constraints of individual countries.
A number of speakers pointed out that not all implementation issues could be addressed by technical assistance, capacity building measures or financial support.  In some cases, implementation involved short-term adjustment costs, while benefits would accrue in the longer term.  Implementation was especially problematic where costs appeared to be a certainty, and benefits only a possibility.  It was suggested that greater impetus could be given to implementation if actions in developing countries were matched by actions in developed countries in areas where developing countries held comparative advantage. 
With regard to difficulties experienced by developing countries in the pursuit of their rights within the WTO, it was noted that special and differential treatment provisions were ambiguous, couched in "best endeavour" terms, and not enforceable.  In addition, matters of "interpretation" of WTO provisions had become increasingly significant and had raised questions regarding the balance between policy discretion of individual Members, the collective decision-making responsibilities of the Membership, and the scope and reach of the Dispute Settlement Mechanism.

The final session reviewed much of the discussion during the day.  In relation to the processes currently under way in the WTO, it was emphasised that the objectives of the special mechanism under the General Council were to assess the difficulties, to identify ways to resolve them whether by technical assistance or substantive changes, and to take decisions on the appropriate action.  While paragraphs 21 and 22 of the draft Ministerial Text of 19 October 1999 were the main basis for discussion, it was important to take into account developments that had taken place in recent months.  A good start had been made in the Special Mechanism but it was necessary to move beyond the restatement of positions.  Both the seminar and the General Council discussions had demonstrated that while different views persisted in some areas, there was full recognition of the importance of implementation issues and the need to resolve them.
ANNEX II

Statement by
&& Mr. O. Maizza-Neto, Director, Executive Office of the Director General
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, Vienna, Austria


First of all, let me thank you for the opportunity to address the Committee today.
Being headquartered in Vienna, we have limited scope to cooperate with the permanent missions in Geneva. Some few are accredited to us from here.  The large majority, however,  does not have the opportunity to participate in our board and technical meetings.  Hence, we thought it would be opportune to bring ourselves closer to you and to provide you with an update of our activities and programmes, particularly those that are relevant in the context of international trade. 
Obviously, industry and trade have a strong correlation, as without productive and technological capacity, countries have limited ability to diversify their exports and engage in high-value added, international trade. So from a supply-side perspective, much of what UNIDO does, impacts on the developing countries ability to trade at the national, regional and international level.
By the nature of UNIDO’s work and mandate, UNIDO’s  contribution to trade promotion is through promoting the industrial competitiveness of developing countries,  improving their productive capacities and addressing overall supply-side conditions.  By concentrating on the linkage between agriculture and industry, particularly in Africa, UNIDO responds to the urgent need for diversification of  their largely commodity-based economies. 
As some of you may know, UNIDO has engaged in a major reform process that was launched in early 1998. Since then, UNIDO has drastically reoriented its operations, both on the administrative and organizational level, but most importantly on the programmatic level. Basically, UNIDO has been refocusing its services into 16 core services in pursuit of sustainable industrial development, which the organization defines as competitive economy, productive employment, and a sound environment (the so-called 3 E’s). These basic dimensions capture the essence of UNIDO’s services, intended to enhance the competitiveness of enterprises and of the countries in which they operate, to address and prevent ecological problems in industrialization, and to stimulate the creation of productive jobs. 
	UNIDO Services in the Field of Trade Promotion

Without going into the detail of all 16 services, let me briefly pinpoint those are relevant from a trade and supply-side perspective. I also wish to underline, that UNIDO is by and large a technical assistance agency, focussing on practical, project-driven type of programmes and with less emphasis to analysis, research and reporting.
formulation of industrial or supply-side policies. The main objective of this service is to encourage good industrial governance by providing policy advice and build institutional capacity for policy analysis and formulation. In the process of policy formulation and implementation, UNIDO suggests to set up public-private sector consultation mechanisms  so as to fully involve the private sector and tap into its developmental potential. Often a environmental policy element is being introduced, such as in China, where UNIDO is conceiving strategies for the competitiveness of key sectors, in particular the automotive sector. 

sub-sectoral support, Under this service modules, UNIDO seeks to strengthen the link between agriculture with industry and to upgrade entire productive systems in the agro-industry sector. In line with UNIDO’s comparative expertise, priority sector include food processing, textile and leather, wood, agro-machinery and chemicals. To enable the production of competitive goods of consistent quality demanded by the specific markets, UNIDO pursues a holistic approach, involving the full range of  sector-specific and cross-sectoral institutions and policy issues.  Projects also integrate factory-level support, such as technology assessments and on-the job training on technology transfer issues, product quality, process optimization, maintenance, cost minimization and product safety. 

continuous improvement and quality management at the productive level. The aim of this service module, is to restructure and upgrade industries to enhance their competitiveness, through the introduction of quality management principles. At the institutional level, UNIDO works with local institutions which are being trained in enterprise diagnosis, technical audits, performance improvement and good manufacturing practices.  Through these institutions, UNIDO works directly with enterprises which are being coached in the implementation of the financial and operational restructuring plans.

support to standardization, certification and metrology bodies. The aim of this service module is to strengthen country’s standardization infrastructure together with national capacities at government, institutional and enterprise level.  This involves the technical and managerial upgrading of national or regional standardization bodies. It also involves the establishment or improvement of certification and accreditation procedures.  National and regional certification and accreditation bodies are being supported to achieve international recognition of certification for products, systems, laboratories, tests and technical personnel. Institutions in turn improve the capacity at the enterprise level for improved product and process quality, export performance, environmental performance and certification to relevant international standards.

	A good example of this service module has found application in  Uganda, whose exports to the EU were banned due to the contamination of fish from the Great Lakes. In parallel with the formulation of safety regulations and inspection standards, UNIDO has been setting up a laboratory and certification procedure to ensure compliance with EU regulations, as a result of which Uganda managed to obtain re-access of its fish products to the European market.

cleaner production programmes, pollution control and waste management.  The objective is to create a sustainable balance between industrial development and environmental management and conservation.

	By advising on appropriate clean and waste management technologies and related production processes, UNIDO seeks to reduce environmental degradation and pollution caused by industrial production. A centrepiece in this are the national cleaner production centres (CPCs), which provide advisory services to the local industry. UNIDO has established CPCs in some 17 countries ( including Guatemala, Morocco, the Russian Federation, Hungary, India, Nicaragua, Mexico, Slovakia, Tunisia, Tanzania, Vietnam and Tanzania), while an additional three are planned in Ethiopia, Kenya and Mozambique.

	A sector-specific centre, focusing on the oil and gas industry, was established in the Russian Federation. In the pesticide sector, a regional cleaner production and information programme covers some 15 countries in Asia and the Pacific. This resulted in the banning of the most persistent and toxic pesticides and facilitated the introduction of new environmentally friendly and bio-pesticides.

private sector and enterprise development. UNIDO places private sector development at the core of its vision and technical assistance and fully subscribes to the global shift away from government intervention towards the creation of an environment in which market forces play a dominant role.

	UNIDO projects are based on an integrated support strategy, that may include the promotion of a more favourable policy and institutional environment for SMEs, the strengthening of business service centres and business incubators with a view to create, expand and modernize private enterprises. They may also involve the formation of SME clusters of enterprises to allow for collective business strategies. Such an integrated private sector development programme is under implementation in Guinea, where he types of enterprises targeted vary form micro and small enterprises (such as artisans in the traditional textile sector) to formal, medium-sized enterprises ( ready to engage in partnerships with foreign investors).

	In addition, UNIDO is increasingly establishing linkages with institutions and enterprises in the private sector of developed countries, many of which have become partners in projects or providers of technical cooperation. In India, for example, UNIDO has forged a partnership with FIAT, INSEAD, the Prince of Wales Business Leaders Forum, and the automotive component manufacturers association of India.  The aim is to strengthen the supply chain of Indian SMEs in the automotive component sector, with a view to linking them up with the supplier network of FIAT. Through provision of shop-floor level expert advice in areas such as management, quality, productivity, Indian SME’s are being upgraded to meet international quality levels and become accredited suppliers to FIAT.

investment and technology promotion.  Investment and technological innovation are the prime movers of economic development and globalization. To achieve sustainable increases in investment and technology flows, UNIDO strengthens local investment promotion agencies in the promotion and negotiation of foreign investment and technology projects, with a view to forming international industrial partnerships, particularly among SMEs. To this end, UNIDO offers a package of tools and methodologies for the formulation and appraisal of investment projects, their promotion towards foreign investors, the finalization of cooperation agreements as well as linkages with the financing system. Under a recent initiative, the UNIDO Exchange, UNIDO is setting up an electronic platform, accessible through our home page, which includes databases on investment opportunities,  technologies and many referral points, while allowing partners to engage in business interactions.

Integrated Programming Strategy

A central element of  UNIDO’s reform, was not only the focusing and streamlining of its technical assistance services, but also a rethinking in the way these services are being delivered. While in the past, UNIDO would address support requirements through small projects isolated from each other, the new strategy is to package services into integrated country programmes, with well-defined linkages among the various components allowing for a more holistic approach and multi-disciplinary solutions. 
Since 1998, integrated programmes have become the main vehicles for UNIDO’s technical cooperation activities.  Currently there are 29 ongoing programmes, of which 10 are in Africa, 6 in Arab Countries, 3 in Asia and the Pacific, 5 in Eastern and Central Europe and NIS, and 5 in Latin America and the Caribbean. An additional 11 programmes are at various stages of development.  Of the total, 14 are in LDCs. 
These integrated programmes are on average based on 4 to 5 service modules, have a duration of 3 years, and an average budget of USD 6 million. Cross-cutting themes are agro-based sectoral support, quality and standardization and  SME and private sector development. Admittingly, the mobilization of full funding remains a challenge.  Operating on the allocation of seed money from the Industrial Decade from Africa and various donor contributions to UNIDO’s Industrial Development Fund, additional donor funding is hoped to be leveraged and we are strongly advocating government ownership in the funds mobilization process. 
Cooperation and Coordination with the WTO

As most of you will be aware, UNIDO is not a member of the core group of six agencies under the Integrated Framework for LDCs. However, we are an associated partner which allows us to participate in the roundtable preparations, if it is so requested by Governments. In the case of Tanzania, Haiti, and Guinea (and  Madagascar, which is currently preparing a roundtable later in the year), UNIDO’s supply-side oriented technical assistance programmes were included in the multi-year technical assistance packages presented at the roundtable meetings.
UNIDO has been seeking coordination with the JITAP programme, so as to ensure compatibility between the trade promotion and supply-side support. This is particularly important, as in five of the eight  JITAP countries, UNIDO has ongoing integrated programmes under implementation (Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Tanzania and Uganda).  Coordination is pursued at the level of the ITC Management unit and through the focal points at the field level.
Finally, there is a current initiative to explore a dedicated cooperation with the WTO in the field of TBT and quality and standardization related support programmes. An initial idea that we are discussing is to set up a global monitoring system to record countries constraints in complying with international standards and to identify their specific needs to overcome these constraints, be it at policy, infra-structural or technical capacity level. The aim is to initially involve some 20 African countries and  to draw up dedicated technical assistance programme to address the identified needs. We hope to have a chance to discuss this proposal in more detail in the context of next week’s seminar on technical assistance in the context of the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade. 
let me end by informing you that UNIDO has a small liaison office here in Geneva, so should you have any specific questions on UNIDO’s services or the specific activities under implementation in your countries, please do not hesitate to contact Ms. Elisabeth Merz, the liaison officer in the UNIDO Office at Geneva.
__________


 This was first issued as Job No. 4175 on 30/06/2000.
 Job(99)/5868/Rev.1

WT/COMTD/M/29 Page  PAGE 46



	WT/COMTD/M/29 	Page  PAGE 43













