WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/51
13 April 2005


(05-1518)


Committee on Trade and Development
Fifty-First Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 16, 26 NOVEMBER AND 10 DECEMBER 2004

Chairperson:  H. E. Mr. C. Trevor Clarke (Barbados)


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC100135314" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC100135314 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC100135315" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC100135315 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc100135316" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc100135316 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc100135317" (ii)	Request for observer status by the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States	 PAGEREF _Toc100135317 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc100135318" (iii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc100135318 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC100135319" C.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC100135319 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc100135320" (i)	Presentation of the International Development Law Organization	 PAGEREF _Toc100135320 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc100135321" (ii)	Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/133/Rev.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc100135321 \h 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC100135322" D.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC100135322 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC100135323" E.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in Order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC100135323 \H 26
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC100135324" F.	Electronic Commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC100135324 \H 32
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC100135325" G.	Graduation of the Maldives from LDC Status (WT/COMTD/W/128)	 PAGEREF _TOC100135325 \H 32
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC100135326" H.	Participation of the Developing Economies in the Global Trading System (WT/COMTD/W/136)	 PAGEREF _TOC100135326 \H 32
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC100135327" I.	Draft Annual Report (WT/COMTD/W/137)	 PAGEREF _TOC100135327 \H 35
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC100135328" J.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC100135328 \H 35


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman recalled that the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in document WTO/AIR/2425/Rev.1 circulated on 11 November 2004. 
&& The Chairman proposed to place an item on the agenda under Other Business.  This item concerned the 2004 Joint WTO/OECD Report on Trade‑Related Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (TRTA/CB).
&& The Committee adopted the agenda as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman noted that agenda Item B(i) related to requests for ad hoc observer status.  He recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the African Union (AU);  the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the Pacific Islands Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, those organizations had been invited to the meeting.  He then proposed that those organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so decided.
Request for observer status by the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
&& The Chairman recalled a request from the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) to be granted observer status to the Committee on Trade and Development.  At  the previous meeting, the Committee agreed to the Chairman's proposal to have informal consultations on the request with the interested delegations and to revert to it at the present meeting.  He reported that following his consultations there was still no change in the position of Members that would allow the OECS observer status at that time.  He said the OECS had indicated a willingness to accept ad hoc observer status if Members were willing to grant it.  He asked that Members give consideration to that request at the next meeting.  
&& The Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Arab Group said that this proposal might be the way out of the current impasse.  His delegation was willing to consider ad hoc observer status for the OECS at the next meeting.
&& The Representative of Antigua and Barbuda spoke on behalf of the six countries of the OECS: Antigua and Barbuda;  Dominica;  St. Kitts and Nevis;  Grenada;  Saint Lucia and St. Vincent and the Grenadines, all island states with a combined population of half a million people.  His delegation's main concern was to have representation in Geneva.  He said that since becoming a Member of WTO, there had been no representation in Geneva and that participation had also been insufficient and infrequent.  He said that the Prime-Ministers of the OECS had met the previous week, and among other issues, the OECS' application for WTO observation status was discussed.  At that meeting, the Prime-Ministers expressed regret that the initial application was unsuccessful, especially at such a critical time during the negotiations when small states needed to have a voice at the table along with the other Members of WTO.  The Prime-Ministers had also expressed hope that the difficulties faced by the OECS' request for observership would eventually be resolved.  He thanked the representative of Egypt for the intervention and for a positive signal that showed that the Committee was moving towards full inclusion of all Members.  
&& The Committee agreed that the ad hoc status of the OECS in the WTO would be addressed at the next meeting.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman noted that the third sub-item in that item of the agenda related to outstanding requests for observer status.  At previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of such requests.  Those requests came from the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie and from the Common Fund for Commodities.  He recalled that the positions of delegations were well known and were on the record.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would revert to those requests at the next meting.  
It was so agreed.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING 
Presentation of the International Development Law Organization
&& The Chairman recalled that at its last meeting, the Committee agreed to the International Development Law Organization's (IDLO) request to make a presentation on the objectives and activities of the IDLO in the field of technical assistance.  He offered the floor to the representative of  the IDLO for the presentation.  
The IDLO representative made the following presentation: 
"It is a great honor to address the Committee on Trade and Development of the WTO on behalf of the International Development Law Organization or IDLO.  I come here today to report to you on the active partnership between the WTO and IDLO and to suggest ways in which this partnership can be strengthened.
For those who do not know us, let me offer a brief introduction.  IDLO is an international intergovernmental organization founded in 1983 and is headquartered in Rome, Italy, with regional offices in Sydney, Cairo and Kabul.  Currently IDLO has 17 member states.  In its 21 year history IDLO has been a pioneer in promoting the rule of law and good governance as key elements of the development process.  IDLO offers training and technical assistance to legislative, regulatory, and judicial institutions and officials in developing and transition economy countries.  To date, IDLO has trained or provided technical assistance to more than 14,000 lawyers and other officials from 162 states.  The alumni of IDLO programs have gathered together to form national alumni associations to advance legal reform and disseminate legal knowledge in 38 countries.  The extensive scope of IDLO's work has established its international reputation as one of the leading organizations with a core competency in building legal and institutional capacity in developing countries.
A critical way in which IDLO has worked to advance the rule of law is by building the capacities of developing and least‑developed countries to understand and work with the rules-based multilateral trading system.  Over the past five years, IDLO has emerged as a center of excellence in trade capacity building.  A cornerstone of those activities is its three-week regional Public International Trade Law Course, which IDLO offers three times a year in different locations around the world for participants coming from developing and least-developed countries and economies in transition.  Through this course and other programs conducted on an ad hoc basis, IDLO has trained hundreds of trade officials from 75 countries since 2000, in close partnership with WTO, which has contributed experts and materials for these courses.  Results of IDLO evaluations of these programs, as further recognized by WTO officials involved, have been overwhelmingly positive.
In addition to providing professionals with relevant knowledge on trade law and policy, IDLO has helped build institutions capable of disseminating such knowledge on a sustainable basis.  IDLO provided technical and advisory support to create the Trade Law Center for Southern Africa or TRALAC.  This center serves as an example of how building local expertise can lead to the sustainable circulation of trade law knowledge on a regional basis.  Similarly, IDLO's efforts to build the capacities of the alumni of its programs have also begun to pay dividends in the field of trade:  by way of example, Sri Lankan alumni chapter recently conducted its first locally-organized training session on trade law, which was followed by a specific workshop on TRIPS.  Similarly, the IDLO alumni association in Romania organized three events focusing on TRIPS and other Intellectual Property related issues this year.  I also know that some alumni of IDLO's trade courses are now delegates to the WTO;  some may even be in the room today.
To formalize the WTO/IDLO relationship and increase collaboration, IDLO and the WTO entered a Memorandum of Understanding in 2003.  Under this agreement, over 50 staff of the WTO Secretariat have contributed to IDLO programs.  In addition, in 2003 the WTO and IDLO co-financed a Trade Training Capacity Building Program and last month, a Public International Trade Law Course in Sydney for trade officials from developing and least-developed countries of the Asian and Pacific regions.  We must now continue identifying concrete actions that can consolidate and broaden the field of cooperation between the two organizations.
IDLO can further assist the WTO in carrying out its mandate in a variety of ways. 
First, IDLO can play a role in carrying out technical assistance to align domestic law and regulation with WTO obligations with specific concern for newly acceding WTO member states and those that are planning to join the Organization.  In doing so, IDLO can draw upon its expertise in the broader field of regulatory law and policy.  These efforts are critical not only to ensure that WTO obligations are respected but, more importantly, have legal effect and allow countries to exploit the benefits of the multilateral trading system.
Second, in terms of plans currently being formulated between the organizations, IDLO hopes to collaborate with the WTO on sub-regional trade training capacity building courses.  This new set of activities would enhance trade training capacity and trade related economic research expertise within national and regional trade training institutions on the range of WTO topics.
Third, IDLO can apply its substantial expertise in the area of judicial training to assist states in meeting their obligations under various WTO Agreements.  Assistance on developing the capacities of judiciaries to enforce laws giving effect to agreements such as TRIPs, as recently done in Bulgaria, Colombia, Guinea Conakry, Mali and Senegal, is one example of how this work could be performed.
Fourth, IDLO can lend its expertise in identifying needs and designing capacity building programs to developing countries undertaking needs assessments to determine their own technical assistance and training needs.
Finally, IDLO would like to assist the WTO in its efforts to continuously improve the quality of its trade capacity building activities, focusing on concrete and sustainable skills development.  
Furthermore, IDLO wishes to announce its desire to engage the WTO Secretariat in an upcoming pilot capacity building project it plans to undertake with the Ministry of Trade in Afghanistan, with the financial support of the Italian government.
To explore these and other possible areas of collaboration, IDLO professional staff have accompanied me on this mission and during this week we will consult with interested WTO staff and delegations. 
To realize the aims of a mutually beneficial, rules-based multilateral trading system, we must continue in our commitment to help developing and least-developed countries play a meaningful role in it.  IDLO agrees strongly with the Doha Declaration’s statement that technical cooperation and capacity building are core elements of the development dimension of the multilateral trading system.  The scale of the challenge is formidable, but it is a challenge that IDLO, through its ever-strengthening partnership with the WTO, is eager to address."
&& The Chairman on behalf of the Committee thanked the IDLO for the presentation and opened the floor for any questions and comments on IDLO's technical assistance activities.  
&& The Representative of Australia noted that the Australian Government was very pleased to provide financial assistance through the APEC Support Fund to IDLO for its public international trade law course which was held in Sydney, October 2004.  Her delegation agreed with the IDLO's statement that it was a very good course and considered it a practical contribution to the developing country participants in the course, particularly those from the Asia and Pacific region.  Her delegation hoped that the course would be held again and continue to be of assistance to those seeking to enhance implementation and improve the effectiveness of their trade policy and strategy.
&& The Representative of Colombia said that her country was one of those which had benefited from the technical assistance provided by the IDLO.  She expressed support for the strengthening of cooperation between the IDLO and the WTO and noted that other areas of the work of the WTO which might be of interest to the developing countries should be explored.
&& The Representative of the United States said that her delegation welcomed the information as well as the ideas put forward on how the IDLO could work more intensively with the WTO in the future.  She considered it helpful to have the institutions which were cooperating with  the WTO speak to the Committee and inform Members of their activities to meet the needs being faced by Members.  She was of the view that other institutions doing work with the WTO should also be invited to share their experiences.
&& The Representative of Egypt endorsed the partnership between the WTO and the IDLO as it would contribute to advance the technical cooperation programmes.  He said that integration of developing countries into a multilateral rules-based system required legal assistance in the field of legal reform and building of institutional capacity.  
&& The Representative of Malaysia said that her country had also benefited from the IDLO courses held in Australia in which she was one of the participants in Sydney in 2001.  She said that the course provided her with a first exposure to the WTO agreements and a good foundation of knowledge on WTO.  She was pleased to hear that the IDLO had continued to draw up programmes and cooperation with other bodies and provided better coherence in terms of technical cooperation for developing countries and LDCs.  She believed that the IDLO's work would help build up a large body of WTO expertise, especially among developing countries.
&& The Representative of Venezuela said that this visit allowed Members to understand the work of organizations that lend assistance to developing countries to make their national legislations compatible with international commitments, particularly WTO commitments.  He asked what  the IDLO's plan was for negotiation capacity building or, in other words, assisting governments in their efforts to carry out negotiations.
&& The Representative of the European Communities commended the IDLO for its very impressive numbers, including the training of 14,000 lawyers and officials in 162 states and the 38 alumni associations.  These associations were important to keep contacts between the participants and to increase further knowledge.  His delegation thought that the IDLO focused on what was a very important part of the integration of the developing countries into the multilateral trading system, particularly the legal, regulatory, judicial and institutional strengthening of the developing countries, which was key for their participation and integration into the global economy.  He said that the five ways in which the IDLO provided assistances were extremely focused.  He noted the role that the IDLO could play in performing needs assessments, which his delegation viewed as an important element.  
&& The Representative of Costa Rica said that the presentation and particularly the commitments toward the building of technical assistance in favour of developing and least-developed countries  would allow those countries to increase their participations in world trade negotiations.  He also thanked the donors for the contributions, so that the IDLO might carry out its objectives.  He continued by saying that Costa Rica was one of the countries which benefited from IDLO's technical assistance and his delegation supported the work and shared the ideas to strengthen links with work done by the WTO Secretariat.  His delegation also asked whether the IDLO was going to integrate into its training programme a subject concerning the facilitation of trade negotiations.
&& The Representative of Canada noted the wide range of sponsorships and partnerships that the IDLO had secured. These relations included governments of developed and developing countries, multilateral organisations, private sector cooperation and private individuals.  She noted the significant amount of pro bono work that was done for the organization.  This showed how much people respected the work of the IDLO.  She also commended the work of the IDLO on gender balance in training programmes, the elimination of discrimination against women and  efforts aimed at improving the legal literacy of women.  
&& The Representative of Morocco said that his country had also benefited from the IDLO's activities.  He asked for more information from the IDLO on the technical assistance programmes that would benefit Arab countries.
&& The Representative of India thanked the IDLO for the information provided on the scope and parameter of its various technical assistance activities.  He would pass this information on to his authorities in the capital. 
&& The Representative of the Kyrgyz Republic said that his country still lacked a solid base of trade lawyers and had never been a recipient of the IDLO's assistance.  His delegation expressed a wish to participate in the IDLO's programme.
&& The Representative of Kenya stated that his country was also a beneficiary of the IDLO.  He asked whether the IDLO did or planned to do any analytical work to see how WTO rules affect individual economies and how they tied in to development in the process.
&& The Representative of Indonesia expressed his expectation that the IDLO would work closely with the WTO to provide capacity building.  He said his delegation would like to have consultations with the IDLO on how to benefit from its activities.  He also sought information on the activities that took place in the Asian region.
&& The Representative of Rwanda said his delegation would like to learn more and wished to establish a contact with the IDLO.  He said that Rwanda, as an LDC, needed a lot of legal assistance and assistance in analysing WTO commitments and their implications on development.  He supported the comments made by the representative of Canada about the importance of the women's programmes, women's protection and legal activities.  
&& The Representative of China said that he had benefited from IDLO's assistance and believed that it was useful.  His delegation encouraged the IDLO to continue its technical assistance activities in capacity building to developing countries.
&& The Representative of Djibouti asked whether the IDLO had specific programmes for LDCs, especially for African countries, and whether the IDLO offered any policy guidance on implementation of WTO rules.
&& The Representative of the IDLO responded that he was pleased that a number of delegations knew IDLO so well.  With regard to the question about negotiations, he said the IDLO had initially started its activities by giving courses on how to negotiate.  In response to Djibouti's question, he said that in 2005 the course for development law in Rome would be devoted to Francophone countries and that Djibouti could follow that course.  He noted that some of the Members stressed the concerns related to equal treatment between men and women, and agreed that women played a fundamental role in the development of developing countries.  He also stressed the importance of the rule of law in development and investment, because the lack of clear rules discouraged entrepreneurs and capital from coming in from abroad for investment purposes.  He, therefore, thought that those were serious obstacles for development.  In response to the representative of Morocco, he noted that an agreement had been signed in Cairo a month ago with Arab Ministers of Justice for the setting up of a regional centre in Cairo which would cover the Arab region and would enhance cooperation with those countries.  To respond to the representative of Kenya concerned about the assessment of the results and the impact of activities, he said this was done with local authorities and with the participants.  He concluded by saying that the aim of his visit was to create better work conditions between the WTO and the IDLO so that it could better respond to the needs of developing countries.
&& The Committee took note of all statements made.
Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/133/Rev.1)
&& The Chairman recalled that at the previous meeting, the Committee had already started its examination of the Technical Assistance (TA) Plan for 2005.  At that meeting, several Members made comments and suggestions.  Those were incorporated into a revised version of the draft Plan.  That revised version was circulated under document WT/COMTD/W/133/Rev.1.  He invited the representative of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) of WTO to present that revised version of the TA Plan for 2005.  
&& The Secretariat noted that it had made a few changes to the TA Plan following the discussions at the last meeting.  The changes mostly concerned paragraph 69, as well as the corresponding parts in the annex to the Plan, i.e. reflecting the way the Decision of the General Council in August, the "July package," was taken account of in the Plan.  This meant that:
The regional seminars on Trade and Investment and Trade and Competition Policy were deleted and requests for TA in these areas would be handled through national seminars as had been indicated at the last meeting. Regional seminars could be held, but only if several national requests emerged in the same (sub-)region;
These topics would stay on the agenda of the Trade Policy Courses (Geneva and RTPCs);
The duration of the regional seminars on NAMA was increased by one day; 
The number of participants to the regional seminars on trade facilitation was doubled;
A world-wide coverage of NAMA and trade facilitation would be assured; 
Targeted assistance would be provided in the field of services, as called for by the General Council Decision, with a view to enabling developing countries to participate effectively in the services negotiations.  Thus, in this area, the request–offer process for new or improved commitments would lead to a country-focused advice to stimulate national contributions;  in essence the emphasis of TA would rest with the national seminars, which were better geared towards addressing the issues;
Regional seminars on services would be maintained, and focus on developments in rule-making negotiations and other relevant issues arising from the ongoing services negotiations.  The venue for these seminars needed to be decided by the Services Division in consultation with ITTC and the Members.

He added that regarding budgeting, there had been a number of discussions and the Secretariat had issued a new document with the financial figures related to the implementation of the Plan which had been issued as JOB/04/150.
&& The Representative of Morocco, speaking on behalf of the Arab Group, welcomed the content and the products of the 2005 Plan, which largely responded to the development dimension of the Ministerial Declaration and the Doha Development Agenda, and the relevant elements contained in the July package, notably in technical assistance and capacity building.  The Arab Group noted that the Plan was designed to enable the WTO Secretariat to achieve the key objectives mandated by Members, namely to enhance institutional and human capacity in the beneficiary countries and to deal with trade policy concerns through coherent activities and a sound balance between quantity and quality.  The Arab Group endorsed the objectives of the activities set out in the Plan to mainstream trade into national development policies and poverty reduction.  Such activities should also help to bring about a better share for the beneficiaries in the multilateral trading system and their effective participation in the Doha negotiations with the support of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation.  The WTO Arab Group also welcomed the scheduled organization of regional trade policy courses in regions which had not yet benefited from them, including the region of the Arab countries and the Middle East.  The Arab Group expected this initiative to go forward and it stood ready to consider the details with the Secretariat of that Organization.  The Arab Group endorsed the flexible nature of the TA Plan 2005 and reserved the right to call later for activities to be organized and to clarify certain types of programmes so that they were in keeping with the needs of the regional group.  He encouraged the Secretariat to pursue the regional partnerships approach, and emphasized the importance of follow-up and assessment of technical assistance activities for the purpose of quality enhancement.  However, any assessment must be flexible, transparent, equitable and realistic, both at the institutional level and at the level of indicator definition and performance objectives.
&& The Representative of European Communities said that his delegation was happy with the sensible solution found for the three Singapore issues that were dropped in the July package.  He thought that was a pragmatic approach and ensured that the WTO would stay involved in those three issues which in his delegation's view were important for developing countries.  He asked whether the Secretariat could take a more proactive approach in offering specific assistance to those countries that wanted assistance to prepare their services offers to ensure that they were able to meet the deadline of May 2005.  He also urged the Secretariat to explore the possibility of cooperating with other institutions such as the International Trade Centre (ITC) on this issue.  Regarding needs assessments, his delegation thought this to be an extremely important element of making TA more relevant, efficient and effective.  He acknowledged what the WTO had done in this area, including the establishment of trade clinics and guidelines for developing Members to do the needs assessment themselves.  He suggested including needs assessments in the criteria for accepting TA requests from developing countries.  On the Integrated Framework (IF) and JITAP programmes, he believed that the participation of the WTO in the IF's Diagnostic Trade Integration Studies (DTIS) should be funded from the WTO's regular budget.  The activities that related to the result of the DTIS, the so called Technical Assistance Matrix, qualified for the global trust fund.  He thought the participation of the WTO itself should come from the regular budget.  Lastly, he said his delegation was happy to see that the overall budget proposal for the global trust fund for next year now amounted to CHF 34 million.
&& The Representative of Japan said that the TA Plan 2005 reflected the discussions held so far and that his delegation supported the revised Plan and appreciated the efforts made by the  Secretariat.
&& The Representative of Benin noted that the CTD would have an important role to play in the run up to the next Ministerial Conference.  Regarding the issue of cotton, he called for consistency between the development side and the trade side.  He recommended that the results achieved on the development side of the Sectoral Initiative on Cotton should be reported periodically and that the WTO Sixth Ministerial Conference, scheduled for Hong Kong, China in December 2005, undertake an overall assessment of these results.  He said it would be necessary in 2005 to organize a follow-up meeting of the cotton workshop held in Cotonou in March 2004 to take stock of the situation.  As for the Sub-Committee on Cotton which was established on 19 November 2004, Members should receive periodic reports on the progress made on the development dimension of the cotton issue.  He called attention to the difficult economic and social consequences that the expiry of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC) would have on developing country Members that were cotton producers and exporters.  He said it was incumbent upon the Membership to seek useful solutions to cope with this new situation.
&& The Representative of Kenya sought clarification on whether regional activities on customs valuation, dispute settlement, rules, GATS and trade and environment would be extended to Africa.  He said some of the African countries, if not all, would need the workshop on these issues to be in their region.  He also said that needs assessments should not make access to TA more difficult than it was at the moment.  His delegation said that it needed more information to be able to understand the suggestion proposed by the European Communities.
&& The Representative of Djibouti supported the issues raised by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the Arab Group Members of the WTO.  He thanked the WTO Secretariat for having taken into account the certain subjects within TA, for example, the NAMA negotiations, trade facilitation and services.  His delegation believed that those fields were important to Africa and the LDCs.  He said that at the regional level, there should be balance in terms of the organization of the seminars and added that there was only one regional seminar in East Africa in English and none in French. 
&& The Representative of Peru said that the TA Plan 2005 would allow Members to assess with greater detail the results of such technical assistance and how it would benefit each region, particularly developing countries and Latin America.  His delegation gave special importance to the trade policy courses in Spanish and understood that a course was not being scheduled for 2005, but would be held permanently for the next few years.  That was important so that Latin American countries could benefit more from the training courses in Spanish.  His delegation wished to include in the Doha programme the interests of Latin America or the Andean sub-region in the area of rules, particularly fisheries subsidies.
&& The Representative of Egypt suggested that activities on government procurement be carried out on a national basis for those countries that requested it.
&& The Representative of Rwanda said that African countries had great problems in submitting their services offers because they could not carry out the necessary national assessments.  Some assistance had been provided by the ITC and some countries such as Canada and the United States, but assistance was still limited to certain countries.  He noted in the Plan that there were seminars scheduled for the sub-region but that this had not been confirmed.  He asked that Africa be included.  He asked the Services Division to be ready to receive national requests concerning national assessments, and, if possible, that these assessments be carried out by the WTO Secretariat.  African countries could then actively participate in the negotiations in services.
&& The Representative of India was of the view that the TA Plan should be in step with the mandate in the Doha Declaration and the July General Council Decision and remain demand driven.  Also, he said there should be no pre-conditions for access to TA.  He sought clarification from the Secretariat on the issue.
&& The Representative of Venezuela, like Egypt, also asked about government procurement and why some of the Singapore issues were still included in trade policy courses as stated in paragraph 69 of the Plan.
&& The Representative of China noted that TA was related to ongoing negotiations or existing agreements.  He noted, however, that the ATC would expire in 2005.  He said, therefore, that activities on textiles were no longer relevant after that date.  He suggested that there should be no regional activities in the area of textiles and that any assistance on this matter should be addressed on the basis of individual requests.
In regard to the regional services seminars, the representative of Brazil said that help in making services offers should be balanced and also address rule-making.  He agreed with China on the points made on textiles.
&& The Representative of Malaysia questioned the need for regional seminars on government procurement since the Government Procurement Agreement was a plurilateral agreement.  
&& The Representative of Thailand expressed concern about the EC's proposal especially since technical assistance was demand driven and Members should conduct their own assessment.  He also requested more information on technical assistance activities on development, special and differential treatment and small economies.
&& The Representative of Cuba expressed concern that the TA Plan did not include seminars for Latin-America on development, special and differential treatment and small economies and suggested that regional activities on these subjects be included.  She also believed that assistance in the elaboration of services offers was very important.
&& The Representative of Korea noted that although attention to the issues in the July Decision was important, other issues were also important especially given the limited amount of resources available in the Global Trust Fund (GTF).  Regarding the GTF he asked whether there were any limitations on the kind of activities that could be financed.  On needs assessment,  he thought that this should not create obstacles to access TA activities.
&& The Representative of Uganda suggested that TA on services should be flexible to take account of the negotiations.  Assistance should be provided with the offers, requests and revisions.  On the issue of textiles, he noted that the assistance being envisioned related to the adjustment to a post-ATC environment, not a continuation of the ATC.  It was a relevant fact that a certain number of countries had to undertake significant adjustments to the post-ATC period and it was unfair for a Member to block the activities requested by another Member.
&& The Representative of the United States noted that the Plan provided a good framework but that the challenge was to be found in its implementation.  She expressed her satisfaction that more time was being dedicated to NAMA and trade facilitation issues and the change of approach to the seminars on services.  Regarding the issue of government procurement, she noted that what was in the 2005 Plan was not anything different from what had been done in the past and did not breach the understanding on the Singapore issues reached in the July Decision of the General Council.  Regarding the issue of textiles, she noted that the WTO provided specific help on a very specific issue like cotton and that textiles would be no different and would benefit a larger group of countries.  The purpose of the assistance was not to reintroduce the quota system in the ATC but to assist with a real problem that some countries were having in adjusting to a post-ATC environment.  Regarding needs assessment, she believed that the needs assessment should be kept in mind but not necessarily become a pre-requisite for receiving technical assistance.
&& The Representative of Bangladesh was of the view that seminars on government procurement were not necessary for those countries that were not signatories of the Government Procurement Agreement.  He noted that on the contrary, technical assistance on textiles was very important.  He too said this would not be an extension of the ATC.  He said it was a reality that some Members needed assistance to adjust to a post-ATC environment. 
&& The Representative  of Turkey said he saw no reason to oppose providing assistance on textiles problems.  The expiry of the ATC was a fact and the post-ATC period would be challenging to several countries.  The textiles sector was just another industrial sector and he saw no problems for the WTO to provide technical assistance on this issue to those countries that needed it. 
&& The Representative of El Salvador shared the concerns of some Members regarding the elimination of the textiles quotas.  He said that his delegation would be very interested in participating in any event held on the adjustments to the post-ATC period.
&& The Representative of the Dominican Republic noted that TA on the adjustments to a post-ATC environment was of vital importance to its industry.
&& The Secretariat replied to many of the questions posed by Members.  On the question raised by Morocco on behalf of the Arab Group, he said that as far as the regional trade policy courses were concerned, the Secretariat had developed a programme with the intention of covering all regions.  This, however, had yet to be achieved.  He said the Arab Group would be covered as soon as possible and noted that regional trade policy courses were quite an undertaking.  They required a lot of preparation, financial resources and staff requirements.  He said he was happy to pursue discussions with the Arab Group at some point to see when and how a regional trade policy course could be organized in that region.
On the issue of how the Secretariat could provide TA to support Members in the negotiations on services and in assessing their needs to present their requests and offers, it had been discussed whether the Secretariat could be more proactive or assist countries more actively and directly.  The proposal in the TA Plan was to have a combination of regional and national approaches.  He noted that there had been some decisions that were taken by the Council for Trade in Services on the issue of the assessment and referred to paragraph 14 of the Guidelines and Procedures for the Negotiations on Trade in Services in document S/L/93.  This decision stipulated that the Council for Trade and Services in Special Sessions shall continue to carry out an assessment of trade and services in overall terms and on a sectoral basis with reference to the objectives of the GATS and Article 4 in particular.  This would be an ongoing activity of the Council and negotiations should be adjusted in the light of the results of the assessment.  He said technical assistance should be provided to developing country Members on request in order to carry out national and regional assessments.  He underlined, however, that Members had to make the request to have such assistance at a national or regional level.  Most requests for national technical assistance that the Secretariat had received over the past two or three years did not specifically refer to the need for such an assessment.  In most cases, requests were couched in more general terms and typically called for the Secretariat to conduct a national seminar on the GATS and the ongoing services negotiations.  Based on the recent past, the Secretariat had conducted about 30 to 40 national services seminars per year.  The programmes for these activities had been drafted in consultation with the beneficiary countries and, generally speaking, the Secretariat had not been asked to undertake such an assessment.  He thought it was important to stress that the initiative came from Members.  The Secretariat could not impose seminars on Members if they had not been requested.  The Secretariat could only assist when there was a request and it was up to Members to come forward with that request.  If any such request was received, the Secretariat would be happy to help Members in making the necessary services assessment, either nationally or regionally.
On the issue of needs assessment, he noted that this issue was becoming increasingly important for the WTO. The Secretariat recognized that as well.  The Secretariat had undertaken significant efforts to assist countries in performing their needs assessments.  The needs assessment increasingly provided a basis for conducting technical assistance.  He said the Secretariat had undertaken a number of needs assessments for countries on a pilot basis and that these resulted in a set of guidelines that were circulated and that Members were encouraged to apply to identify their needs.  The Secretariat also had held discussions with various regional organization secretariats. There had also been discussions within the Secretariat, particularly with the Trade Policy Review Division, to see how, in a more systematic way, the Secretariat could cover the needs assessments for technical assistance through the Trade Policy Review process.  There were a number of initiatives in the early stages of development.  He also said the Secretariat was discussing with one donor country which had in the past been quite generous in providing funding for technical assistance activities.  He was hopeful that these discussions could lead to contributions that would actually allow  the Secretariat to help beneficiaries in a more direct, tangible and concrete manner.  The Secretariat was looking at setting up programmes that would be directly geared to helping beneficiaries in undertaking their needs assessment and provide targeted technical assistance in the negotiating process.  For the time being, the Secretariat would continue to provide the technical assistance on a demand-driven basis.
&& On the comments made by Benin, the Secretariat said it was considering how to follow-up on the cotton initiative and other discussions and programmes held on this subject.  
On the concerns expressed by Kenya, about some of the regional seminars and how certain regions were sometimes not covered in the TA Plan, the Secretariat said it was operating with a generous budget of 24 millions CHF in the GTF.  Nevertheless, this was a somewhat tight budget, because there were a lot of activities that stretched its resources.  Therefore, it was necessary to prioritize the activities and see how the objectives indicated – mainly to provide support in the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) negotiations - could be met.  It was decided to reduce the number of regional seminars in some areas and for some topics and to conduct them as part of a two-year cycle.  Those countries that had indicated that their regions were not covered in the Plan for 2005, should bear in mind that those subjects may have been covered in 2004.  Accordingly, it was foreseen that a number of areas or a number of agreements would be covered through a two-yearly cycle and that the Secretariat would cover all the regions at least every second year with a regional seminar on any given topic.  For those areas where negotiations were underway, all the regions would be covered, so this would achieve an equitable balance.
On the question by Peru that there was no Geneva based Trade Policy Course in Spanish for 2005, the Secretariat said this was true, but that it corresponded to the cycle and the sequence established in the past for the Trade Policy Course in Geneva as it rotated among the three official languages.  There was one underway in Spanish and the next one in Spanish would be offered in 2006.  The Secretariat explained that if it were to undertake an annual trade policy course in Spanish, it would probably not be able to fill the course properly.  For 2005, there were two specialized courses scheduled in Spanish.
In regard to Egypt's concern that government procurement was still on the agenda when the other Singapore issues had been dropped, the Secretariat explained that the Government Procurement Agreement was still a WTO agreement, even though it was a plurilateral and not a multilateral agreement.  So the Secretariat said it had covered that in the agenda, in the same way that it had done in the past.  Transparency provisions, however, were separate issues which no longer formed part of the WTO's agenda.  The Secretariat made it clear that the focus was on the Government Procurement Agreement, under which there were at the time discussions on how to simplify the Agreement and make it more flexible for developing countries desiring to accede to that Agreement.  The Secretariat, therefore, thought it would be useful to keep it on the agenda.  Moreover, government procurement aspects were also part of the WTO's agenda under the GATS discussions where multilateral negotiations on government procurement of services were continuing under the Working Party on GATS Rules.  Additionally, the back-to-office reports from the activities undertaken encouraged the Secretariat to continue maintaining those activities and pursuing efforts in that field.
Regarding the follow-up process of the regional trade policy courses discussed in paragraphs 34 to 39, these paragraphs outlined the direction for the Secretariat.  The Secretariat noted it had not been able to fully develop phase 2 parts of the regional trade policy courses.  The Secretariat was still considering what could usefully be done under the second phase and reference was made in the cited paragraphs to follow-up actions which could include universities establishing academic programmes on WTO matters.  This was actually one of the programmes that was included in the TA Plan.  The Secretariat said it wanted to network more with the universities and actually develop more capacity at that level in the sense that these universities could, at the end of the day, contribute to providing policy advice that would be useful for the policy community in itself.  
Regarding the question by Venezuela on paragraph 69, the Secretariat explained that it understood from other interventions that Members seemed to be happy with the way this was addressed.  Regarding the last sentence of paragraph 69, these issues have always been part of the trade policy and regional trade policy courses.  They would continue to be treated the same way they had been treated in the past, irrespective of the July package.  
On the question raised by Thailand concerning the issue of trade policy courses on special and differential treatment (S&D), LDCs and small economies, the Secretariat said that the title "trade policy course" was not well chosen since the training event was more like a seminar where issues were addressed.  The purpose of this seminar was basically to discuss the state of play on the discussions in Geneva on S&D.  The Secretariat explained that, here again, not all regions would be covered since some were already covered this year.
Regarding the question by Tanzania on the university workshops referred to on page 43 of the TA Plan, the Secretariat explained that there were only two workshops for university professors on WTO matters.  These two workshops were for Arab Middle East countries and for Central and Eastern European and Central Asian countries respectively– these regions were chosen because they were not covered through the regional trade policy courses.  In order to establish some contacts and deal with some of the issues in those regions, although not in the same detail as in a regional trade policy course, the Secretariat thought it would be useful to undertake these workshops for the university professors, keeping in mind that for example Tanzania would be covered by the African regional trade policy course.  He said that if Tanzania would like to have a national workshop, for example on WTO issues for university professors, the Secretariat would certainly consider that.
&& The Representative of Kenya noted that for some of the activities and regions there was some urgency in receiving technical assistance, for example on  rules in the African region.  He said assistance was needed with plurilateral agreements such as the Information Technologies Agreement.
&& The Representative of the European Communities urged delegations needing assistance on services to make their requests as soon as possible.  He mentioned that assistance on this issue could also be provided with the help of the OECD.  He also asked the Secretariat to clarify how funding was made available for the WTO's participation in the IF, and whether this participation should come from the regular budget or the GTF.
&& The Secretariat clarified that the WTO's regular participation in the IF was funded from the regular budget.  However, for those technical assistance activities resulting from the IF and where the WTO played a leading role as assistance provider, the funding came from the GTF.  
&& The Representative of Venezuela requested that the TA Plan clearly state that the Agreement on Government Procurement was a plurilateral agreement.  
&& The Representative of Uganda welcomed the EC's proposal to have the OECD help on providing assistance on services but thought that the currently scheduled events should not be postponed.
&& The Representative of Canada suggested that on the issue of textiles, the necessary assistance should be provided through other institutions such as the ITC, UNCTAD and others.  
&& The Chairman said it did not seem as if a consensus could be reached on the adoption of the TA Plan for 2005.  He said he would hold consultations on this issue and reconvene the meeting on 26 November 2004 to see if the TA Plan could be adopted then.
The meeting was suspended.
The meeting was reconvened on 26 November 2004.  The Chairman recalled that the Committee had already started its examination of the TA Plan for 2005 at the previous meeting in September 2004.  He also recalled that the Committee had discussed the Plan again on 16 November 2004, but that it had not been possible for the Committee to adopt the TA Plan for 2005 because of differences among Members regarding certain regional seminars.  He informed Members that he had held various informal consultations on this issue with interested Members but  that these had not resulted in finding a solution that addressed the concerns of all parties.  While it was not his intention to now open the floor for discussion on this item, he asked if any Member had comments on any other matter in connection with the TA Plan for 2005.
The representative of the European Communities suggested that there needed to be a correlation between the national activities for a country and its needs assessment.  However, he said that the needs assessment was not to become an additional step to have access to TA and he was not asking a re-write of the Plan on this issue.  He was only focusing on the need to encourage this approach as a best practice.
&& The Representative of Venezuela requested that the representative of the EC provide more detail. 
&& The Representative  of Cuba questioned the EC's proposal and asked who would be the judge on whether the TA requested would be granted.
&& The Representative of India said that he did not see anything wrong with the way the Plan dealt with the issue of needs assessment and that this was probably the best way to proceed on this issue.
&& The Secretariat clarified that the issue of needs assessment was still being discussed in consultations to see how they could be made more effective but it was not envisioned that this would become an additional conditionality. 
 && The Representative of the European Communities clarified that no changes in the drafting of the Plan were being sought, but only a reassurance that there would be an interaction between the recipient countries and the Secretariat to better prioritize the technical assistance to be undertaken.
&& The Representative of China said that if the response of the Secretariat had been satisfactory on the issue of needs assessment, then there should not be any reason to add any additional text to the TA Plan.  He said that all activities should be carried out in accordance with the TA Plan, and that it was not appropriate to undertake activities that were not contemplated in the Plan except for national activities.
&& The Representative of Sri Lanka said that he considered the EC's suggestion to be valuable.  He added that countries should be encouraged to perform a needs assessment and if they were not able to do a needs assessment on their own, then the Secretariat should provide assistance to perform this needs assessment.
&& The Representative of Venezuela thanked the EC representative for his clarification and recognized the efforts made by the European Communities as an important donor country.  He noted, however, that the status quo regarding needs assessments seemed to be working but that suggestions were welcome on how to improve the process.  In any case, he said, there should not be a single methodology for performing a needs assessment, as the idea was that each country would have a "custom made suit" of technical assistance that would reflect their particular situation.
&& The Representative of Barbados reiterated the importance of the TA Plan as an exercise to prioritize the TA needs of developing countries.  However, paragraph 8 the TA Plan recognized that there should be flexibility in its implementation.  This flexibility was very important to enable the Secretariat to respond to urgent technical assistance needs which may arise in developing countries.  Therefore, pragmatism in the implementation of the Plan was desirable at both the regional and national level.
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee take note that everything in the TA Plan for 2005 was agreed, except sub-paragraph 11 of paragraph 68 and the part of Annex II which concerned the list of activities relating to textiles and clothing.  Consultations would continue to resolve this outstanding matter and Members were asked to be prepared to return to the CTD at short notice to formally adopt the TA Plan.  
&& The Representative of Canada asked whether it would be possible to pass the budget along to the Budget Committee for approval, given that the amount of money to be approved for funding of the TA Plan would remain the same, independent of how the textiles issue was resolved.  
&& The Chairman said that he had assurances that the Budget Committee was not in a position to conclude its work the following week, and that a delay did not restrain the budget outcome.  He, therefore, preferred not to proceed in the direction suggested by Canada until the textiles matter  was resolved.  He said this was also the preference of the parties involved.
&& The Representative of China asked for clarification on whether the Secretariat could proceed with the preparations of some of the activities that have already been scheduled in the Plan which may take place in early January 2005 or some period after January 2005.  If the Secretariat could not do so because the Plan was not adopted, then he requested that all preparations for any activities that would be taking place next year be stopped immediately.  
&& The Chairman said the Committee had an understanding of the issue to be resolved and the key matter was for him to assist the parties on both sides to seek an early resolution of the problem.  He was assured that the Committee had another couple of weeks to resolve the matter and thought it might be better to leave it to the Secretariat to clarify the interaction between the CTD and the TA Plan and the Budget Committee.  Thus, there was a formal issue on the Secretariat side and there was the consultative issue on the paragraph that he mentioned with respect to textiles and clothing.  The latter was for Members to resolve.  He noted that if he was not clear it was because he was not clear.  He said he had learned that sometimes it was better in the WTO to leave things unclear.  But what was clear was that he would continue to dialogue with the parties and see if a quick resolution to this matter could be achieved.  After the issue was resolved in the Committee, he would need to reconvene the CTD to adopt the TA Plan.
The meeting was suspended.
The meeting was reconvened on 10 December 2004.  The Chairman informed Members that at its meeting on 3 December 2004, the Budget Committee had approved the financing of the TA Plan, as authorized by the CTD.
&& The Chairman recalled that at the last formal session of the CTD, which was held on 26 November 2004, he had said that everything in the Plan for 2005 was agreed except sub‑paragraph (xi) of paragraph 68 and the part of Annex II which concerned the list of activities relating to textiles and clothing.  He had said that consultations would continue on this matter and that the CTD would need to reconvene in formal session in order to adopt the Plan.  He informed Members that at the last open-ended informal meeting held on 2 December 2004, he had reported on the status of his consultations with the parties.  Those consultations had continued after that meeting.  The position now being explored concerned an adjustment to the references to textiles and clothing in paragraph 68(xi) and Annex 2, and the inclusion of a new paragraph 62 which would read as follows:
"Given the importance of textiles and clothing for certain developing and least-developed countries in a post-ATC environment, technical assistance activities in this area shall be conducted in response to the demand of beneficiaries.  In doing so, the most cost-effective and efficient manner in which the activities can be conducted will be explored by the Secretariat.  To this end the indicative figures regarding the number of national activities per country will be applied flexibly to take account of the additional requests that may result from this approach."
&& The Chairman asked Members whether they had any comments on the proposed amendments.  There were no comments from the Members.  The Chairman then proposed that the Plan in document WT/COMTD/W/133/Rev.1 be adopted as amended.
It was so decided.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman recalled that at the last meeting it was agreed to invite various organizations to share their experiences on the work they had done on commodities.  It was also agreed that the first speaker in this series would be a representative from UNCTAD.  In order to clarify the content of the presentation, he said he had invited Members to participate in an informal meeting on 8 November 2004.  
The presentation given by the representative of the UNCTAD is re-produced below:
"A. BACKGROUND:
Real prices are low... 
Commodity price indices 1964-2004 (1985=100)

Product Group
12-monthly averages 
Current $
Current SDRs
Real prices*
196419942004**19942004**196419942004**Tropical beverages3391556338895837Other food66152133106911789688Vegetable oilseeds and oils4610711275771246774Agricultural raw materials4614012698871248983Minerals ores and metals491241558610713279103Crude petroleum8571273987223583	Source:  UNCTAD, Commodity Price Bulletin various issues
	* Current prices in dollars deflated by Manufactures Export Unit Value Index for developed‑countries
	** October 2003-Sept 2004 average
… in spite of the recent upward movements, basically owing to the general, albeit uneven, recovery of the world economy, and to fast-increasing commodity demand in Asia, especially China.  Industrial raw materials, including cotton and rubber, were the principal gainers, benefiting from the economic upturn and strong Chinese demand.  Tropical beverages were again left behind, partly the result of continued supply overhangs and insensitivity of demand to economic conditions. 
Changes (per cent) in average monthly prices (October 2003 – September 2004) 
over the same period a year earlier

Tropical beverages
Other food
Vegetable oilseeds, oils
Agricultural raw materials
Minerals ores and metals
Petroleum
2
9
22
18
36
22
	Source: UNCTAD database
Increasing yields, on the average have not compensated for the price declines – except in some countries (mostly new areas brought into production) and for some products.
Selected commodities: Index of real prices 2002-2003 (1985=100) 
and yields (2001-2003)as a proportion of (1984-86)


coffee
cocoa
maize
cotton
priceyieldpriceyieldpriceyieldpriceyieldSub-saharan Africa21*122


51°141


49°°103


69°°°
107Developing Asia25**151109139121Lat. Amer. and Carib.22***14763163216Developed12297Source:  UNCTAD, Commodity Price Bulletin various issues and FAO statistical database 
*Robustas  ** ICA indicator 1976 *** Brazilian and other arabicas
°Average daily prices °°Argentinian °°° Index A

The amplitude of volatility is higher than earlier. Apart from lags in (the often imperfect) supply response to price signals and the impact of weather conditions, speculative activity also generates price fluctuations.
Instability indices for prices: Commodity groups and selected products


1989-92
2000-03
Tropical beverages 
coffee
cocoa
8.2
12.9
9.1
9.1
11.2
14.1
Other food
wheat
sugar
bananas
3.6
12.1
12.1
17.7
4.0
7.0
15.0
20.3
Vegetable oilseeds and oils
soyabean oil
palm oil
6.7
3.5
10.2
9.3
9.1
11.3
Agricultural raw materials
cotton
rubber
3.6
10.5
5.7
6.0
15.3
13.2
		Source: UNCTAD secretariat calculations
Developed countries are becoming more important exporters and developing countries more important importers of agricultural products (including processed forms).  On the export side, the major factors behind this trend are agricultural support in developed countries and the more rapid growth of exports of high valued processed items from these countries than from developing countries.  On the import side, the main reasons for the increasing share of developing countries are rapid industrialization and income growth, which generate demand for both imports and domestic supplies.  Nonetheless, developed countries still account for two thirds of world non-fuel commodity imports.  They are likely to remain a dominating influence for many years to come, and they have a crucial role in establishing conditions in international commodity markets that are favourable to developing countries. 
	Share in world trade (%)


Developed countries
Developing countries
1970
2001
1970
2001
Food items:           Exports
58
64
33
33
                              Imports
72
66
18
28
Ag raw materials:  Exports
58
62
31
31
                              Imports
73
62
14
34
	Source: UNCTAD database
Between 1990-91 and 2001-02, the share of processed products rose from 42 per cent to 48 per cent of global agricultural trade. Developed countries are more successful in this respect.  Looking at developing countries' trade, coffee, sugar and cotton, which were the top agricultural exports thirty years ago, have now been replaced by fish and vegetable oils.  Non-traditional exports such as fruit and vegetables and flowers have also become much more important.  Not all countries have been able to participate profitably in this transformation.  The bulk of the increase in dynamic exports has originated from the more advanced and already diversified countries of South East Asia and Latin America.  Success stories from other regions, such as flower exports of Kenya, can also be cited.  These countries not only have entered markets of non‑traditional products, but also add value to their exports, for example by supplying ready-made flower bouquets and vegetables that have been packaged, bar-coded and ready to be put on the retailers' shelves.
B. SYNOPSIS:  UNCTAD’S WORK ON COMMODITIES
1. Mandate
	UNCTAD's work on commodities is based on the diagnosis of the commodity situation and the direction provided by its membership at UNCTAD XI.  Sao Paulo Consensus, which says… 
	Over 50 developing countries depend on the exports of three or fewer commodities for more than half of their export earnings.  The decline and instability of world commodity prices and resulting terms-of-trade losses have reduced economic growth in many developing countries, particularly in economies that are not diversified, such as the LDCs and the African countries, and contributed to increased poverty and indebtedness.  Moreover, the added value retained by many developing countries' producers of commodities is decreasing in some sectors, and their participation in domestic and international value chains is a major challenge.  This situation may be further complicated by concentrated market structures at the international and national level. Furthermore, countries often face difficulties in meeting the standards and requirements in developed countries' markets. (Paragraph 64)
	A concerted focus should be put on the difficulties faced by commodity-dependent developing countries.  Efforts by these countries to restructure, diversify and strengthen the competitiveness of their commodity sectors, including through local processing, should be supported, including by the provision of enhanced market access on a secure and predictable basis, adequate technical and financial assistance, and strengthening of capacity and institutions, in both the public and the private sectors.  Investments in infrastructure, domestic structural reforms and prudent and transparent fiscal policies will encourage productive investment in the commodity sector.  Existing compensatory financing schemes should be reviewed with a view to assessing their effectiveness and, as may be required, making them more user-friendly and predictable and possibly combining them with modern risk management and risk-sharing instruments.  The potential of regional integration and cooperation to improve the effectiveness of traditional commodity sectors and support diversification efforts should be exploited.  Relevant suggestions contained in the report of the Meeting of Eminent Persons on Commodity Issues 5 and the relevant outcome of discussions at the fiftieth session of the Trade and Development Board and in the General Assembly on the report should be given serious consideration.  Support for commodity development projects – especially market-based projects – and for their preparation under the Second Account of the Common Fund for Commodities should be encouraged.  It is also important to address fully the problem of the cotton sector faced by African countries at the national level and in the relevant fora at the international level.  (Paragraph 74)
	UNCTAD should continue to monitor developments in commodity markets and assist developing countries, in particular those most dependent on commodities, in formulating strategies and policies to respond to the challenges of commodity markets, including over-supply, and addressing links between international commodity trade and national development, particularly poverty reduction.  It should analyse and promote exchange of information on commodity markets and experiences with factors, policy issues and responses influencing the competitiveness of the commodity sector so as to contribute to diversification, adding value, and more effective participation in the supply chain, including through assistance for institution building; analyse and support the development of appropriate and effective mechanisms and capacity to respond to commodity price fluctuations and to mitigate earnings shortfalls, in particular by improving the capacity to apply modern commodity price risk management and financial instruments; and follow up, as appropriate, on the recommendations addressed to UNCTAD in the report of the Meeting of Eminent Persons on Commodity Issues.  UNCTAD should also continue work on agricultural, forestry and fishery products, metals and minerals, and oil and oil products.  It should further help to build effective partnerships among relevant stakeholders aiming at viable solutions and sustainable approaches to commodity problems, including by fostering public-private cooperation in commodity chains with a view to ensuring, inter alia through market-based principles, a more equitable distribution of revenues and benefits along the supply chain and supporting diversification. It should include a regional perspective in its work.  UNCTAD and the Common Fund for Commodities should strengthen their cooperation.  (Paragraph 100)
	And the establishment of the International Task Force on Commodities. (Paragraph 114 and Annex)
	The principal aspects of this assessment and work programme are:
Dealing with low and fluctuating prices and their impact. 
Improving competitiveness.
Support to negotiation of International Commodity Agreements.

2. Approach
	UNCTAD's work on commodities is anchored in complex realities.  UNCTAD takes a holistic view of the commodity situation.  It is focused on obtaining development gains from the commodity sector and making it a positive factor in the development process and poverty reduction, particularly in LDCs.  The traditional problems of declining terms of trade and price fluctuations are very important but so are the new problems related to generating, identifying and exploiting the opportunities offered by new developments in commodity markets.  There is a need to differentiate between market access and market entry issues, with the former subject to negotiations at WTO and the latter generally falling outside the realm of WTO.  UNCTAD's work helps prepare the ground for dealing with these two types of issues, in the WTO, in RTAs and outside the negotiating framework.  The latter include national policies that require international support.  Technical cooperation and consensus building functions of UNCTAD are particularly important in these areas. 
	A single track approach (action on prices or market access alone) will not be sufficient to generate development gains.
3. Premises
	The situation is bad but windows of opportunity exist, principally owing to rapid growth in Asia (basically China and India) and levelling of the playing field as a result of trade negotiations.  They can be utilized if supply capacity is there or can be developed. 
a. Prices
	Different prices (internationally quoted prices, border prices, farmgate prices, consumer prices) are important for different actors in the commodity economy.  There may be little correspondence between these different prices.
	There are immediate (catastrophic levels), short term (volatility) and long term (structural oversupplies) problems related to prices, each with a different potential remedy. 
b. Competitiveness
	Modern supply chains have specific requirements that must be understood. 
	Improving competitiveness and supply capacities is the key.  Without market access and well functioning markets, however, this may be of little value.
	Opportunities exist and new ones are emerging.  These have been, and are being, exploited by some competitive suppliers with business skills rather than those with preferential market access. 
	It is crucial that these opportunities, including the new 'windows of opportunity' opening in fast growing large markets such as China and India, are not closed by developed countries exploiting their permitted support levels. 
4. Some policy options
a. Liberalization
	Generally it means more rules to be abided by, small producers are inherently disadvantaged.  
	Liberalization takes place in WTO and under structural adjustment programmes. Also, new market structures are a new element of a liberalized environment.
	In WTO, Agreements on Agriculture, NAMA, SPS, TBT, TRIPs, Services, are particularly relevant.  So are various articles of GATT Part IV.
b. Prices
	Will be helped by successful conclusion of Doha work programme.
	Need to differentiate between action on prices and on dealing with the undesirable consequences of low and volatile prices.  The second is more likely. 
	For catastrophic price levels, for a short term solution, elimination of supply overhangs is necessary.
	Action to deal with price levels and instability, by producers alone or together with consumers, is very complicated.  More than anything else, it calls for political will by a wide variety of actors, who must act in concert.  This political will does not seem to be there, either among producers or consumers.  International policy dialogue may help generate some overall political will, but any action must be on a commodity by commodity basis and based on a very realistic approach.  Action by producers alone may benefit from a stronger political will, but experience shows that it is easy to break.
	It would be irrational to prevent producers who can produce competitively from doing so. The important developmental challenge is to eliminate exit barriers faced by others and enable them to get out the vicious circle of poverty and dependence on low value commodities.
	Dealing with structural oversupplies calls for elimination of exit barriers and enabling diversification by uncompetitive producers into high value alternatives.  Massive international financial and technical support is necessary, to be supplied in a coordinated manner for coherent action in individual countries.  In reality, development assistance to agriculture is much less than it was earlier. 
	Action to increase global generic demand would help.  To improve competitiveness with respect to synthetics, scientific research must be supported on a commodity by commodity basis.  Technical specifications and acceptance by the industry are the critical factors in this respect.
	Regarding instability, market based price risk management instruments have the potential to provide a safety net.  They will not reduce instability.  Given the large economic cost of price risk exposure, efforts to create the capacity to manage commodity price instability should be a part of all rural development schemes.
	Compensatory finance may help countries (not necessarily producers) but there are large practical difficulties.  These have been recognized by those supplying compensatory finance (EU and IMF), and attempts at improving them are under discussion.  It can be turned into an automatic insurance scheme with much more predictability.  Domestic measures are needed to shield producers.
c. Competitiveness 
	Various aspects, including information, technology, finance, institution building must be dealt with to improve competitiveness and supply capacity, and achieve successful participation in modern supply chains
Resource flows to agriculture must be increased. OECD DAC flows to agriculture, which comprised 11.7 per cent of the total in 1981-82, declined to 5.6 per cent in 2001-2002 (OECD), and there is no indication that it has rebounded.  The Common Fund for Commodities is the only international organization that provides finance exclusively for the commodities sector.  Its meagre resources need to be increased.
Awareness of and understanding market conditions and requirements are among the first prerequisites of improved competitiveness.  Access to useable information is the key factor.  There are global information sources, but many of them are costly. UNCTAD’s Infocomm programme provides useful information on several commodities freely on the Internet.
The ability to meet the standards is very limited among small farmers.  In many cases this requires considerable investments, which the small farmers are unable to undertake individually.  Moreover, institutions and infrastructure for quality control and assurance are lacking.  Global initiatives that would provide support in these areas, including both financial and technical assistance is required.  Support to farmers' organizations would also help.
Owing to the large quantities involved in trade, small farmers are disadvantaged as their participation in supply chains.  Buying from small suppliers leads to higher transactions costs for the buyers who prefer to deal with a small number of large suppliers.  Organization among small farmers could reduce some of these transaction costs, but it is a complicated venture.  International cooperative movements could assist in this area. 
Access to finance is an important constraint for the agricultural sector, particularly in developing countries, and especially for small farmers.  Warehouse receipt finance is probably the simplest technique for providing finance to producers.  Improvement of the legal environment with respect to ownership rights, bankruptcy, and the transferability of warehouse receipts, contracts and export licenses is a prerequisite for enhancing finance opportunities for farmers, and international community can provide much help in this respect.  Global initiatives could be envisaged to support pilot projects on commodity finance.
The distribution of the value added along the supply chain is affected by the difference in the market power of the agents.  Large international firms dominate world markets and enter into commercial relations with much smaller entities. Cooperative action may increase bargaining power.  While national rules on competition policy may deal with dominance on domestic markets, no corresponding mechanism exists regarding the situation in international markets.  Nevertheless, there have some been proposals to bring a discipline to concentration in international commodity markets.  These include an international review mechanism for proposed mergers and acquisitions among agribusiness companies that are present in a number of countries simultaneously, and extending transparency requirements now imposed on state-trading enterprises to companies with 20 per cent or more of a national or global market in a given commodity.
d. A multi-stakeholder approach
	Partial solutions and single-track approaches are unlikely to be effective, as has been seen in the past.  A coherent, multi-faceted stance, however, requires a global multi‑stakeholder participation in the conceptualization as well as implementation of programmes to deal with the problems of the commodity sector in general, and small farmers, in particular.  In this connection, it is necessary to overcome scepticism and find the political will.
	To further this 'mindset change', an International Task Force on Commodities has been launched at UNCTAD XI (UNCTAD 2004a, p.34).  It will examine such global initiatives, provide substantive ideas and give a political boost where warranted.  It will help in ensuring networking and synergies between activities of different bodies and different actors, inter alia to avoid duplication and ensure coherence, and in generating technical cooperation ideas, building upon technical cooperation projects so that their impacts are enhanced, and identifying technical cooperation projects that fall outside the purview of existing organizations, in particular multi-stakeholder projects."
&& The Representative of Kenya suggested having more discussions on the presentation at the next meeting to give more time for delegations to analyse the paper which  addresses some of the key points in this matter.  He suggested including more information in the paper that was presented as he did not believe that it covered the vast experience of UNCTAD on this issue.
&& The Representative of the United States asked what concrete programmes UNCTAD was to implement after the São Paulo mandate.  She said this could help identify what could be done by the WTO and thus to avoid a duplication of efforts.
&& The Representative of UNCTAD replied that the main problem was one of resources as commodities did not receive much extra budgetary support.  Activities at the country level were therefore relatively low.  There was some specific work being done on product diversification and integration in value chains.  He explained that UNCTAD had done some specific studies on the role of supermarkets, but that when it came to studying specific products, there were some resource problems.  In JITAP, UNCTAD was trying to integrate the commodities and commodity value chains into identification export opportunities from the developmental point of view.  Some studies were also being done on the question of cost of compliance with standards, like SPS, private standards, and standards for export of food products for certain specific countries.  UNCTAD had also done some work on information, risk management and finance.  For this a website had been created to provide free information to users on commodities markets, through links to other sites.  Some innovative work was being done on financing, such as a meeting on how to generate financing for the agricultural sector.  Here UNCTAD had found that using a value chain approach to financing provided much more opportunities for agriculture than just focusing on production.  What this meant was that for production that was to be exported, the financing banks might be guaranteed some receipts from the exports, so that the export revenues would be redirected to the banks providing more opportunities for the financing of credit unworthy producers.  UNCTAD was also doing some work on commodity exchanges in developing markets, like they had done in India, and also on risk management.  UNCTAD had produced a report to the General Assembly of the UN which provided an overall view of what was happening in this area and concluded that there was potential for expansion.  He said that there was also some consensus building work which was being done between developed and developing countries on how best to prioritize the work in this area.
&& The Representative of Australia said it was necessary to have some more time to have a closer look at the paper presented.  He also noted that it would be useful to hear from other institutions active in this field. 
&& The Representative of Canada said that it was necessary to hear other presentations on the subject and then to have a wide ranging discussion of the issues. 
&& The Representative of Venezuela noted that since it was not possible, due to a lack of time, to have a dialogue with UNCTAD's representative, it would be useful to invite him back at a later meeting.
&& The Representative of the United States  warned against duplication of the work carried out by the WTO with the work of other IGOs.  She also mentioned that the work in the NAMA and Agriculture negotiating groups which touched on this matter was about to start.  She suggested inviting other institutions such as the FAO, the ITC, the World Bank and the OECD to also speak to the Committee on their work in this area.  She said that the United States had identified some experts from the private sector who might be able to share their experiences on risk management and futures exchange.  She said it would be useful to hear from these experts from the New York and Chicago exchanges, and also from Malaysia, Brazil and South Africa.  She added that these discussions should then be given a WTO angle.
&& The Representative of Brazil believed it would be useful to invite UNCTAD back after the paper had been read carefully to have more opportunities to interact before moving on to the next presentations.  He would also look into the possibility of inviting Brazilian experts. 
&& The Representative of Cuba said she agreed with Venezuela and that she also wanted to engage in a dialogue with UNCTAD.  She supported the comments made by Venezuela and suggested having a special session on this issue.
&& The Representative of Kenya said that the presentations must help define the work of the WTO on this matter and, therefore, more information was needed from UNCTAD.  He suggested first finishing with a thorough discussion of UNCTAD's work, including the report to the General Assembly, before moving on to hear other institutions or country experiences especially on the issue of product diversification. 
&& The Representative of China noted that this was a cross-cutting issue of a lot of importance to developing countries.  He said that at the moment it was not possible to comment on UNCTAD's paper and the report to the General Assembly.  He also said that studies should be not based on theory and hypothesis but should be based on scientific facts. 
&& The Representative of the United States said that she did not want to repeat discussions that had taken place in other institutions.  She also mentioned that there should be a balance in the presentations and that it was important to hear from other institutions.
&& The Representative of Switzerland said that better coordination was needed as there were two events on this issue taking place at the same time.  He also welcomed the opportunity to further interact with UNCTAD and expressed his desire to achieve concrete results and move away from discussions on process.
&& The Chairman proposed to invite the UNCTAD representative back for the next meeting to continue the discussion on the presentation.  He also said that since this issue was introduced by Kenya, the Committee should be guided on how next to proceed by Kenya.
&& The Representative of Venezuela insisted that the debate with UNCTAD be finished before moving on to other presentations. 
&& The Representative of Kenya said that they believed that UNCTAD possessed more information than what they had included on the paper and presentation and asked UNCTAD to expand on what had been presented.
&& The Representative of Malaysia noted that his delegation would be happy to contribute to the discussions on this item by making a presentation on their experience.
&& The Representative of Rwanda supported the statements made by Kenya and looked forward to further discussions on this issue.
&& The Representative of Canada said that it was important to make sure the Committee also heard the views of other organizations.  
&& The Representative of China said that the Committee should eventually also invite the World Bank and the FAO to hear what kind of work these organizations were doing on the issue of commodities.
&& The Chairman proposed to invite the representative of UNCTAD back for the next meeting of the Committee and to continue the debate on UNCTAD's presentation.  However, he said he would also invite a representative of Malaysia to make a presentation on its experiences in product diversification.
&& The Committee so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& The Chairman recalled that at the last regular meeting, the CTD had discussed how best to move forward on this item.  One of the suggestions that had been made was to continue with the presentations by the Secretariat of the different negotiating groups.  The rules negotiation was mentioned as one of the areas which so far had not been presented to the Committee.  At the informal meeting of 8 November 2004, the issue of how to proceed with the work of the Committee on this issue was also discussed.  It was decided that an invitation would be extended to the Secretariat to speak to the Committee on the developmental aspects of the Negotiating Group on Rules.  He then offered the floor to the Secretariat for its presentation on the developmental aspects of the Negotiating Group on Rules.
&& The Secretariat made the following presentation on the developmental aspects of the Negotiating Group on Rules:
"&& The Secretariat has been asked to make a presentation on the developmental aspects of the Negotiating Group on Rules.  A thorough presentation of all proposals relating to development would require an extensive period of time.  As Members are aware, more than a hundred and fifty papers have been submitted to the Negotiating Group on Rules to date.  Many proposals explicitly refer to development issues or the Special and Differential Treatment to Developing Countries.  Other proposals, while not expressly referring to development, may relate somehow to developmental aspects. 
My intention is neither to make an exhaustive description of all proposals relating specifically to development, nor to examine possible developmental impact of these and/or other proposals.
My intention is rather to make an introduction on the negotiations on Rules, followed by a reference, by way of example, to some of the proposals which Members themselves have identified as being related to development, to Special and Differential Treatment to Developing Countries or to sustainable development, and then try to respond to questions Members may have.
It should be clear to Members that this presentation is simply an overview of the negotiations and in no way intends to reflect the totality of proposals made, nor the different views, positions and opinions of participants in the Negotiating Group on Rules.  It goes without saying that this presentation in no way prejudices the positions of Members in the negotiations.
Introduction: 
The Mandate for Rules Negotiations:  Paragraph 28 of the Doha Declaration, reads: 
'In light of experience and increasing application of these instruments by Members, we agree to negotiations aimed at clarifying and improving disciplines under [the Agreement on Anti-dumping] and [the Agreement] on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, while preserving the basic concepts, principles and effectiveness of these Agreements and their instruments and objectives, and taking into account the needs of developing and least-developed participants.'
The mandate also includes the aim to 'clarify and improve WTO disciplines on fisheries subsidies, taking into account the importance of this sector to developing countries'.
The Negotiating Group on Rules has been meeting on a regular basis since 2002, both formally and informally.  Negotiations on the disciplines and procedures on Regional Trade Agreements are also conducted under the Negotiating Group on Rules, but are in fact treated distinctively in terms of Secretariat support – therefore I will not talk about this aspect of the negotiations today.
In August of last year, the Secretariat issued a Compilation of all proposals presented to the Group until that time. This compilation is contained in document TN/RL/W/143.  Although the compilation has not been updated, it still contains reference to most if not all of the proposals which expressly refer to development issues.
Since the issuance of the Compilation, about 25 new proposals have been submitted to the Group.  These new proposals (i.e. post-Cancun papers) can be found in the document series TN/RL/GEN/...
There are three main areas of negotiations:
	1)	Anti-dumping
	2)	Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
	3)	Fisheries Subsidies
Anti-Dumping
This is the area of the rules negotiations on which Members have focused the most. The number of issues identified by Members as deserving clarification and improvement cover practically all Articles of the Agreement on Anti-Dumping.
The largest number of proposals on AD has been made by a group of Members which call themselves the 'Friends of Anti-Dumping Negotiations' or FANs.  This group, as you know, includes both developing and developed Members and calls for improved and strengthened disciplines on Anti-Dumping.
It should be noted that, in addition to the FANs, other Members – both developing and developed – also have tabled proposals on anti-dumping.
In terms of development-related proposals on AD, the issue of Special and Differential Treatment for Developing Countries is perhaps the one of most relevance.
A number of Members have proposed revisiting Article 15 of the Agreement on AD.  This provision calls for 'special regard' to be given by developed country Members to the 'special situation of developing country Members when considering the application of [anti-dumping] measures.'
The FANs, for example, have proposed to develop the terms of Article 15 to make this provision fully operational and include provisions to give developing country Members meaningful and effective Special and Differential Treatment.
Several other proposals on S&D were referred to the Group by a letter of the Chairman of the General Council in May 2003.  These are basically proposals from the African Group and call for 'constructive remedies' to be explored by developed country Members when applying anti-dumping measures on products from developing countries.
Other proposals regarding developing countries were made on issues such as initiations of investigations, price undertakings, de minimis thresholds, lesser duty (mandatory application of the lesser-duty rule when applying AD measures on products from developing countries), and Reviews and other areas of the AD Agreement.
I should also note that some developing countries have expressed concerns in the Group about negotiating AD disciplines which would be too difficult to be applied in practice.  These Members have stated that, having recently established an AD authority and having little experience in the application of the current rules, they would have difficulties in applying even more complex procedures in terms of investigation requirements etc.
Finally, a number of proposals on increased transparency and due process in the conduct of AD investigations have been made which, although not expressly relating to development, may (or may not) have developmental aspects.  As I said, the purpose of this presentation is not to make an exhaustive listing or analysis of the development aspects of all proposals to the Group, but rather to provide Members with an overview of the negotiations, with examples of proposals which have been identified by Members themselves as relating to development.
Negotiations on Anti-Dumping have shown that this is not simply an exporter/importer issue, nor a developed/developing country issue.  AD measures are now being applied by a variety of WTO Members, both amongst developed and developing ones.  And this, of course, is reflected in the negotiations.
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures
The proposals on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures may be divided in two main areas: (1) the disciplines on Governments' subsidies programmes, which we usually call the 'subsidies disciplines';  and (2) the disciplines on the application of countervailing duties (CVD).
Most of the proposals on countervailing measures presented to the Group relate, at least to some extent, to proposals on AD.  No specific proposals on development have been tabled in the area of CVD (only, of course, to the extent that there should be a harmonization of rules on AD and CVD, where applicable).
In the Subsidies Disciplines area, a number of development-related proposals have been tabled. Approximately 20 proposals relate to Article 27 of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (SCM Agreement).
Article 27, as you know, establishes rules for Special and Differential Treatment for Developing Countries and contains a series of special provisions and waivers of obligations.  Proposals on Article 27 basically call for more flexibility in terms of allowing governments to have recourse to different categories of subsidies as an instrument of development.
There have also been proposals to reintroduce Article 8 of the SCM Agreement.  As Members are aware, Article 8, which contained provisions on Non-Actionable Subsidies (the 'green light' in the traffic-light structure of the Agreement) was subject to provisional application under Article 31 of the SCM Agreement, and lapsed on 31 December 1999.  Article 8 described three types of subsidies (assistance for research activities, assistance to disadvantaged regions and assistance to promote adaptation of existing facilities to new environmental requirements) which would be considered as non-actionable, under certain conditions and following certain criteria.
One proposal under the current negotiations calls for the reinstatement of Article 8, with an additional type of subsidy (assistance to product diversification), when applied by developing countries.
As I said, these are only a few examples of proposals made in the area of subsidies disciplines, which have been expressly identified by Members as relating to development. Many other proposals have been tabled, which certainly have developmental aspects.
Fisheries Subsidies
It comes as no surprise that this is the area of the Rules Negotiations in which Members most clearly identified 'sustainable development' aspects of their proposals.
The initial proponents of disciplines on fisheries subsidies are a group of Members who call themselves 'the Friends of Fish'.  These Members basically call for strengthened disciplines on subsidies related to fisheries, in view of both trade concerns and concerns with over-exploitation, over-fishing and resource management.
Currently, discussions on fisheries subsidies are mainly focused on types of fisheries subsidies and their categorization.
Since the words 'sustainable' and 'development' have been used specifically by Members in some of their proposals, I thought I might quote, for the benefit of Members, some of the formulations used in these proposals:
- one proposal reads:  'determine the scope of subsidies to be negotiated in order to give [differential consideration] to subsidies of different natures and effects on trade, environment and sustainable development';
- another proposal suggests:  'to provide for the review of the lists of "prohibited" and "permitted" subsidies, both in terms of their operation and to consider whether they should be modified to further advance the ultimate aim, which is to match capacity to the available fish and so contribute to the sustainable exploitation of fishery resources'.
I should also mention a paper with proposals from a group of Small Vulnerable Coastal States (all of them developing or least-developed countries), to the effect that 'any development assistance granted to these small vulnerable coastal states by developed or more advanced developing countries to facilitate sustainable management should be excluded from the definition of subsidy in Article 1 of the SCM Agreement'.
In the negotiations on Fisheries subsidies, therefore, Members have clearly indicated developmental and environmental aspects of some of their proposals.  This should help to achieve, as called for in Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, 'the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected '."
&& The Representative of Chile noted that in the anti-dumping negotiations, the issue of special and differential treatment had been clearly identified but that no discussion on how to address this issue had been held.
&& The Representative of Venezuela requested more information on how the Negotiating Group on Rules was addressing paragraphs 28 and 32 of the Doha Declaration on trade and environment and the interests of developing countries.
&& The Representative of Guatemala asked for the presentation to be made available to Members.
&& The Representative of Hong Kong, China asked whether the Committee would also have an opportunity to discuss the negotiations taking place in the Negotiating Group on Rules on regional trade agreements.
&& The Secretariat, in reply to Venezuela, noted that the Negotiating Group on Rules had discussed papers that were presented by the Members.  To the extent that these papers covered issues related to trade and the environment and the interests of developing countries, these issues would be addressed in the course of the discussions.  The Secretariat said there had been a number of proposals mostly on fisheries subsidies that related to sustainable development to date.  
&& The Representative of Barbados said it was difficult for some Members to follow these very technical issues, as they lacked experts in the area and some did not have trade remedies legislation.  She noted that special and differential treatment should not be in the form of exceptions from some of the rules but should be an integral part of the agreements.  She also said that the issue of fisheries subsidies was of great importance to some developing countries.
&& The Secretariat noted that proposals on new disciplines for fisheries subsidies had been put before the group.  In some of these proposals it was recognized that the issue of fisheries subsidies had developmental and environmental aspects but that it also affected trade.
&& The Representative of Venezuela noted that the Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Environment had reported on his consultations with the CTD Chairman.   He asked whether the Chairman could report on the information exchange that was ongoing with the Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Environment.
&& The Chairman said that he had had various discussions with the Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Environment and that both recognized the challenges in the interpretation of the mandate in paragraph 51.  However, there was nothing new to report to the Committee.  He suggested organizing a meeting with the Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Environment and any interested Members to see if a better understanding of the work under paragraph 51 could be had from such a meeting. 
 && The Representative of Venezuela said that he would participate in such a meeting as this issue was of much interest to his delegation.  He said he had some ideas and views on how the work under paragraph 51 should be carried out.
&& The Chairman encouraged the representative of Venezuela to prepare a paper for circulation to the Committee with his views on the issue of paragraph 51. 
 && The Representative of Venezuela said that his delegation together with other delegations were working on a paper that would be submitted to the Committee on Trade and Environment.
&& The Chairman proposed that since the presentation on rules had not covered the Negotiating Group's discussions on regional trade agreements, this could serve as the next issue for discussion at the Committee.
It was so decided. 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman recalled that at the Committee's meeting in September, it had been decided to invite a representative of the ITU to speak on the latest developments in the preparation of the second phase of the World Summit of the Information Society that would take place in Tunisia in 2005.  Since the expert was unavailable, the Chairman proposed to revert to this item at the next regular meeting of the Committee.
It was so decided.
GRADUATION OF THE MALDIVES FROM LDC STATUS (WT/COMTD/W/128)
&& The Chairman recalled that this item was on the agenda of the previous meeting of the Committee.  Unfortunately, the delegation of the Maldives could not travel to Geneva to  be present and it was decided that this issue would be taken up at this meeting.  The Chairman noted that he had been in contact with the Maldives' delegation and they had said that their work on a plan for a smooth transition to developing country status was continuing.  He also understood that the Maldives would be able to present this transition plan to the Committee at  its first meeting in 2005.  Therefore, he suggested reverting back to this item at the next meeting of the Committee.  
It was so decided. 
PARTICIPATION OF THE DEVELOPING ECONOMIES IN THE GLOBAL TRADING SYSTEM (WT/COMTD/W/136)
&& The Chairman reminded Members that under this agenda item, the Secretariat had prepared a note circulated to Members as document WT/COMTD/W/136 and corrigendum 1.  This note had been prepared to assist the Committee with its requirement to keep under continuous review the participation of developing economies in the multilateral trading system.  The note highlighted salient features of developing economies trade, focusing mainly on the period 2000-2003.  It also touched upon various issues including the participation in merchandise trade by each of the developing country regions, participation in world trade in services, as well as a specific section on LDCs.  The Chairman then opened the floor for discussions on the paper prepared by the Secretariat.
&& The Representative of Canada said that it would be useful to have the full numerical information for some of the charts presented in the paper.
&& The Secretariat noted that more complete statistical information had been included in the appendix to the paper.
&& The Representative of Brazil requested the Secretariat to introduce the paper and suggested placing this issue in the agenda for further discussions at the next meeting of the Committee.
&& The Secretariat said that the paper had been prepared to assist the Committee with its requirement to keep under continuous review the participation of developing economies in the multilateral trading system.  The paper highlighted salient features of developing economies' trade, focusing mainly on the period 2000-2003.  It also touched upon various issues including the participation in merchandise trade by each of the developing country regions, participation in world trade in services, as well as a specific section on LDCs.
&& The Representative of the European Communities said that this was a very useful reference document.  He also made a series of observations based on the statistics presented in the paper.  He said that globally the picture painted by the paper was encouraging as the participation of developing countries had risen lately reaching again the high mark that had been achieved in the year 2000.  He also noted the increase in South-South trade.  He said that the interesting disaggregation at regional levels allowed some useful analysis.  It was interesting to see the increased growth sustained in the East Asia region, especially in China.  He also remarked on the increase in trade between China and Latin-America.  He said that he was very encouraged by the section on services as one could see an increased growth in this area in Africa, although admittedly from a very low base.  He also noted that the paper also confirmed the increase by India in participation in global trade.  In general, he found this a useful exercise that allowed Members to keep track of developments in trade by developing countries.
&& The Representative of Kenya asked the Secretariat to clarify the concept of "trade per capita" and asked what was the benefit of this statistic.
&& The Representative of Venezuela asked the Secretariat about the product coverage of the term "fuels" that was used in the paper.  
&& The Representative of the United States noted that the paper by the Secretariat was very useful to identify trends and patterns in trade by developing countries.  She highlighted that the fact that there had been overall growth of participation of developing countries in world trade was important, and that the challenge now was to build upon this growth.  She also highlighted the growth levels achieved in such areas as office and telecom equipment and machinery, transport and consumer goods.  She said the positive growth rate achieved by LDCs and the increasing role of China was an engine for growth in world trade.
&& The Representative of China commended the Secretariat for an accurate study which was based on scientific observations and not hypothesis or predictions.  He highlighted the fast growth in trade participation of all developing countries, including LDCs.  He also highlighted the trade growth between China and other developing countries and also LDCs and underlined the importance of South-South trade and cooperation.  He said that imports into China from LDCs are done on a zero tariff and quota-free basis and that this had contributed to their growth.  He noted that there had been an increase in the participation of LDCs in world trade, although their participation was still relatively small.
&& The Representative of Antigua and Barbuda noted that the statistics were in many cases very difficult to compile, especially in services.  He also expressed concern about the trade per capita analysis as it could provide a distorted view of the situation of small countries like Antigua and Barbuda.  He asked what were the components of the statistics reflecting trade in commercial services.  He also asked how Article 4 of GATS was being monitored by the Secretariat.
&& The Representative of Argentina, regarding statistics presented on the Falkland Islands, noted that the Falkland Islands were not a country, it was a territory over which a territorial dispute existed.  He also noted that the correct denomination was Falkland Islands (Malvinas) in English or Islas Malvinas (Falkland) in Spanish. 
&& The Representative of Venezuela asked where the Secretariat had obtained statistics for the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).
&& The Secretariat, in reply to the questions on trade per capita, said that this concept was defined at the beginning of the paper.  This statistic was not originally prepared for this document, but it thought that this could be useful additional information, that could be annexed.  That being said, it was also mentioned by some Members that the developing countries were a heterogeneous group and it would be interesting to relate trade to other indicators to give some ideas of the relation between countries in terms of trade performance.  
On the question regarding the scope of the term "fuels", the Secretariat referred to the "Standard International Trade Classification (SITC)", and said all the statistics had been prepared in the context of the SITC Classification III, and "fuels" was classified under SITC group section III.  Regarding office and telecoms equipment classification, these groups had been done several years back and with recent trade development and technology changes, they had become less useful.  The Secretariat was looking at how to break them down further to make them more appropriate for economic analysis.
On the sources used for services trade statistics and services classification, the Secretariat said it used the IMF balance of payments manual, and there were basically three major groups/categories there.  These were transport services, travel services and other commercial services which was broken down in several other components such as communication services, construction services, insurance, financial computer and information, royalties and licence fees, recreational services and other business services.  The problem was that other business services was a residual category so many different kinds of services fell in that category when countries could not appropriately classify them.  This made it quite difficult for economic analysis and to make cross‑country comparisons.  Regarding the source of the statistics, the WTO Secretariat said it had no mandate to do its own data collection in terms of trade statistics.  The Secretariat relied heavily on other international organizations' data on services.  The data was taken mostly from the IMF database, and complemented with national statistics.  Regarding merchandise trade statistics, these trade data were collected by the United Nations Statistics Division, by origin, destination and by product.  These data were then used to prepare the Secretariat's statistics according to the Secretariat's geographic compositions and product definitions.
&& The Secretariat apologized for the inclusion of statistics on the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), as this was not a country and should not have been included.
&& The Representative of Venezuela said that the note used the term "fuels" in a chart in page 4, and that in page 24 there was a mention that the term commodities included "crude oil, gas and coal".  He requested more clarification on the scope of these terms, and considered that gas was not a commodity.
&& The Secretariat said that the scope of the two terms was different and that this would be clarified in the note.
&& The Chairman proposed that at this stage the Committee take note of the statements made and decide to revert to this item at the next meeting for further discussions.
It was so decided.
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT (WT/COMTD/W/137)
&& The Chairman noted that a draft of the Committee's Annual Report to the General Council was circulated by the Secretariat in document WT/COMTD/W/137 and opened the floor for comments on the draft.  
The Committee adopted the annual report.
OTHER BUSINESS
	2004 WTO/OECD Report on Trade-Related Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (TRTA/CB)

&& The Chairman raised an item under "Other Business" concerning the 2004 WTO/OECD Report on Trade-Related Technical Assistance and Capacity Building.  He noted that this report was available in the room under the Job Number 7340.4.  Concerning the report itself, he informed Members that the Secretariat would appreciate it if they could make their comments available by e‑mail to the WTO's ITTC Division or to the OECD.  The e‑mail addresses appeared on page 2 of the report.  Once comments were incorporated, the final version would be made available to Members.  At the same time, the joint Website would be updated.
&& The Representative of the United States said that her delegation had completed its assessment of US bilateral technical assistance and would provide the information to the OECD.
&& The Representative of Canada said she was impressed with the improvements on the website. She noted the website was easy to use and provided a lot of useful information.  She hoped that this tool would be used by the recipient countries.
The Committee took note of the statements made.  
The meeting was adjourned on 10 December 2004.
__________


 This report was circulated as document WT/COMTD/50.

WT/COMTD/M/51 Page  PAGE 34



	WT/COMTD/M/51 	Page  PAGE 35













