WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/54
20 December 2005


(05-6198)


Committee on Trade and Development
Fifty-Fourth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 5 OCTOBER 2005

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Gomi Tharaka Senadhira (Sri Lanka)



 TOC \O "1-1" \T "HEADING 2,2,HEADING 3,3,HEADING 4,4,HEADING 5,5,HEADING 6,6" A.	ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA	 PAGEREF _TOC122246168 \H 2
B.	OBSERVERS	 PAGEREF _TOC122246169 \H 2
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc122246170 \h 2
(ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc122246171 \h 2
C.	NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE	 PAGEREF _TOC122246172 \H 3
-	REVISED TREATY OF THE ECONOMIC COMMUNITY OF WEST AFRICAN STATES (ECOWAS) (WT/COMTD/N/21 – WT/COMTD/54)	 PAGEREF _TOC122246173 \H 3
-	AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/N/20/ADD.1 – WT/COMTD/51/ADD.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC122246174 \H 3
D.	DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES	 PAGEREF _TOC122246175 \H 4
E.	PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED (WT/COMTD/W/143)	 PAGEREF _TOC122246176 \H 4
F.	TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING	 PAGEREF _TOC122246177 \H 20
(i)	Training and Technical Assistance: Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities – 1 January to 30 June 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/141)	 PAGEREF _Toc122246178 \h 20
(ii)	Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2006 (WT/COMTD/W/142)	 PAGEREF _Toc122246179 \h 20
G.	ANNUAL REPORT	 PAGEREF _TOC122246180 \H 27
H.	OTHER BUSINESS	 PAGEREF _TOC122246181 \H 27
ANNEX	 PAGEREF _Toc122246182 \h 31


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman recalled that the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in document WTO/AIR/2646 circulated on 7 September 2005 and a revision issued on 29 September 2005. 
&& The representative of Thailand said he wished to make an intervention under "Other Business" on behalf of the member states of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and China.  In particular, at the request of some Members, further information would be provided on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China, which had earlier been notified to the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD).
&& The representative of the European Communities said he wished to make a brief intervention under "Other Business" relating to the European Communities' Generalized System of Preferences (GSP).
&& The Committee adopted the agenda as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, those organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that those organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	REVISED TREATY OF THE ECONOMIC COMMUNITY OF WEST AFRICAN STATES (ECOWAS) (WT/COMTD/N/21 – WT/COMTD/54)
&& The Chairman said that two notifications under the Enabling Clause had been received for consideration at the present meeting.  The first notification related to the Revised Treaty of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).  The notification had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/N/21.  The Revised Treaty of ECOWAS had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/54.
&& The Committee took note of the notification.  
-	AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/N/20/ADD.1 – WT/COMTD/51/ADD.1)
&& The Chairman said the second notification received related to the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People's Republic of China.  The notification had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/N/20/Add.1.  The text of the Agreement had been circulated as WT/COMTD/51/Add.1.
&& The representative of China, on behalf of the ASEAN member states and China, said that he wished to introduce to the Committee the notification under the Enabling Clause of the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China.  The notification was sent in a joint communication from the delegations of the ASEAN member states and China to the Chairman of the Committee on 21 September 2005 and was circulated to Members on 26 September 2005 in documents WT/COMTD/N/20/Add.1 and WT/COMTD/51/Add.1.  A copy of the Agreement and its annexes, which included the products list, tariff reduction schedules for the normal track and the sensitive track, as well as the rules of origin, were submitted to the Secretariat.  The documents were also available on the Internet at:  www.aseansec.org.  He said it was the firm belief of the Members notifying the Agreement that the notification and the documents referred to were self-explanatory, and contained all necessary information for Members.  It was, therefore, not necessary for him to repeat the details of the Agreement.  However, if the delegations of the ASEAN member states had anything to add, they would be most welcome to do so.
&& The representative of the United States thanked the ASEAN member states and China for the information that had been provided. She said her delegation had not had much time to examine the notification and that it would, therefore, like to reserve its right to return to questions relating to the notification at the next meeting of the CTD.  She said the sense of her delegation was that the Agreement appeared to go beyond just a tariff agreement, as it also covered non-tariff barriers (NTBs) and services.  Her delegation, therefore, wished to inquire whether there was an intention to notify the NTB-related issues and the services-related issues under the regional trade agreement (RTA) process, as the Enabling Clause did not cover agreements related to these issues.
&& The representative of the European Communities thanked the ASEAN member states and China for the notification.  He said his delegation, like that of the United States, had not had time to fully digest the circulated documents or consider whether it had a need for clarification on any points.  He said his delegation would wish to return to this item at a future meeting of the CTD after having considered the notification in more detail.
&& The representative of China said that the Members notifying the Agreement had taken note of the comments made. He said the comments would be sent back to the capitals of the notifying Members for possible reactions according to the relevant provisions of the Enabling Clause.
&& The Chairman said the Committee would be returning to this item at its next meeting.
&& The Committee took note of the notification and the interventions made.   
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last meeting of the CTD that presentations at the present session would focus on a Member that had experienced difficulties with its commodities trade, on a private institution working on commodities issues or on an international organization active in the area of commodities.  However, because of the lengthy discussion that was expected on the agenda item relating to technical cooperation and training, as well as his desire to concentrate during the present session on the agenda item relating to paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration, he proposed that the CTD postpone its examination of the declining terns of trade of primary commodities until its first meeting of 2006.  He understood that Kenya would be willing to make a presentation at that meeting on its experiences with commodities.  
It was so agreed. 
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED (WT/COMTD/W/143)
&& The Chairman recalled that at the last meeting of the CTD, the Committee had agreed to undertake at the present session a review of the developmental aspects of the Doha Round of negotiations.  In order to assist the Committee with its deliberations on the subject, the Secretariat had been requested to prepare a background paper.  The paper in question had been issued as document WT/COMTD/W/143.  He also recalled that delegations were to request views from capitals for  discussion on this agenda item at the present meeting.
&& The Chairman said he believed a discussion on the developmental aspects of the negotiations was very timely.  As the date of the Ministerial Conference in Hong Kong drew closer, he thought it was important for Members to take stock of the extent to which the development dimension was being reflected in the negotiations.
&& The Chairman said he wished to make a brief presentation summarizing some of the main points that arose in the Secretariat's paper WT/COMTD/W/143.  He would then open the floor for comments and discussion.
&& The Chairman made the following presentation:
"I would like to provide an overview of the developmental aspects of the Doha Round of negotiations.  I will briefly touch upon the key areas in which negotiations are taking place.
Before I get to the negotiations themselves, however, let me begin by reading out an excerpt from the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization.  I think this will set the stage for our discussion today in the context of paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration. The text of the Marrakesh Agreement starts with the following:
'The Parties to this Agreement,
Recognizing that their relations in the field of trade and economic endeavour should be conducted with a view to raising standards of living, ensuring full employment and a large and steadily growing volume of real income and effective demand, and expanding the production of and trade in goods and services, while allowing for the optimal use of the world's resources in accordance with the objective of sustainable development, seeking both to protect and preserve the environment and to enhance the means for doing so in a manner consistent with their respective needs and concerns at different levels of economic development ...'
It is also worth recalling the text of paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration, which reads as follows:
'&& The Committee on Trade and Development and the Committee on Trade and Environment shall, within their respective mandates, each act as a forum to identify and debate developmental and environmental aspects of the negotiations, in order to help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected.'
Having set out this background, let me now turn to the main subject of the presentation, which is the developmental aspects of the Doha Round of negotiations.
Agriculture
The Agriculture negotiations are of critical importance for many developing countries.  This importance, and agriculture's ability to contribute to the development objectives of developing countries, is reflected in the mandate for the Agriculture negotiations, paragraph 13 of the Doha Declaration. 
Paragraph 13 of the Doha Declaration has been given further precision by the General Council Decision of 1 August 2004.  Annex A of the General Council's Decision, which is the Agreed Framework for the Agriculture negotiations, contains several development-oriented provisions.  These provisions are quite complex, and, of course, many of the details remain to be settled.  Nevertheless, broadly speaking, it can be said that several developmental concerns have been taken into account. 
I would now like to turn to some of the developmental aspects in each of the three main pillars of the Agriculture negotiations.
Agriculture:  Domestic support
Many developing countries are concerned by the high levels of subsidies provided to the agricultural sector by some countries.  Broadly speaking, developing countries would like to see large reductions in trade-distorting support in developed countries, strict rules on Blue Box criteria and the review and clarification of the Green Box criteria so as to ensure that such measures have no, or at most minimal, trade-distorting effects or effects on production.
At the same time, some developing countries would like to reserve the right to use some level of agriculture support either now or in the future.
As regards the Agreed Framework, in addition to longer implementation periods and lower reductions in trade-distorting domestic support, the Framework sets out several other areas where developmental aspects of agriculture in developing countries could be addressed. 
Agriculture:  Export competition
The objective for most developing countries is the rapid elimination of all forms of export subsidies.
Paragraph 18 of the Agreed Framework commits Members to eliminate all forms of export subsidies, although the date for elimination is still subject to negotiation.  
Developing countries have longer implementation periods for the phasing out of export subsidies.  Furthermore, the Framework states that developing countries will continue to benefit from the exception in Article 9.4 of the Agreement on Agriculture – for certain types of export marketing and transport costs – for a reasonable period even after the phasing out of export subsidies has been completed.
It should be said that some developing countries do have concerns about the possible negative impact of the disciplines to be agreed in the areas of food aid, export credits and state trading enterprises, or STEs.  As regards export credit disciplines, the Agreed Framework states that appropriate provisions will have to be made for differential treatment in favour of least-developed and net food-importing developing countries as provided for in the Decision of Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme on Least-Developed and Net Food‑Importing Developing Countries.  Moreover, where developing countries maintain STEs which enjoy special privileges to preserve domestic consumer price stability and to ensure food security, such entities will receive special consideration for maintaining their monopoly status.
Agriculture:  Market access
This is possibly the most difficult area in the Agriculture negotiations.  All Members are, of course, concerned about domestic support and export competition, but not all Members have commitments relating to these pillars.  On the other hand, all Members have agriculture tariffs set out in their Schedules and all Members also export agricultural products to other countries. 
Once again, the Agreed Framework contains several development-oriented provisions.  These include provisions for lesser tariff reductions or tariff quota expansion commitments relative to those to be undertaken by developed countries, as well as Special and Differential Treatment (S&D) on the tariff reduction formula, the number and treatment of sensitive products and the implementation period.
One of the key objectives of many developing countries is to achieve significant improvements in market access, not only in developed country markets, but also in other developing countries.  With this objective in mind, some developing countries have expressed concern that some of the flexibilities available to both developed and developing countries could impair potential future trading opportunities.
Non-Agricultural Market Access:  Tariffs
From the developing country point of view, objectives in the tariff area can be categorized as being defensive or offensive.
Broadly speaking, the defensive interests of developing country Members in the Non-Agricultural Market Access (NAMA) negotiations are often expressed as the need to have flexibilities that would allow them to make less tariff cuts, exempt tariff lines from new bindings or reduction commitments, or to maintain the status quo.  The principle of less than full reciprocity in reduction commitments is also frequently mentioned in this context.  Some of the arguments that have been put forward in the context of defensive interests include the following:
The need to preserve "policy space"
The need to protect or encourage infant industries
The need to preserve unbound duties
The need to deal with non-reciprocal preference erosion
The need to prevent tariff revenue loss
The NAMA framework – Annex B of the 1 August 2004 Decision of the General Council – contains a number of provisions that aim to treat some of the defensive concerns of developing countries.
Turning to the offensive interests of developing countries in the tariff negotiations, these are usually expressed as the need to obtain improved and secure market access conditions through new tariff reductions and bindings.  Market access is sought not only in developed country markets, but also in other developing countries in order to boost South-South trade.  
As regards the status of the deliberations in the Negotiating Group on Market Access, discussion on the non-linear formula has been very intensive since the start of the year.  Various proposals have been submitted by both developed and developing countries.  The sectorial tariff component of the negotiations is also being pursued actively by some Members.  There has also been discussion on other tariff-related issues including how unbound tariffs are to be treated, and the question of non-reciprocal preferences.
Non-Agricultural Market Access:  Non-tariff barriers
Discussion on non-tariff barriers (NTBs) has been relatively limited so far, though NTBs have received increased attention since the adoption of the NAMA framework. 
It should be said that NTBs are a very complex area of the Negotiating Group's work.  At the same time, however, addressing non-tariff barriers is very important for many developing country Members.  This is an area of the work of the Negotiating Group that is, therefore, of great interest to many developing countries.
Services
The developmental aspects of services trade liberalization were addressed by Members as early as 1999, when the Secretariat was requested to prepare a background note on the developmental impact of trade liberalization under the GATS.  Since then, the developmental aspects of services trade liberalization have remained a central topic of the negotiations.
More recently, the elaboration of the recommendations to the TNC of the Special Session of the Council for Trade in Services, finally adopted as part of the 1 August 2004 Decision, provided another opportunity for Members to focus on the developmental aspects of the Services negotiations.  Developing countries considered some of those recommendations as being clearly linked to the development dimension of the Doha Round.  These include the call for greater quality of offers, particularly in sectors and modes of supply of export interest to developing countries, the call for special attention to sectors and modes and supply of export interest to developing countries, the interest of developing countries in mode 4 and the mandate to provide targeted technical assistance with a view to enabling developing countries to participate effectively in the negotiations. 
Finally, in reviewing progress in the negotiations, Members have stressed the importance of ensuring that a developmental thrust is embedded in the offers by, for example, paying attention to sectors and modes of supply of interest to developing countries.
Trade Facilitation
The negotiations on Trade Facilitation were launched more recently than negotiations in other areas.  The modalities for the negotiations on Trade Facilitation are found in Annex D of the 1 August 2004 Decision.
Several proposals have been tabled by Members in the course of the last year.  A useful compilation of all the proposals has been prepared by the Secretariat, and is being used by the Negotiating Group on Trade Facilitation.  The symbol for the Secretariat document is TN/TF/W/43, which, I believe, is being updated regularly.
The Secretariat document categorizes the content treated in the various proposals.  Among the categories used in the document are two of special interest to developing countries, namely S&D and technical assistance and capacity-building.  According to the compilation document, several proposals by both developed and developing countries make reference to these two issues.
Special and Differential Treatment
The work on S&D is of particular interest and importance to developing countries, and this has been brought out in a number of submissions by developing country Members.
It should be said that some Members have stressed the distinction between development on the one hand, and the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system on the other.  For these Members, the main objective of S&D should be integration into the multilateral trading system, and not development per se.
The issues treated by Members in their submissions can be classified as being Agreement-specific or cross-cutting in nature.  Several developing country Members have expressed the view that work on Agreement-specific proposals should be completed before a detailed discussion on cross‑cutting issues can begin, as this order of priority fulfils more closely the mandate given by Ministers at Doha, as well as the mandate in the 1 August 2004 Decision.  Other Members, however, feel that having a discussion on the cross-cutting issues is important as it would help Members in making progress on the Agreement-specific proposals.
A total of 88 Agreement-specific proposals have been submitted by Members.  An in‑principle agreement was reached on 28 of them prior to the Fifth Ministerial Conference in September 2003, but these have yet to be adopted.
In spite of differences between Members on how to move forward with the S&D work programme, the CTD in Special Session is, I understand, continuing to examine the remaining Agreement-specific proposals. 
Implementation-Related Issues and Concerns
In their Decision on Implementation-Related Issues and Concerns, Ministers at Doha agreed to take immediate action to address a number of implementation concerns of developing country Members. 
They also agreed that outstanding implementation issues be addressed in accordance with paragraph 12 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, either directly under the specific negotiating mandates in the Declaration – the so‑called paragraph 12(a) issues – or in the relevant Councils and Committees – known as the paragraph 12(b) issues.
The paragraph 12(a) issues are being taken up in the relevant negotiating bodies, namely Agriculture and Rules. 
The paragraph 12(b) issues include consideration of technical assistance for developing countries, exemptions, flexibilities and extension of transition periods.  The Director-General was mandated by the 1 August 2004 Decision to continue the consultative process on paragraph 12(b) issues, but in the former DG's July 2005 report to the General Council no significant progress was reported.  The former DG therefore suggested that his successor be requested to continue the consultative process.    
Rules
Anti-Dumping is area of the Rules negotiations that has received the most attention to date. 
The largest number of proposals on Anti-Dumping has been made by a group of Members that call themselves the "Friends of Anti-Dumping Negotiations" or FANs.  This group includes both developing and developed Members and calls for improved and strengthened disciplines on Anti‑Dumping.  In addition to the FANs, several other Members – both developing and developed – have tabled extensive proposals and elaborated on anti-dumping rules. 
It should be added that a number of proposals regarding developing countries have been made, including on the issue of S&D.
As for the other areas of the Rules negotiations, the extent to which the development dimension is being reflected varies.
In the area of subsidies disciplines, a number of development-related proposals have been tabled, while no specific proposals on development have been submitted in the context of countervailing duties. 
Fisheries subsidies is the area of the Rules negotiations in which Members have most clearly identified the "sustainable development" aspects of their proposals.  The need to take into account the legitimate interests of developing Members in formulating disciplines has also been widely recognized.
The final area of the Rules negotiations concerns regional trade agreements (RTAs).  One important aspect of the mandate on RTAs is that it expressly directs Members to "take into account the developmental aspects of regional trade agreements".  The developmental aspects of RTAs have been important to the Negotiating Group's work in mainly two areas:  the place of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause vis-à-vis any improved RTA's transparency and review process resulting from current negotiations;  and the inclusion of S&D for developing countries in some WTO provisions relating to RTAs.  A number of submissions by Members in the context of RTAs have dealt with developmental issues or development-related flexibilities. 
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
Those developing countries that have been active in the work of the Special Session of the Council for TRIPS have expressed diverging views about the merits of the proposals on the table for a multilateral system of notification and registration of geographical indications for wines and spirits, including on the implications for their development.
A significant number of developing countries have yet to take a position and are still studying the various proposals.
Discussion of S&D has been relatively limited so far.  The point has been made that the need for it would depend, to a significant extent, on the nature and complexity of the basic notification and registration system to be chosen – which still remains unclear.  
Trade and Environment
	Paragraph 31 of the Doha Declaration represents the "environmental package" of the Doha Round.  It has three main components:
Paragraph 31(i):  Negotiations on the relationship between WTO rules and Multilateral Environmental Agreements, or MEAs
Paragraph 31(ii):  Negotiations on how to enhance information exchange and cooperation between the WTO and MEAs, and on the granting of "observer status" to environmental organizations
Paragraph 31(iii):  Negotiations on trade liberalization in environmental goods and services 
Developing countries have participated actively in the negotiations, with a number of them tabling submissions to clarify their positions.  Some submissions have focused on the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  In addition, some proposed lists of environmental goods take into account the development dimension by, for example, including goods of export interest to developing countries.
Dispute Settlement Understanding
The final item relates to the negotiations on dispute settlement, which aim to agree on "improvements and clarifications" of the Dispute Settlement Understanding.  It should be kept in mind, as stated in paragraph 47 of the Doha Declaration, that these negotiations are not to be treated as part of a single undertaking.
Overall, more than 40 proposals have been tabled in the DSB Special Session, covering virtually every provision of the DSU.  Many of these proposals have been submitted by developing countries or groups of developing countries, including some Members that have not been active users of the dispute settlement system so far.  Proposals put forward by developing country Members, like those of other Members, have been very diverse and related to all stages of the procedures.
The work of the Special Session over the last year has been primarily based on efforts by Members to work among themselves and develop areas of convergence, based on prior work.  Although no specific proposal relating to S&D as such has been put forward recently in this context, several delegations have indicated that they have been working on issues relating to the participation of developing country Members in WTO dispute settlement".
&& The Chairman said his presentation, as well as the Secretariat document, did not claim to provide an exhaustive coverage of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  Nor did it prejudice the right of any Member to raise other concerns or views related to paragraph 51 or to the areas under negotiation in the Doha Development Agenda.  He said his main objective in making the presentation was to set the stage for the discussion that would take place at the present meeting.
&& The representative of Colombia said she wished to congratulate the Chairman and the Secretariat for the presentation and the document.  The document provided a snapshot of the developmental aspects of the negotiations and was a laudable effort.  She said it was a shame that  not many delegations of developing country Members were represented in the meeting room.  She wondered what developing countries wanted from the Doha Round.  It was a difficult question, but her delegation had an answer, however partial.  Her delegation considered the Agriculture negotiations as mandated in the Doha Declaration to be of great importance to Colombia's development.  Through the negotiations there would be less export subsidies and less domestic support, and market access in both developed and developing countries would be enhanced.  She said she was concerned that the section on Non-Agricultural Market Access (NAMA) made a distinction between the defensive interests of developing countries and the offensive interests of developing countries, whereas the section on the Agriculture negotiations seemed to mainly touch on defensive interests.  This suggested that developing countries' interests in the Agriculture negotiations were limited to protecting their own markets.  The Doha Round was not a Round of preferences.  She requested that a revised version of the Secretariat paper treat the offensive interests of developing countries in the Agriculture negotiations in more detail so as to better balance the Agriculture and NAMA sections.  She also requested that the paper and its revision be discussed at future meetings of the CTD.  She further suggested that other WTO bodies also debate in more depth what was being sought from the Round in terms of development.  
&& The Chairman said the main objective of the Secretariat paper was to start a debate on the developmental aspects of the negotiations, and to take the issue forward in the CTD. 
&& The representative of Rwanda said that it was timely to evaluate the development dimension of the Doha Round of negotiations.  He said many of the development dimension aspects of the Round were still in the form of proposals, which was not surprising as the negotiations were still continuing.  He asked when the Chairman would be in a position to provide an updated assessment so that Members could be in a position to evaluate how best to change the form and substance of the document.  He said there would be a need after the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference for an extensive assessment of the developmental aspects of the negotiations, with all elements included.  This would allow Members to get an idea of what could be expected on the development side at the end of the Round. 
&& The Chairman said that any improvement of the document was largely in the hands of Members.  He said that the discussion of the Committee and comments by Members would help the Secretariat to improve the document. 
&& The representative of China thanked the Chairman for his presentation, and thanked the Secretariat for having prepared the paper.  He said his delegation, like the delegation of Colombia, was deeply concerned by the lack of progress in the development issues in the negotiations.  His delegation believed it was high time to have a focused discussion on the development issues in the negotiations.  The CTD, as the focal point for development issues in the WTO, was the appropriate place to have the discussion.  
&& The representative of China said that the United Nations Millennium Development Goals set out the blueprint for addressing development issues.  In the past five years, however, slow progress had been made.  The gap in development between the North and South had been widening.  Many developing countries, in particular in Africa, were faced with serious challenges to their economic and social development.  The recent United Nations Summit attached great importance to the issue of development. Trade was not an end in itself, but formed part of a country's national economic and social development strategy.  If development issues in the Doha Round were not duly addressed, this would have a negative effect on the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.
&& The representative of China said he had some specific comments on the Secretariat paper.  In paragraph 2, it was mentioned that the paper attempted to address all the subject areas under negotiation in the Round, and was organized by negotiating body and by work programme or working group.  This was reaffirmed in paragraph 102, which stated that the document identified some of the developmental aspects raised in the various negotiating bodies and working groups.  However, the paper did not contain any information on such Working Groups as those on Trade and Transfer of Technology or on Trade, Debt and Finance.  He suggested that a distinction should be made between the negotiating bodies and the working groups, and sought clarification from the Secretariat or comments from Members on this issue. 
&& The representative of China said he had noted that in paragraph 21, where issues relating to recently acceded Members were addressed, only a proposal by economies in transition was mentioned. China, as a recently acceded developing Member, had also submitted a proposal – JOB(03)/168 – in which specific proposals had been put forward to address the concerns of newly acceded Members.  He hoped that the proposal by China would be reflected in a revised version of the paper.  He said he supported the proposal of the representative of Colombia to have an in-depth discussion of the paper at future meetings of the CTD, and that his delegation reserved the right to make further comments on the paper. 
&& The Director of the Development Division said the Secretariat had reflected on the issue of whether to include a treatment of the working groups and work programmes in the paper.  He said the mandate in paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration dealt with the negotiations.  Some groups were discussing areas related to the negotiations, but were not considered as negotiating groups under the Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC).  A discussion of these groups was, therefore, not included in the paper.
&& The representative of Nicaragua thanked the Secretariat for the document.  He said several Members were concerned with the lack of progress in the Agriculture negotiations.  There was no indication of a political will for agriculture to be brought fully within the WTO system.  His delegation supported the view of the delegation of Colombia that the current Round was not a Round of preferences, nor a Round where protectionism would be perpetuated.  His delegation wanted the current Round to bring about greater development for all Members.  Although liberalization was not an end in itself, more open markets could lead to more jobs, particularly in developing countries.  Developing countries like Nicaragua had a comparative advantage in agriculture, as they produced at lower cost and had abundant manpower and natural resources.  There was no reason for the status quo in the agricultural sector to be maintained. 
&& The representative of Japan thanked the Secretariat and the Chairman for the paper and the presentation.  He said it was useful to have an overview of the developmental aspects of the negotiations in each negotiating body.  He said his delegation reserved the right to make future comments on both substance and procedural matters.  He personally wondered whether the CTD was the appropriate body to discuss the advancement of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.
&& The Chairman said the CTD had a mandate under paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration to address the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  The CTD was not a negotiating body, but was taking stock of the developmental aspects of the negotiations. 
&& The representative of the European Communities thanked the Secretariat for the document.  He said that after the compartmentalized discussion that had taken place under this agenda item up to now, a more holistic discussion was welcome.  He noted that under the mandate of paragraph 51 the CTD was limited to discussing the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  His delegation took note of the caveats in the paper, in particular in terms of providing a non-exhaustive and preliminary presentation.  He noted that the Secretariat had presented the information in the paper in a factual manner, without prioritizing issues or suggesting that any issue was more important than another.  It was appropriate of the Secretariat to have presented the information in this manner, as Members would have their individual assessments of where things stood, and the Secretariat would not be in a position to present the paper in any other way without further guidance from Members.  His delegation was also aware of the work being undertaken by the Committee on Trade and Environment (CTE).  He said that Committee was organizing in the following week an event on sustainable development.  The paper pointed clearly to the conclusion that the developmental aspects of the negotiations were very much to be found in the core negotiating areas such as Agriculture, NAMA, Services, Trade Facilitation and Rules.  Some of the supporting measures were outside the WTO altogether, but were certainly relevant as part of the overall exercise. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said he thought the interventions made in the present meeting demonstrated that the developmental aspects of the negotiations were not simply the sum of the requests made by developing countries.  Some positions by developing country Members tended to go against each other.  Such differences could only be resolved through negotiations between Members.  The development potential of the Round was to be found in the commercial opportunities in goods and services that would be available to developing countries in the future, as well as the capacity to take advantage of them.  It was, therefore, important not to close off the potential for additional trading opportunities in both developed and developing country markets if the development potential of the Round were to be maximized.  He agreed that the paper should be kept on the agenda of the CTD.  His delegation certainly wished to come back to the paper in the future. 
&& The representative of Pakistan thanked the Secretariat for the preparation of the document.  Her delegation supported the intervention made by the delegation of Colombia.  Her delegation also echoed the concerns of the delegation of China regarding development issues and their proper reflection and inclusion in the negotiations.  She said it would be worthwhile if a treatment of the Working Groups on Trade and Transfer of Technology and Trade, Debt and Finance were included in a revised version of the paper.  In the context of S&D, she said her delegation looked forward to an update on the status of the various Categories of proposals.  She noted that while making an analysis it was important to keep in mind the question of what would be the commercial opportunities available to businesses in the future.  She said her delegation reserved the right to come back to the paper in the future.  
&& The Chairman said that Members would have to decide whether to include the Working Groups on Trade and Transfer of Technology and Trade, Debt and Finance, as well as the Work Programme on Small Economies, in a revised version of the Secretariat paper.  With regard to the revision, he said he welcomed comments from Members on any developmental aspects of the negotiations they felt were not adequately reflected in the paper.
&& The representative of Cuba thanked the Secretariat for the document.  The document provided a snapshot of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  Her delegation was deeply concerned with the scant progress that had been made in the developmental aspects across the negotiations.  She said Members should pool their efforts in order to have a result which honoured the title of 'Development Round'.  She said that the working groups and work programme not included in the Secretariat paper were of great importance to her delegation, as they were to other developing country Members.  They were  part of the Doha Agenda, and it would be useful if they were included in the paper.  She said that in order to have a satisfactory and balanced outcome to the so-called Development Round, both the offensive and the defensive interests of developing countries must be satisfied.  Her delegation agreed that it would be useful to continue discussing the paper at future meetings of the CTD.  She wished the records to show that her delegation supported the statements made by the delegations of China, Rwanda and Pakistan.
&& The representative of China said he wished to clarify the statement made earlier by his delegation.  By making reference to discussions on development issues in other organizations, the intention of his delegation was not to suggest that those discussions be brought into the WTO.  Rather, his delegation wished to highlight the importance of development issues in the context of a wider international background, so as to emphasize the need for development concerns to be stressed to a greater extent in the WTO. 
&& The representative of India said the comments of his delegation at this stage would be very preliminary.  His delegation would revert with more detailed comments at a later stage.  He thanked the Secretariat for the document, and noted the caveats in the paper.  He said that from the point of view of his delegation one clear omission in the paper related to implementation issues.  In particular, under that heading his delegation would have wished to see a specific reference to the CBD/TRIPS issue, which his delegation regarded as a major pro-development element in the mandate with potential long-term benefits for developing countries. 
&& The representative of India said his delegation had for some time been speaking of the need for a development audit of the negotiations, and saw the Secretariat paper as a first step in that direction.  It would be desirable if a way could be found to feed the CTD's discussion on the Secretariat paper into a larger stocktaking of the development dimension of the negotiations.  Discussion could then focus on the concrete development deliverables at Hong Kong, China.  He said that unless a way could be found to reflect the deliberations of the CTD into a broader stocktaking exercise, the value of the present discussion would be limited.  He was aware that the mandate given to the CTD provided some limitations, but within those limitations perhaps the Chairman would wish to give some thought as to how the CTD could communicate with other organs in the WTO on this issue. 
&& The Chairman said he certainly agreed that the CTD's discussion on the developmental aspects of the negotiations should be reflected outside of the Committee.  The Committee would have to decide at some stage on how to transmit the content of its deliberations.  He recognized that the Indian delegation had been asking for a development audit for some time, which was one of the reasons why the initiative had been taken to prepare a paper on the developmental aspects of the negotiations.
&& The representative of Mauritius thanked the Chairman and the Secretariat for having put so much effort into the preparation of the timely paper on the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  He was appreciative of the caveats and disclaimers in the Secretariat paper.  He said the work being undertaken in the context of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) was at the present time being done on two tracks.  The first track was under the responsibility of the Chairman of the Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) while the second track was under the responsibility of the General Council Chairperson.  He suggested that non-TNC issues should also be reflected in the paper.  This would capture the whole thrust of the DDA.  He agreed that discussion of the paper should continue in future meetings of the CTD and also agreed with the representative of India that the CTD's discussion on the subject should be reflected in negotiating and other bodies concerned with the implementation of the work of the DDA.   
&& The representative of Costa Rica said his delegation had found valuable information in the Secretariat paper.  However, his delegation was deeply concerned with the lack of balance in this and other documents dealing with the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  The imbalances in the Secretariat document were very clear.  Prior to the adoption of the 1 August 2004 Decision his delegation had strongly defended the dual dimension of development.  He said his delegation had made the point that development in the negotiations seemed to be treated only along one track, which was to offer flexibilities to developing countries.  While flexibilities were important, they were only one component of the development dimension.  Developing countries needed to seek greater participation in world trade, greater market access and less trade barriers and distorting measures in developed countries.  The offensive, export interests of developing countries must be treated in the Round, and should therefore have been reflected in more detail in the paper.  His delegation had particularly stressed the importance of the offensive interests of developing countries in the context of tropical products in the Agriculture negotiations.  Paragraph 43 of the August 2004 Decision made reference to tropical products and reflected the need for developing countries to secure greater market access for products of export interest to them.  That was why he was greatly surprised that the offensive needs of developing countries were explicitly treated only in the NAMA section, and not in the Agriculture section.  It gave the impression that different people had authored different sections of the document. He could not understand this on the part of the Secretariat.
&& The representative of Costa Rica said his delegation welcomed India's initiative calling for an audit of the developmental aspects of the Round and was grateful for the document that had been circulated by India.  However, it also suffered from significant omissions when treating the offensive interests of developing countries.  His delegation understood and respected India's position.  However, his country saw development in a different way.  His country had a high level of ambition in both Agriculture and NAMA.  In the document circulated by India, no mention was made of the mandate to substantially enhance market access, nor of tropical products.  Even though preference erosion was part of the Agriculture and the NAMA mandate, the Indian document mentioned this only in relation to NAMA.  His delegation was of the view that this should also have been mentioned under Agriculture, thus leading to a more balanced treatment of the two areas.    
&& The representative of India raised a point of order.  He said the comments made by the representative of Costa Rica pertained to a document that India had submitted in the Informal Group of Developing Countries, and not in the CTD.
&& The representative of Costa Rica inquired whether the representative of India meant that the document submitted by India should not be discussed in the present meeting because it was submitted in a different body.
&& The representative of India said the document in question was submitted in a different forum, and it was, therefore, not appropriate for it be discussed in the CTD.
&& The representative of Costa Rica said he would not mention the submission by India.  To conclude his statement, he said his delegation believed that work should be carried out on what Brazil had called the development deficit.  His delegation felt it was very important for developing countries to reach an agreement on the means of striking a balance, or even a surplus, in development. In order to do so, however, the interests of all developing countries needed to be taken into account.  That was why his delegation considered it a serious omission and imbalance that not enough attention had been paid in the Secretariat document to achieving enhanced market access for developing countries. 
&& The representative of the United States thanked the Secretariat for what her delegation felt was an outstanding first attempt to assist Members in looking comprehensively at the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  Her delegation acknowledged the challenge faced by the Secretariat to present issues in a neutral manner, and felt that on the whole the Secretariat had successfully described the different views of Members in a succinct and balanced way. 
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation noted that the paper did not, and perhaps could not, capture what it believed to be the fundamental economic reality of the contribution of trade liberalization to economic development.  The preponderance of economic benefits to Members from the Round would be generated through the efficiency gains and increased competitiveness spurred by their own liberalization.  To her delegation, the key benefit was what was contributed rather than what was received in the negotiations.  While difficult to address, it was nevertheless important to keep this in mind. 
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation was struck by the serious attempts that had been made in every negotiating group to look at the development aspects.  There were also serious challenges in addressing these issues, as there was not a universal view among developing country Members about what would be a pro-development outcome to the Round.  Furthermore, the perspectives of developing and developed country Members varied very much by issue.  Her delegation was impressed by the extent to which substantive negotiations had been building in differentiation of flexibilities based on needs and concerns.  Examples included the needs of resource‑poor farmers in the domestic support pillar, the net food importers, or the approach that had been taken in the NAMA negotiations with respect to those countries with very low level of bindings and with respect to LDCs. 
With regard to the reference in paragraph 30 of the Secretariat paper to the NAMA mandate, the representative of the United States said that in the view of her delegation the NAMA mandate did not limit the addressing of tariff peaks, high tariffs and tariff escalation to developed country markets.  Rather, the mandate addressed any market where products originating from developing countries were traded, including developing country markets.  It was important to emphasize that developing countries had export interests in each other's markets.  By and large the NAMA section of the paper highlighted that point, but there was some misimpression in paragraph 30.  Also with regard to the NAMA section of the paper her delegation noted that NTBs were not given as much attention.  She said efforts were under way by her delegation and others to reach out to the smaller trading nations to help them identify and explore solutions to the barriers they were facing in developed and developing country markets.   
In the area of trade and environment, the representative of the United States recalled that her delegation's modality proposal for environmental goods endeavoured to take account of the development dimension by proposing that developing countries eliminate tariffs in a lesser percentage of products on the complementary list than would apply to developed countries. 
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation joined others in expressing an interest in continuing the present discussion at future meetings of the CTD.  Her delegation believed that the role of the discussion was to monitor and assess the developmental aspects of the negotiations rather than to direct other bodies.  With regard to the question of whether to include other areas of the Doha Declaration in the paper, she said those subjects were not being discussed in negotiating groups and a distinction should therefore be made.  
&& The representative of Brazil thanked the Chairman and the Secretariat for having prepared the background for the present discussion.  In his view, the Secretariat paper was a very useful document.  He said it was extremely difficult to keep track of the proposals in the various negotiating groups, and the document was a useful contribution as it summarized the ongoing work in several areas.  He said the Secretariat had taken the right approach in presenting the issues rather than making value judgements or suggesting possible solutions.  On a number of issues, however, the paper was perhaps a little too concise.  He was also of the view that explicit mention should be made of the TRIPS/CBD issue.  He said it was easy to criticize the document because of the way things were presented, but in his view that was not useful.  What he wanted to see was an as exhaustive list as possible of issues.  He noted the Secretariat disclaimer.  While it was impossible to assure that all issues were included, he felt the Secretariat should try to be as exhaustive as possible.
&& The representative of Brazil said he did not think it would be useful to include in the document a discussion of the economic efficiency gains from unilateral liberalization.  If everybody believed in such gains there would be no need for negotiations.  He said that when the argument for unilateral liberalization was brought up in his country there were always commentators that noted that much richer countries had not liberalized. 
&& The representative of Brazil noted that proposals by developing countries were sometimes contradictory.  He believed that the role of a document such as the one prepared by the Secretariat was to compile the proposals by developing countries without passing judgement.  Differences between developing countries needed to be discussed and sorted out.  Clearly, exceptions to market access would have a greater negative impact on those countries exporting a small range of products than on larger economies with a more varied export structure.  Another example was Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), which had a much greater negative impact on countries at lower levels of development and with lower capacities.  These were structural problems, and did not lend themselves to easy solutions. It was nonetheless important to discuss such issues and find ways to mitigate the problems.   
&& The representative of Brazil said he believed the present discussion fell squarely within the mandate of the CTD.  However, issues related to the developmental aspects of the negotiations needed also to be taken up elsewhere.  
&& The representative of Australia said the Secretariat document provided a neutral and balanced overview of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  She thanked the representative of Colombia for the lucid and powerful intervention, echoed in the interventions by Nicaragua and Costa Rica.  Her delegation was in full agreement that the Agriculture negotiations were of critical importance to developing countries, and that the offensive interests of developing countries should not be overlooked.  Her delegation was of the view that the major developmental benefits of the Round would be found in the core negotiating areas.  In particular, her delegation believed that achieving an ambitious outcome in the Agriculture negotiations across the three pillars was central to realizing the development potential of the Round.   
&& The representative of Canada said the Secretariat paper was a useful factual compendium. The paper demonstrated how development had permeated the discussions in all negotiating bodies.  He noted that what had been brought out in the present discussion was that development did not necessarily mean the same thing to all delegations.  He said the paper should be a living document, which should evolve as the negotiations evolved.  There were missing elements in the paper, for example the TRIPS/CBD issue.  He encouraged the Secretariat to revise the paper.  He also agreed that the present discussion should continue at future meetings of the CTD. 
&& The representative of Moldova said the concerns of small transition economies had been reflected in the Agriculture section of the Secretariat paper but not in the NAMA section.  In particular, the NAMA section did not make reference to document TN/MA/W/56/Rev.1 which was submitted by a group of small transition economies.  She requested the Secretariat to reflect in its revised paper the concerns of small transition economies in the NAMA negotiations.   
&& The representative of Egypt said that some points would have to be addressed if the Secretariat paper was to be a living document.  It was firstly important to ensure that there was a balance in the treatment of the various negotiating areas.  He also noted that in some parts of the document, the treatment of issues moved from being factual to being judgemental, for example in paragraph 24 relating to cotton.    
&& The representative of Ecuador said the Secretariat paper was a good basis for discussion, though it could certainly be improved.  She said she fully agreed with what had been said by the representatives of Colombia, Costa Rica and Nicaragua.  She also found the intervention by the representative of Brazil to be most relevant.
&& The representative of Brazil said that, if possible within the mandate relating to paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration, it would be useful to supplement the Secretariat paper with a treatment of the non-TNC issues, in line with what had been suggested by the representative of Mauritius.   
&& The Chairman said he had been informed that the Secretariat had received some proposed amendments to the Secretariat paper from Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali.  As there had been no intervention from these Members at the meeting, he would inform the Committee of the changes proposed.  First, in paragraph 7, page 4, it was proposed that the phrase "which is one reason why some West and Central African cotton producing countries are pursuing their interests through the Sub-Committee on Cotton" at the end of the paragraph be deleted.  The last sentence in paragraph 7 would therefore read:  "An additional factor for some countries is their dependence on a relatively small range of commodities".  Second, in paragraph 22, page 7, it was proposed that the first sentence, which read "Although not originally a specific element of the Doha Declaration, the trade-related aspects of cotton are now a core part of the negotiations" be deleted.  In its place would appear the following:  "The Sectorial Initiative on Cotton was submitted to WTO in May 2003.  The Cotton issue is a core part of the negotiations".  Also in paragraph 22, it was proposed that the phrase "Tasked with addressing cotton "ambitiously" and "expeditiously"" be replaced with:  "Tasked with addressing cotton "ambitiously, expeditiously and specifically"".  Finally, in paragraph 24 it was proposed that the first sentence, as well as the latter part of the second sentence, be deleted.  Thus what would be left of paragraph 24 would simply be the following:  "In the Chairman's status report, (JOB(05)/126), he noted the vital need for progress in both the trade and development tracks".  
&& The Chairman said the Secretariat would prepare a revision to the document based on the points raised in the present discussion.  He noted that a number of Members had suggested that it would be useful if the non-TNC issues were included in the revised Secretariat paper.  He inquired whether the delegation of the United States would be opposed if these issues were placed in a separate section of the paper.
&& The representative of the United States said she would confer with her capital about whether the non-TNC issues could be included in the revised Secretariat paper.  She said she was concerned with the changes proposed in the paper on the language relating to cotton, as the paper was quite factual as it was.  She said she would also confer with her capital on this point.   
&& The representative of Benin confirmed the amendments proposed by Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad and Mali.  He said his delegation considered that the amendments were necessary and reflected the facts and the discussion that had taken place on cotton.  The amendments were believed necessary in order to have a balanced treatment of the issue in the Secretariat paper.
&& The Chairman said he would hold consultations with certain delegations that had raised concerns relating to the Secretariat paper in order to see how the paper could be revised.  
The representative of Mauritius said he was aware that the Chairman would in coming weeks be submitting his report to the General Council.  He wondered whether the report could have the  Secretariat paper annexed to it, or at least have some aspects of the present discussion reflected in it.  
&& The representative of Colombia said the Secretariat paper was a very important document that went to the very heart of the negotiations.  She requested that a discussion on the document take place again as soon as possible.  She said she wished to promote the document and the discussion that would take place. 
&& The representative of Costa Rica said the present discussion had demonstrated that there were a number of elements lacking in the Secretariat paper.  He hoped the Secretariat could revise the document quickly so that discussion could continue in the CTD based on the revised paper. 
&& The Chairman said he could see valid reasons for the concerns of the representative of Costa Rica.  There was a need to improve the paper before promoting it outside the CTD.  The question was how to go about that process, whether it would be through consultations or perhaps another meeting of the CTD.  
&& The representative of Costa Rica said he believed there was no need for consultations to revise the document.  The Secretariat could certainly revise the document based on the discussion that had taken place at the present meeting.  The document was meant to be a factual compilation, and records were available to make the necessary revisions. 
&& The Chairman said the Secretariat would, therefore, revise the paper before the Ministerial Conference in Hong Kong, China.  He said that consultations would nevertheless be necessary in certain areas, for example on whether the non-TNC issues could be included in the revised paper.
&& The representative of China inquired whether the discussion on paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration would continue at the next CTD meeting in November 2005.
&& The Chairman said that the plan had been to have a more limited meeting of the CTD in November, where the annual report of the Committee would be adopted.  However, if Members wished to continue the present discussion at the next CTD meeting it would certainly be possible.
&& The representative of Colombia requested that the discussion on paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration be on the agenda of the next CTD meeting.  She said it was important to give Members a chance to continue the discussion based on the revised Secretariat paper.  
&& The Chairman said that discussion on paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration would continue at the next meeting of the CTD.
&& The Committee took note of the Secretariat paper and of all interventions.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Training and Technical Assistance: Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities – 1 January to 30 June 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/141)
Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2006 (WT/COMTD/W/142) 
&& The Chairman said there were two reports for the Committee to consider under this agenda item.  He wished to invite the Secretariat to present both reports, after which the floor would be opened for questions and comments.
&& The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) said he would start by introducing document WT/COMTD/W/141, which was the first of the twice-yearly reports that the Secretariat had undertaken to provide Members with.  The report under consideration covered the first six months of 2005.  The last six months of 2005 would be covered in the annual report which Members would receive in the first part of 2006. Members had also been kept informed of progress in the implementation of the 2005 Technical Assistance (TA) Plan through the informal consultation process that had been initiated the previous year.  One of the informal sessions had been held in conjunction with Geneva Week, thereby allowing non-resident Members to participate. 
&& The IITC Director said he wished to highlight some salient points in the document under consideration.  The document was divided into two parts.  The first part contained a quantitative report of the activities.  In the second part, two particular products were analyzed in more depth. 
On the quantitative part, the ITTC Director said that the implementation rate showed that the process was on track to provide a level of delivery similar to that of 2004, where approximately 500 activities were delivered.  In the first semester of 2005, 263 activities had been delivered.  Using the procedure agreed to the previous year for measuring the implementation of especially regional activities and Geneva-based activities, namely in terms of participant days, 17,000 such days were recorded in the first semester of the year.  Up to 30 September 2005, 385 activities had been delivered with 28,700 participant days.
&& The ITTC Director said that paragraph 6 of the report outlined some of the main features of the activities that had been conducted.  Some numerical and other parameters of these features were highlighted.  There had been some innovations in the area of e-training, in the Netherlands trainee programme and the trade negotiations skills seminars.  Particular emphasis was being placed on activities in Africa and in LDCs.  In respect of national activities, however, LDCs were not fully taking up the opportunities being offered to them.  Partnership agreements with other institutions were allowing a leveraging of resources beyond what could be done by the Secretariat on its own.
&& The ITTC Director said that, as he had mentioned earlier, the second part of the report considered in more detail two particular products.  The first was the trade negotiations skills seminars, which were held both on a regional basis and as national activities upon request.  These were simulations of a real negotiation aimed at cutting tariffs on industrial goods and agricultural goods, and on establishing new rules governing trade.  They were done on the basis of role-playing. The participants in the activities took on the roles of negotiators for different types of countries, ranging from LDCs to highly developed economies.  An agreement was hammered out during the five days of the seminar.  The seminars were particularly well received by participants from developing countries, who indicated that they left the seminars feeling better prepared to participate in real trade negotiations.  Trade negotiations simulations were also carried out in the trade policy courses in Geneva and in the regions.
The other product considered in detail in the second part of the report was the traineeship programme sponsored by the government of the Netherlands, which had a budget of CHF 3 million over four years.  Approximately 25 trainees were either already functioning as part of the programme or were about to join for periods up to ten months.  The trainees came from LDCs and low-income countries, as required by the terms of reference of the programme.  The trainees were working on specific topics, and many were engaged in undertaking needs assessments from the countries from which they came.  They were working in a number of Divisions of the Secretariat.  Because of space constraints, however, some of them had been placed in Missions or elsewhere.
&& The ITTC Director said he wished to bring the Committee up to date on the funding situation. The situation had markedly improved since the last time he had addressed the Committee.  Of the CHF 20 million of fresh money that had been requested from Members for 2005, almost all the amount had been received.  There were, therefore, sufficient funds to carry out the programme of work for the year.  There would also be funds available to begin activities in 2006, because in addition to any left over funds from the present year, a number of pledges for contributions for 2006 had been received.
&& The ITTC Director said he wished to turn to the proposed Technical Assistance and Training Plan for 2006 contained in document WT/COMTD/W/142.  The approach had been refined every year, attempting to incorporate new features based on lessons learned from implementing the Plan in the previous year.  In the proposed Plan for 2006 an attempt had been made to make training more targeted, both in terms of the issues dealt with and in terms of the audience being addressed.  An attempt was being made to raise the level of the training in some activities by making some assumptions about the background knowledge participants had, though basic training on WTO issues also continued to be offered.  More emphasis was being placed on hands-on exercises and simulations.  In addition to the trade negotiations simulations exercises that had been mentioned earlier, simulation exercises also existed in various areas including Dispute Settlement, Services negotiations and Rules negotiations.  A more careful selection of participants in training courses was also being undertaken. 
With regard to the duration of training activities, the ITTC Director said that an effort was being made to keep them to the minimum time required to appropriately present the material. Participants regularly made the remark that a longer activity would have provided additional benefits, and it was therefore necessary to strike a balance so as to ensure that all activities remained at a high level within the allotted time frame.  The partnership programme was also being pursued actively with a view to enhancing ownership by the beneficiary countries of the training that was being received.
&& The ITTC Director said that the main objective of the Plan continued to be to provide a framework for a coherent and cost-effective pursuit of the key development and capacity-building objectives mandated by Members, particularly those mentioned in the Doha Declaration and the 1 August 2004 Decision of the General Council.  An effort was being made to enhance the capacity of developing country Members in a sustainable way to understand the WTO agreements and to participate more actively in the negotiations and other work of the WTO.  As in past years, the Plan contained a range of products.  The main objectives of each product were listed in the Plan. 
&& The ITTC Director said that the key features of the Plan, which had not changed much from the previous year, were found in paragraph 8.  The Plan was demand-driven.  A list of what could reasonably be foreseen had been provided, but there was flexibility to deal with demands from beneficiary countries, in particular with regard to national activities. 
&& The ITTC Director said that the Plan had been budgeted at CHF 31 million.  About CHF 5.5 million of the amount was under the regular budget, while the rest came from the Global Trust Fund (GTF) and other funds.  The budget for technical assistance was the same as in the previous two years.  In particular, the total budget for the GTF had been foreseen once again to be CHF 24 million.  
A representative of the Budget and Control Section made the following statement:
"I have been asked to provide you with an overview of the Secretariat's cost estimates for WTO-provided technical assistance and training activities in 2006. 
Cost estimates for the 2006 Plan have been circulated.
I hope that these figures, taken together with the details contained in the document presenting the 2006 Plan will provide Members with the information they need.
The results of the discussions in the CTD will be taken into consideration by the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration later this year, when it will make a recommendation the General Council on a target amount for the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) GTF in 2006.
The document that that you have in front of you follows the structure of the 2006 Plan, as presented in Annex 1 to document WT/COMTD/W/142.
&& The Director of ITTC mentioned that the structure of the Plan for 2006 is similar to the previous two Plans.  This makes a direct comparison of the cost estimates for the different parts of the Plan easier.
In arriving at these figures, the Secretariat also applied the same standard cost methodology as in the previous years. 
The methodology consists of assigning different standard costs for one day of activity for one person depending upon whether the event is a national activity, a regional activity, a training course or an activity in Geneva headquarters. 	
With the exception of national activities, for which the standard cost increased by 9 per cent, these figures are either identical to or less than last year's.
When applying the standard costs for all activities organized at the regional level, we anticipated a participation level of 85 per cent.
Globally, the costing we have arrived at for the 2006 Plan comes to CHF 31 million. 
The total is comprised of the following elements: 
1.	Estimated overall cost 
2.	Reduction in cost due to cost sharing arrangements
3.	Net total for WTO to be financed from the regular budget and extra-budgetary funds.
We have assumed that Members, when revising the regular budget for 2006, will maintain an envelope for technical assistance (TA) and training activities similar in size to what has already been proposed.  In other words, an amount of CHF 5,346,300.
In that case, the estimated cost of the TA activities contained in the Plan, and requiring financing from the DDAGTF would amount to CHF 24 million.
I will now try to give you a better understanding of how the Secretariat anticipates spending the money.
CHAPTERS A & B
General WTO-Related Training and Technical Assistance in Chapter A, and Specialised and Advanced Training and Technical Assistance in Chapter B combine Geneva-based activities traditionally financed out of the WTO regular budget, and activities in the field financed by the Global Trust Fund.
Members accept that the Geneva-based activities, like the four three-month trade policy courses, constitute the core of the training provided by the WTO to developing country officials.  Therefore, they are incorporated in the regular budget of the Organization.  The budget for this line has been reduced by 1.2 per cent.
For the activities included in chapters A and B, globally we have anticipated a budget increase of  4 per cent. 
As indicated earlier by the ITTC Director, activities in the field financed through the DDAGTF have been reconsidered in the light of the most recent developments. Examples of the cost evolution are as follows, compared to the Plan for 2005:
The cost of the regional three-month trade policy courses would decrease by 11 per cent.  This is mainly due to the lower standard cost and revised discount rate for non-participation.  Regional Trade Policy Courses – both the three-month and the short courses – represent some 42 per cent of the total expenses financed through the GTF.  This is the clearest indication of the efforts made by the Secretariat to reinforce the activities that have the most impact for beneficiaries.  
The cost of shorter national activities of a week or less, decrease by 7.5 per cent in 2006.
The estimated cost of the regional seminars and Trade Negotiations Skills Course are in line with that of last year.
The cost of outreach activities has been reduced significantly.
The budget for Geneva-based topic-specific symposia has been reduced by 40 per cent compared to 2005. 
For costing purposes, we have grouped the cost of L posts and other short-term contracts, WTO contribution to the STDF (Standards & Trade Development Facility), UNIDO, the Joint WTO/OECD, Integrated Database Projects, and WTO documentation under Chapter E.
In 2006 it is proposed to finance 12 to 14 L posts  which are directly associated with the delivery of TA or training to beneficiary countries.  You may recall that 19 L posts were created in 2002 in order to give the Secretariat the additional human resources needed to implement the DDA.  The remaining L posts consist of internal support positions in the implementation of the Plan and will be financed out of the Programme Support Fund.  This is a continuation of the current practice.
Chapters F and G deal with the overheads of 13 per cent charged on all direct costs financed by extra-budgetary resources and with the sharing of costs with certain of our partners.  The cost sharing hypothesis on which our estimates are based is ambitious:  CHF 7,113,762.  This reflects the fact that the WTO is further increasing and exploiting it's partnership arrangements.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that the Secretariat has been very careful to make sure that the continuous re-engineering of the TA and Training Plan presented to you today is designed to enhance the Plan's effectiveness and efficiency in 2006, while maintaining costs at the same level as for the last two years.
I hope this information is useful to you.
Thank you."
&& The Chairman thanked the Secretariat for the presentations and opened the floor for questions and comments. 
&& The representative of Barbados said her delegation welcomed the fact that the 2006 Plan was built largely on the success of previous Plans.  She emphasized that the Plan should be development‑oriented, results-oriented and flexible, and that it should respect the priorities that were laid out in paragraph 38 of the Doha Declaration.  Of particular importance to her delegation were the trade policy courses – and in particular the Regional Trade Policy Courses (RTPCs) – and her delegation was pleased to note that an RTPC was scheduled to be held in 2006 for Caribbean countries.  In terms of national activities, her delegation was satisfied that the same number would be delivered as in the previous year.  Other products to which her delegation attached great importance were academic support for training and capacity-building and Geneva Week for non-residents.  With regard to the internship programmes, she was pleased to note that the regional coordinator internship programme had been maintained.  She also urged that the WTO Mission internship programme be continued, and that donors come forward to replenish the funds without excluding participants from any particular country from being able to benefit from the programme.  She said that the increase in synergies between the delivery of TA and the conduct of trade policy reviews was a positive development.  She commended the innovative products that were being continuously elaborated through the use of information technology.  She also highly commended the work of the Development Division and the ITTC, and the excellent contributions of Secretariat officials who were travelling to capitals to deliver national and regional TA activities.  
&& The representative of the European Communities said his delegation welcomed the 2006 Plan and acknowledged the progress made by the Secretariat in programming and implementation.  He said he had two specific queries.  First, the Plan indicated that national activities would be based on needs assessments where possible.  He inquired how the Secretariat intended to encourage beneficiaries to actually use such material when submitting requests.  Second, the Secretariat had announced that it would allocate CHF 225,000 to pay for the operation of the Standards and Trade Development Facility (STDF).  He requested clarification on which budget this amount would come from.  In particular, he inquired whether it would come from the regular budget, the programme support cost of the STDF or from another budget.
&& The representative of the China said the ITTC had done some very good work, and that China had benefited from technical cooperation activities.  He expressed the thanks of his delegation to the donor Members, without whom it would have not been possible for technical cooperation activities to be carried out.  He pointed to some potential errors in the two Secretariat documents, and requested clarification from the Secretariat.  First, in paragraph 6 of document WT/COMTD/W/141, his delegation believed that reference to research on Textiles and Clothing and related Import Competition should be deleted, as this activity did not take place.  Second, in paragraph 93 of document WT/COMTD/W/142 it was stated that the cost of planned joint research programmes in 2006 would be met from the regular budget.  His delegation believed that the cost of planned joint research programmes were, in fact, to be met from the GTF.
&& The representative of Ecuador said her delegation was very interested in the RTPCs, and hoped that an RTPC would take place in Ecuador.  Her delegation was interested in hearing about the results of the Internet-based training courses.  During the year, Ecuador had received assistance in vital sectors.  Thanks to TA provided by the Secretariat, Ecuadorean officials were beginning to get a feel for the notification process relating to Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS).  The Permanent Mission had requested and received information on which Ecuadorean officials had participated in which TA activities, including those organized with other institutions.  This was important information, as it allowed an assessment of the value of TA to the country.  Her delegation expressed its gratitude to the donors.     
&& The representative of Canada said he saw a marked improvement in the TA Plan relative to a few years ago.  The Plan seemed to be taking a more strategic and proactive approach.  He had noticed that there was an increasing utilization of development partners in the implementation of activities, which he felt was the correct way to move forward.  He had also noticed the link to identification of needs coming from the countries themselves and from the Integrated Framework.  He saw considerable progress in performance reporting, but believed some improvements could still be made.  In particular, he was of the view that a move away from the quantitative approach and towards a qualitative approach would be useful.  The Plan seemed a little sparse on the subject of Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), and the Secretariat could consider doing more in this area.  In relation to distance learning, he noted that in the previous year UNCTAD had launched its Virtual Institute.  He wondered whether the Secretariat had any involvement in that.  He also inquired on the reasons for the underutilization of the available training. 
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation was pleased with the manner in which the TA Plan had evolved.  There was certainly more work to be done in terms of needs assessment, partnerships and performance indicators, and her delegation was willing to participate in continuing to improve the TA Plan.  More simulation activities were especially welcome and useful. The Netherlands traineeship programme offered an interesting demonstration of how, in addition to the general work that all donors were undertaking, the strengths of individual donors could be used to help in specific ways.  She wondered how the qualitative benefits of TA could be better captured.  She asked if the Secretariat could comment on the extent of the usefulness of partnerships with other institutions.  She inquired whether there was yet an example of a programme in which an evaluation component had already been built in, and what the results had been.
&& The representative of Kenya said that TA and capacity-building had been very useful for African countries, and had allowed their representatives to participate in the work of the WTO in a meaningful way.  On the issue of regional partnerships, the University of Nairobi had been host to a regional course for the past three years.  He hoped the ITTC would continue to work with the University of Nairobi in the future.  He thanked the donor countries, and said that without their support several developing countries would not have been able to participate so effectively in the WTO.  He requested the donors to continue their support, as the funds they were providing were being put to very good use.
&& The representative of Rwanda said his delegation was satisfied with the quality of the TA activities.  The simulation exercises had been particularly useful.  His delegation appreciated paragraph 138 of the 2006 Plan concerning the STDF, and supported the STDF initiative.  He said that the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the East African Community (EAC) were recently established regional arrangements that would benefit from a seminar to better understand and appreciate WTO issues.   
&& The representative of Japan said her delegation saw some improvements in the TA Plan on issues relating to needs assessment.  Her delegation commended the partnerships between the WTO and other international organizations.  She asked the Secretariat to comment in particular on its partnership with UNCTAD with regard to the Virtual Institute.  She inquired whether any specific work had been undertaken in securing participation in TA activities.    
&& The representative of Ethiopia said the work undertaken by the ITTC was well recognized by his delegation.  He inquired whether it would be possible for the WTO to provide a dedicated training programme at headquarters for acceding countries.  This would allow representatives of these countries to benefit from the wealth of expertise available in the house.
&& The Director of the ITTC thanked delegations for the support they had shown for the 2006 TA Plan.  On the issue of how to encourage countries to use the needs assessments when making their requests, he said that when the Secretariat wrote to Members with regard to national activities it was made clear that requests submitted should be based on the needs assessments.  While this was not yet happening in all cases, requests were increasingly being submitted in this way.  As far as regionally based activities were concerned, the ITTC was organized in terms of country desks.  The heads of the country desks had very close contact with their counterparts in the regions.  Communication therefore took place on what would constitute a request from a country that corresponded to an identified need.  Incrementally, therefore, countries were being encouraged to make their requests based on identified needs.  However, because the WTO was a Member-driven organization, there was a limit to how far the Secretariat could push Members to follow a specified format.
&& The ITTC Director said the contribution to the SDTF would be made as required.  The reason for this wording was that the programme support funds from which such resources normally came would only become available when the programme started disbursing grants for activities, which was not the case at the moment.  A bridging arrangement of sorts was therefore probably called for until the programme support funds became available.
&& The ITTC Director confirmed the points raised by the representative of China. Reference to research papers in the first bullet point of paragraph 6 of document WT/COMTD/W/141 should not include mention of research on Textiles and Clothing and related Import Competition.  In addition, there was a mistake in paragraph 93 of document WT/COMTD/W/142.  The activities referred to in that paragraph were financed from the GTF, and not from the regular budget.  Appropriate changes would be made to the documents.
On the issue of the Regional Trade Policy Course (RTPC) for Latin America, the ITTC Director said that one such course was taking place at the present time in Santiago.  Ecuador had been a candidate to host that course.  The decision to hold the course in Santiago had been based on very fine considerations.  When the hosting of the RTPC for Latin America was once again open for application, however, Ecuador was welcome to apply.
&& The ITTC Director said the evaluation side of the TA activities was the responsibility of the TA Audit Unit.  In general, an effort was being made to capture the qualitative aspects of evaluation.  There were two major programmes in which particular attention was being paid to the qualitative aspects.  These were the Geneva trade policy courses and the RTPCs.  Some of the shorter courses in Geneva also had built-in evaluation processes.  Work was additionally being undertaken to build performance indicators into the various activities.
&& The ITTC Director said that a number of activities were now being offered on a bi-annual basis.  The decision to do so had been taken in consultation with the relevant Divisions.  The TBT activity was one of those that was now being offered bi-annually.
On the issue of e-training, the ITTC Director said that training was being offered at a basic level and at an advanced, specialized level.  The objectives of the basic-level courses were firstly to provide training at an even more basic level and at a lower cost than what could be offered in face‑to‑face courses, and secondly to serve as a building block to more advanced training.  In the context of specialized training, a course had already been offered in the Rules area.  It was planned to prepare specialized courses in other areas.  The ITTC was also working with UNCTAD on the latter's Virtual Institute.
On the question of why some Members were not fully using their entitlement for national activities, the ITTC Director said that significant efforts had already been made to bring the issue to the attention of the authorities.  Efforts would, however, be intensified.
With regard to partnerships, the ITTC Director said it was desirable for these to be more than just co-hosting arrangements.  In fact, cost-sharing was becoming more prevalent.  Other institutions were increasingly providing training on WTO issues, and the Secretariat was assisting in various ways, for example by providing speakers and documentation or by helping in drafting the programme for a course.
&& The ITTC Director said the Secretariat would look into the possibility of undertaking an activity in the COMESA or EAC regions.
With regard to the request for a dedicated training session for acceding countries, the ITTC Director drew the attention of the Committee to the table annexed to document WT/COMTD/W/142, in which it was mentioned that one of the topic-specific Geneva Symposiums planned for 2006 was for the benefit of acceding countries.
&& The Committee took note of the Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities and adopted the Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2006, with the changes noted during the meeting.
ANNUAL REPORT 
&& The Chairman said that the annual report of the CTD contained the reports of the CTD in Regular Session, the CTD in Dedicated Session and the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  The draft annual report would be completed shortly by the Secretariat, and would be issued for circulation.  The annual report would be adopted at the last meeting of the year, which was scheduled for 29 November.
It was so agreed.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The representative of Thailand said he wished to provide responses to requests for further information by Members on the notification under the Enabling Clause concerning the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China.  He said the first request was for elaboration on the relationship between the Framework Agreement, the Free Trade Agreement and the Early Harvest Programme.  The Framework Agreement, signed on 4 November 2002, was an umbrella agreement for the establishment of the ASEAN-China Free Trade Area (ACFTA).  It contained general provisions for the establishment of ACFTA within ten years, covering the progressive elimination of tariffs and NTBs in goods and the progressive elimination of trade in services and investment.  The Framework Agreement also incorporated the implementation of the Early Harvest Programme (EHP) as an integral part of ACFTA.  The EHP provided for earlier tariff elimination on products in Chapters 1-8 of the Customs Harmonized System and a limited number of products outside these Chapters prior to the actual implementation of ACFTA.  The Framework Agreement additionally outlined other areas of economic cooperation including agriculture, information and telecommunication technology, human resource development, capacity‑building and Mekong River Basin Development.
&& The representative of Thailand said that separate agreements for trade in goods, services and investment were to be signed between ASEAN and China to provide specific and comprehensive provisions for the respective areas.  The Agreement on Trade in Goods, for which a separate notification had been submitted to the CTD, was signed on 29 November 2004.  It was expected that the Agreement on Trade in Services would be signed during the ASEAN-China Summit in December 2005.  Negotiations were ongoing with regard to the Agreement on Investment.
&& The representative of Thailand said a second request was for elaboration on the implementation timetable for tariff reductions on trade in goods under the EHP and the Framework Agreement.  He said the tariff elimination timetable for products in the EHP commenced on 1 January 2004 and would be completed by 2006 for the six original members of ASEAN (ASEAN-6:  Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand) and 2010 for the new members (Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar and Vietnam, or CLMV). The implementation timetable for tariff reduction or elimination for products outside the EHP was as follows, with details to be found in the Agreement on Trade in Goods:
For products placed in the normal track, ASEAN-6 and China would reduce import duties to 0-5 per cent on at least 40 per cent of the products beginning 1 July 2006, on 60 per cent of the products by 2007 and elimination of duties on the remaining products in 2010.  Flexibility up to 2012 was allowed for a limited number of products not exceeding 150 tariff lines.
CLMV countries would eliminate their tariffs by 2015 with flexibility up to 2018 for a limited number of products not exceeding 250 tariff lines.
For products placed in the Sensitive List, duties would be reduced to 20 per cent by 2012 and to 0-5 per cent by 2018 for ASEAN-6 and China.  For CLMV countries, products in the Sensitive List would be reduced by 20 per cent by 2015 and to between 0 and 5 per cent by 2020.
For products in the Highly Sensitive List, tariffs would be reduced to 50 per cent by 2015 for ASEAN-6 and China and 2018 for CLMV countries.
&& The representative of Thailand said a third request was to clarify how tariff reductions would be phased in the EHP and the Framework Agreement.  He said the tariff reduction or elimination for products under the EHP was contained in the Framework Agreement.  Details of tariff reduction or elimination on products other than the EHP were contained in Annexes 1 and 2 of the Agreement on Trade in Goods.
&& The representative of Thailand said a final request was to provide information on the coverage of tariff reductions under the two paths in terms of both trade volume (percentage of current trade between the parties) and tariff lines (percentage of tariff lines in respective tariff schedules) for each party to the Agreement.  He said trade in almost all products would be covered.  Except for a limited number of tariff lines excluded under the general exceptions clause, duties on all products would be subject to either reduction or elimination.  Details could be found in the Agreement on Trade in Goods.  He said that ASEAN and China stood ready to respond to any further queries that Members might have.
&& The representative of the United States thanked ASEAN and China for the clarifications provided and for the transparency shown.
&& The representative of Rwanda said he wished to make an intervention relating to the agenda item concerning paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration.  He said that commodities were an important source of livelihood for many in developing countries.  His delegation requested that the revised paper that the Secretariat was to prepare for the next session of the Committee include a discussion of commodities.
&& The representative of the United States said that in follow-up to the discussion the Committee had had on the developmental aspects of the negotiations at the present meeting, she wished to confirm that her delegation did not support the inclusion of non-negotiating items in the revised paper that the Secretariat would prepare.  Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration mandated the CTD to limit its discussion to the areas under negotiation.  She said that Rwanda’s request could be treated in the revised paper in the context of the Agriculture and NAMA negotiations, but a separate section on commodities was not appropriate.  On the proposed changes to the language relating to cotton, she said her delegation welcomed any additional factual points that the proponents may wish to make.  However, her delegation did not want to see the deletion of factual points, which seemed to be the case with the language proposed. 
&& The representative of Barbados said she took the point of not expanding mandates in the absence of a Ministerial Conference or General Council decision.  She remarked, however, that what had been observed since Doha was that some issues which were subject to a non-negotiating mandate had acquired a negotiating touch.  With the evolution since Doha, and in particular the 1 August 2004 Decision of the General Council, it was necessary to look at the revision of document WT/COMTD/W/143 in light of what had transpired. She, therefore, urged the Chairman to undertake consultations on this issue. 
&& The Chairman said his aim was to hold limited consultations on certain issues including the one referred to by the representative of Barbados.
&& The representative of Rwanda said he agreed that the Chairman should hold consultations on the issue raised by the representative of Barbados.  He said the mandate for negotiations on commodities was to be found in the 1 August 2004 Decision of the General Council under "Other Development Issues".
&& The representative of the United States said she agreed that commodities could be dealt with in the sections of the Secretariat paper dealing with the Agriculture or NAMA negotiations.  However, the work on commodities that had been undertaken in the CTD should not be reflected in the paper, as the CTD was not a negotiating body.
&& The representative of the European Communities thanked ASEAN and China for the information that had been provided on the Framework Agreement.  His delegation was amongst those that had raised questions on it. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said he wished to bring the attention of the Committee to a recent piece of legislation in the European Communities (EC). Council Regulation 980 of 2005, concerning arrangements for applying a GSP scheme in the EC, was passed on 27 June 2005.  The legislation allowed for the replacement of the current EC GSP scheme.  It would enter into force on 1 January 2006, although certain elements of the regulation had already entered into force in July 2005.  The formal notification would be made in the future under the relevant provisions of the Enabling Clause.  Copies of the regulation could be obtained from the EC delegation in Geneva or on the Internet.
&& The Chairman reminded Members that the next meeting of the CTD was scheduled for 29 November 2005.
The meeting was adjourned.
ANNEX
WTO Technical Assistance and Training Plan for 2006
WT/COMTD/W/142
Swiss francs

ChapterRegular Budget DDAGTF  Other Trust Funds Total 







A

General WTO-Related Training & Technical Assistance



(a)
Trade Policy Courses
2,206,800 
5,487,000 
- 
7,693,800 

(b)
Introduction Courses
481,400 
 
 
481,400 

(c)
Regional Short Trade Policy Courses
 
4,677,338 
 
4,677,338 



Total
2,688,200 
10,164,338 
- 
12,852,538 








B

Specialised & Advanced Training & Technical Cooperation



(a)
Geneva-based Specialised Courses
540,000 
 
 
540,000 

(b)
National Activities
1,258,000 
1,250,300 
 
2,508,300 

(c)
Regional Seminars
- 
8,072,450 
- 
8,072,450 

(d)
Trade Negotiations Techniques
 
962,838 
 
962,838 

(e)
Outreach Activities
 
306,935 
 
306,935 



Total
1,798,000 
10,592,523 
- 
12,390,523 








C

Academic Support for Training and Capacity-building:  An Integrated Approach


(i)
Regional Trade Policy Courses
 
 See A.a.ii 
 
- 


(ii)
Workshops for University Professors
 
887,570 
 
887,570 


(iii)
Doctoral Studies
 
129,600 
 
129,600 


(iv)
Visiting Academics
 
- 
 
- 


(v)
Research Collaboration
213,000 
 
 
213,000 


(vi)
Document Dissemination
37,000 
 
 
37,000 



Total
250,000 
1,017,170 
- 
1,267,170 








D

Support Training & Technical Assistance Facilities




(a)
Geneva-based
536,600 
2,028,773 
1,400,000 
3,965,373 

(b)
In the Field
- 
440,000 
- 
440,000 

(c)
Others
73,500 
166,500 
- 
240,000 



Total
610,100 
2,635,273 
1,400,000 
4,645,373 








E

Other Programmes and Support Activities with Funding Requirements

(a)
Staffing: L-Posts and other Short-Term Contracts
2,480,000 
- 
2,480,000 

(b) 
Programme activities

645,000 
50,000 
695,000 



Total

3,125,000 
50,000 
3,175,000 








F

Overheads

3,579,459 
188,500 
3,767,959 








G

Cost Sharing

(7,113,762)

 (7,113,762)








Grand Total5,346,300 24,000,000 1,638,50030,984,800









__________


 The table circulated during the meeting is reproduced in the Annex to this Note.

WT/COMTD/M/54 Page  PAGE 30



	WT/COMTD/M/54 	Page  PAGE 31



 



