WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/56
21 April 2006


(06-1864)


Committee on Trade and Development
Fifty-Sixth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 3 MARCH 2006

Chairmen:  H.E. Mr. Gomi Tharaka Senadhira (Sri Lanka) for items A – I
and Mr. Faizel Ismail (South Africa) for item J


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315433" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC133315433 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315434" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC133315434 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc133315435" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc133315435 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc133315436" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc133315436 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315437" C.	Notifications Under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC133315437 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315438" -	Communication from the European Communities on the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC133315438 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315439" -	Communication from the United States on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, the Protocol to Amend the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC133315439 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315440" D.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC133315440 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315441" E.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in Order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC133315441 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315442" -	Statement by the Chairman	 PAGEREF _TOC133315442 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315443" F.	Draft Work Programme for 2006 (WT/COMTD/W/147)	 PAGEREF _TOC133315443 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315444" G.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC133315444 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315445" -	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/146)	 PAGEREF _TOC133315445 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315446" H.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC133315446 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315447" I.	Election of the Chairperson of the CTD	 PAGEREF _TOC133315447 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC133315448" J.	Election of the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC133315448 \H 17



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in airgram WTO/AIR/2578 circulated on 7 February 2006  and a revision issued on 24 February.  He recalled that it was mentioned at the last meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) that a representative of the European Communities (EC) would attend the 56th Session to make a presentation on the EC Export Helpdesk for Developing Countries.  The representative was, however, unable to attend the present meeting and it was for this reason that the item was not included on the agenda.  He hoped the EC representative would be able to make the presentation at the next meeting of the CTD.
&& The representative of India said his delegation wished to raise under "Other Business" the issue of negotiations in WTO bodies which could have an impact on the functioning of the CTD.
&& The representative of the European Communities said he wished to make a brief intervention under "Other Business" relating to the notification of the EC's revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme.
&& The Chairman said he also wished to make an intervention under "Other Business" concerning the Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance.  He proposed that the agenda item relating to "Other Business" be considered before the agenda items relating to the election of the Chairpersons of the CTD and the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries (LDCs).  
&& The Committee adopted the agenda as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that as was the case at previous meetings, the Committee had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He inquired whether there was any change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants.
&& The respresentative of Egypt, on behalf of the Arab Group, said the positions of Members were well known.  He said he wished to put on record that the Group's position remained the same with regard to any new requests, whether they be for regular observer status or ad hoc observer status. 
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee revert to the requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	&& COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES ON THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.2)
-	&& COMMUNICATION FROM THE UNITED STATES ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, THE PROTOCOL TO AMEND THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.3)
&& The Chairman recalled that the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China was notified to the CTD at the 52nd Session in February 2005.  In addition, the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China was notified to the CTD at the 54th Session in October 2005.  The notifications were discussed in the Committee over the course of 2005. 
He said that written questions on the notifications had recently been received from the European Communities and the United States (US).  The questions had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/51/Add.2 and document WT/COMTD/51/Add.3 respectively.  He proposed that the Members that submitted the questions first introduce them and that representatives of the ASEAN member countries and China would then respond. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said the communication from the EC was largely self-explanatory.  He said that in previous CTD meetings his delegation had indicated that it was still examining the notification on the Agreement on Trade in Goods between ASEAN and China and reserved the right to raise questions on the notification.  Document WT/COMTD/51/Add.2 was the outcome of his delegation's examination of the notification.  It contained twelve questions falling under five broad categories.  In his delegation's view the level of ambition and scope of the Agreement was such that it was appropriate for it to be notified under the provisions of GATT Article XXIV.  His delegation encouraged ASEAN and China to take the necessary steps in that regard.  He looked forward to the responses from ASEAN and China and hoped they could be provided at the present meeting.
&& The representative of the United States said his delegation appreciated the opportunity to explore the notifications between ASEAN and China in greater depth.  With trade among the parties reaching well over US$100 billion in 2004, and with a population numbering a quarter of the world's population, his delegation believed all WTO Members had an interest in having a full understanding of the notifications and their operation.  He said that following the tariff reductions on about 7,000 tariff lines under the terms of the Agreement, trade among the parties increased by 23 per cent last year to surpass US$130 billion.  His delegation welcomed the opportunity for Members to consult with the parties as provided for by the Enabling Clause.  However, the breadth and scope of the Framework Agreement and the Agreement on Trade in Goods went far beyond tariff reduction and elimination and brought into play an array of provisions under both GATT Article XXIV and GATS Article V.  Moreover, the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) had expertise that could add greatly to the clarity and depth of Members' understanding of the provisions of the Agreements, and also provided an efficient process for consultations and exchange regarding the Agreements.  The notifications were of undeniable significance for the multilateral trading system.  There was little doubt that greater regional integration could contribute to economic growth and development.  His delegation saw an opportunity for promoting greater understanding among all Members of the specific contributions of such extensive and complex agreements for the further integration and economic development of the parties.  His delegation also extended its appreciation to the EC for the questions it submitted and looked forward to receiving responses to both sets of questions.    
&& The representative of Malaysia, on behalf of the ASEAN member countries and China, informed the CTD that the questions from the EC and the US had been received and had been sent to the capitals.  It was her understanding that a coordinating committee would meet at the end of the present month to prepare a coordinated response, and the CTD would be informed accordingly.
&& The representative of Japan said her delegation shared interest in most of the questions posed by the EC and the US.  She looked forward to receiving the responses from ASEAN and China.  Her delegation also had some additional questions for ASEAN and China.  As the questions were rather detailed, she inquired whether they could be submitted in written form.
&& The Chairman said that if the questions were comprehensive it would be better if they were submitted in written form and circulated among Members.  He urged the delegation of Japan to submit the questions as soon as possible, since the respresentatives of ASEAN and China could then prepare responses to these questions as well as those of the EC and the US. 
&& The Chairman said the Committee was looking forward to receiving responses from ASEAN and China to all the questions raised. He proposed that this item be on the agenda for the next meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.  
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said he had proposed to the Committee at its 54th Session in October 2005 to postpone a detailed discussion on commodities until the present meeting.  He mentioned that Kenya had intended to make a presentation at the present meeting on its experiences with commodities but that the representative from Kenya who was to make the presentation was unable to attend.  He said the Committee hoped to hear a presentation from Kenya at a future meeting of the CTD. 
&& The Chairman asked Members where they wished to go with the present agenda item relating to commodities.  He said that at the 53rd Session of the CTD in May 2005, the Committee had agreed to hear presentations from a Member experiencing difficulties in managing its commodities trade, a private institution or an international organization.  He proposed that the Committee continue along the lines of what had been agreed at the 53rd Session, namely to continue listening to presentations from Members and relevant institutions.  He particularly encouraged Members to present to the Committee their experiences with commodities.  Otherwise, there were several interesting presentations that could be heard from organizations working in the area of commodities.  He said he had taken note of a number of suggestions that had been made by Members in that regard, including for invitations to be extended to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), the World Bank, the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) and the International Coffee Organization (ICO).  He inquired whether Members wished to invite any particular organization.
&& The representative of Kenya confirmed that due to unforeseen circumstances it would not be possible for Kenya to make a presentation at the present meeting.  Her delegation would be informing Members as to when the presentation could be made.  Her delegation planned to circulate a synopsis in advance of the presentation in order to allow a fruitful discussion in the CTD. 
She said she wished to recall the mandate on commodity issues in the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.  Ministers had clearly recognized the problems that developing and least-developed countries were facing with their dependence on the export of commodities.  They had instructed the CTD to intensify its work in cooperation with other relevant international organizations and to report regularly to the General Council with possible recommendations.  She said the CTD should pay special attention to the fulfilment of this mandate.
She said her delegation was of the view that the CTD should continue to function as a think-tank on commodity issues, and should also monitor progress in the negotiating bodies.  There should, therefore, be two aspects to the work of the CTD on commodity issues.  With regard to presentations in the CTD, her delegation wished to hear from producer organizations and associations, particularly those from Africa.  Her delegation stood ready to share the names of particular associations with the CTD.
&& The Chairman inquired whether Kenya had any suggestions at this time for producer associations that could be invited to make a presentation to the CTD.
&& The representative of Kenya said she did not have any specific names to provide at this time but asked the Committee to take note of her delegation's interest in hearing a presentation from such an association.  
&& The representative of the United States said he regretted that Kenya would not be able to make a presentation at the present meeting.  He welcomed Kenya's idea of having a synopsis circulated in advance of the date of the presentation and noted Kenya's interest in a presentation in the CTD from a producer association.  His delegation proposed hearing presentations with a focus on specific commodities.  This could help Members compare and contrast experiences, as well as identify appropriate roles for international organizations.  Such presentations would be consistent with earlier presentations in the CTD by UNCTAD and the Common Fund for Commodities.  They could also focus attention on the critical role of the private sector in both trade and development outcomes.  His delegation welcomed hearing presentations by the ICO and the ITTO. He said these presentations would provide the opportunity to examine different experiences and also draw on the perspectives of the private sector, which played an important role in both the ICO and the ITTO. 
&& The representative of Djibouti said his delegation believed that the main issue relating to commodities was not one of marketing, but one of life or death in several countries, particularly least‑developed countries (LDCs).  At Hong Kong, China, the CTD was instructed to intensify its work on commodity issues. He said the participation of other international organizations was vital in the work of the CTD, as this would enable the Committee to hear about the experiences these organizations had in specific areas.
&& The Chairman proposed that either the ICO or the ITTO be invited to make a presentation at the next meeting of the CTD.   
It was so agreed. 
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
-&& 	STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN
&& The Chairman said that at the last meeting of the CTD, the Committee had continued its review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations based on a revised background paper prepared by the Secretariat, circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.1.  He said the Committee had had a very interesting and constructive discussion and was to continue its review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations at the present meeting.  The Secretariat was to  revise its paper once again for this purpose.
He said he had reflected on how best the Committee could continue with its work on this agenda item and now believed that the CTD's next review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations, based on a revised version of the Secretariat document, would be of greater value if it were to take place after the April deadline for modalities.  This would provide an opportunity for Members to assess the developmental value of any agreed modalities.  He said he was encouraged to see several Ambassadors present at the last meeting of the CTD when this agenda item was discussed.  He encouraged representation at the Ambassadorial level when the Committee undertook its next review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.
He added that the Secretariat would need sufficient time to revise its document on the developmental aspects of the negotiations in order to take into account any possible modalities, and also to have the document translated in the three languages.  While there was a CTD meeting scheduled on 11 May 2006, he believed that would be too soon after the April deadline.  He, therefore, proposed that the Committee's next review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations, based on a revised Secretariat document, take place at the CTD's meeting of 6 July 2006.  
It was so agreed.
DRAFT WORK PROGRAMME FOR 2006 (WT/COMTD/W/147)
&& The Chairman said a draft 2006 work programme for the CTD had been issued as document WT/COMTD/W/147.  He invited the Committee to consider the draft work programme with a view to adopting it.
&& The representative of Zambia made the following statement on behalf of the LDC Group:
"Mr. Chairman,
The mandate of this Committee remains central to the full and effective integration of developing countries, and least-developed countries in particular, in the global trading system.  It is no doubt that the work undertaken thus far has been valuable and will continue to be so in enhancing the participation of our economies in the global trading system, with the ultimate objective of attaining sustained levels of economic development.
Our Ministers in Hong Kong, China adopted a Declaration that sets out important parameters for the continuation of work in several committees of the WTO, including this Committee.
The Ministers instructed this Committee to, among other issues, intensify its work on commodities, in cooperation with other relevant international organizations and to report regularly to the General Council with possible recommendations.
They also gave this Committee the task of receiving notifications and conducting the review of implementation of the schemes adopted under Decision 36 of Annex F on duty-free and quota-free market access granted in favour of least-developed countries.
In addition, the Ministers underscored the importance of designing technical assistance programmes in a manner that addresses the needs and priorities of the beneficiary countries.
Mr Chairman, I am confident that in the months ahead, we shall all work towards fulfilling the mandate given to us by our Ministers, not necessarily in the technical sense, but more in the spirit within which these were adopted.
It is, therefore, our view that the starting point is for us to structure our work in this Committee in a manner that would facilitate attainment of the objectives set before us by our Ministers.  We believe that an early start to this work is essential.  It is, therefore, important to have these issues as standing items on the agenda of this Committee, bearing in mind that the work to be undertaken has a close link to work being undertaken in other bodies.  In particular, the work relating to the implementation of market access schemes has a close link to negotiations under NAMA and agriculture.  We see work on this as a process that would require constant updates as negotiations unfold.  It is, therefore, critical to have this and other areas where Ministers have given instructions, as standing items on the agenda.  We, therefore, look forward to working with you to have these issues effectively addressed as early as possible.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to assure you of the continued cooperation of the LDC Group in your work and accomplishment of  the tasks under this Committee."
&& The representative of Egypt observed that according to the draft work programme, the report of the Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance was to be discussed at the 59th Session of the CTD in October 2006.  He said there had been an understanding at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference that negotiations were to be concluded by the end of 2006, which would presumably entail intense negotiations towards the end of the year.  The idea of the Review was to allow planning of the future direction of technical assistance (TA) provided by the WTO.  He expressed concern about whether discussion of the report at the October meeting of the CTD would allow delegations adequate time to express their views and explore how the results of the report could be integrated into future TA.  He inquired whether it might be possible to discuss the report at the 58th Session of the CTD in July instead.
&& The Chairman said that a mid-term review meeting between consultants and the Steering Committee of the Strategic Review was originally scheduled to take place in April 2006.  However, it was later agreed that April was not an appropriate time, as the Geneva-based members of the Steering Committee would be heavily involved in the negotiations during that month.  The meeting had, therefore, been postponed to May 2006.  This had also postponed the expected date for finalization of the report to the latter part of June 2006.  The July meeting of the CTD would, therefore, probably be too early to have a comprehensive discussion of the report.
&& The representative of Senegal said he supported the statement made by the representative of Zambia.  He agreed with the importance of having a standing item on the CTD agenda relating to the decision on duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs taken at Hong Kong, China.
&& The Chairman said that if Members so wished, the Committee could begin discussing the DFQF decision already at the next meeting of the CTD.   
&& The representative of Djibouti said he supported what had been said by Zambia and Senegal.  He said the work programme of the CTD should give importance to issues of interest to LDCs.  He also wished to thank the WTO for the TA that had been provided to LDCs.
&& The representative of Norway said his delegation supported the draft work programme.  He said the representative of Egypt had made a valid point with regard to the proposed timing of the discussion on the report of the Strategic Review.  He, however, also agreed that it would be difficult to have a comprehensive discussion on the report at the July meeting of the CTD.  He, therefore, proposed that informal consultations could be held to allow Members to comment on the report and make suggestions on items for inclusion in the 2007 TA Plan.
&& The Chairman said he would take steps to try and hold informal consultations to discuss the report of the Strategic Review.
&& The representative of China said he understood that LDCs may prefer having their concerns addressed in the CTD, but inquired whether their concerns would not be better addressed in the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.  He also fully supported Norway's proposal to have informal consultations relating to the report of the Strategic Review, in particular if it was not feasible to discuss the report at the July meeting of the CTD.  He wondered, therefore, whether it was necessary to hold the July meeting of the CTD, as the proposed items for that meeting could potentially be discussed at other meetings during the year.
&& The Chairman, in response to the query from China concerning the CTD's July meeting, said the Committee had agreed to undertake its next review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations at that meeting.  The discussion that would take place under the agenda item relating to paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration warranted a full meeting. 
&& The representative of Zambia said the decision taken in Hong Kong, China on DFQF market access for LDCs should be reflected as a standing item on the agenda of the CTD.  With regard to the query raised by the representative of China, he said that the mandate given by Ministers was for the CTD to deal with the matter.
&& The Chairman said that an item relating to the decision on DFQF market access for LDCs could be incorporated in the CTD's work programme for all meetings of the year.  With regard to TA for LDCs, he proposed that this issue be discussed in detail in the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  If necessary, the Chairman of the Sub-Committee could bring to the attention of the CTD Chairman any relevant TA issue discussed in the Sub-Committee.   
&& The representative of India said his delegation supported the concern expressed by Egypt.  The purpose of the Strategic Review was to provide input for the future TA Plan.  The timeframe provided in the draft work programme for discussion of the report of the Strategic Review would not permit this.  Norway's proposal was one possible way to address the concern.  Members should be allowed sufficient time to put in their views on how the results of the Strategic Review would feed in to the future TA Plan.
&& The Chairman said he would consult with the members of the Steering Committee and the consultants, as well as with the Secretariat, to find a way to move forward.  He believed informal consultations should be held before the finalization of the 2007 TA Plan.  He said all efforts would be made to take into account the concerns of Members.
He proposed that the Committee adopt the draft work programme with the change proposed by Zambia, namely to include an agenda item for all remaining meetings of the CTD in 2006 on the decision relating to DFQF market access for LDCs.
&& The Committee adopted its work programme for 2006.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	ANNUAL REPORT ON TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING, 1 JANUARY TO 31 DECEMBER 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/146)
&& The Chairman said he wished to invite the Secretariat to introduce the 2005 Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, which had been issued as document WT/COMTD/W/146.  The floor would then be opened for questions and comments.
&& The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) said the report contained in document WT/COMTD/W/146 followed the structure of the Technical Assistance (TA) Plan.  This permitted an easy cross-referencing with the TA Plan.  The report contained both qualitative and quantitative information, which was in line with Members' wishes.  In 2005, 462 activities were implemented, plus an additional 59 of a project nature, for a total of 521 activities.  The corresponding figure for 2004 was 501.  This seemed to confirm that a maximum had been reached with regard to what could be physically undertaken with the current resources.  To have a more meaningful way of counting and assessing the activities, the notion of "participant days" was used in the report.  For 2005, about 31,200 participant days had been foreseen.  The actual number of participant days for the year had, in fact, been approximately 28,000, which was a 90 per cent implementation rate. 
He said that four three-month trade policy courses had been held in Geneva, and five in the regions.  An attempt had been made to maintain a geographical balance in the activities, while also paying particular attention to LDCs, the African region and small and vulnerable economies.  Of the activities carried out, 38 per cent were for the African region, 23 per cent were for the Asia-Pacific region and the rest were spread among the other regions.  A total of 218 national activities had been held, which was a little less than the desired level.  This was due to a number of reasons including some difficulty experienced in getting Members to come forward with their requests for such activities.  A total of 169 regional activities had been held.  Of the activities, 40 per cent related to LDCs, either through national or regional activities.  The needs of LDCs were also being addressed in the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme (JITAP), the Integrated Framework, the Netherlands Trainee Programme and the introduction courses held in Geneva specifically for LDCs.
&& The ITTC Director said that Secretariat staff in the operational divisions had been asked for their inputs in describing the regional activities undertaken in their areas.  The relevant sections of the report gave an indication of how the various activities were carried out and what their objectives were.  He also drew the attention of Members to the description of distance learning in the report.  Distance learning came in the form of an e-learning platform or a CD-based platform.  ITTC was making substantial efforts to develop the distance learning product.  Significant progress had been made in 2005, in particular through the development of courses of apparent interest to Members.  The ITTC Director said that support of various kinds was continuing for regionally-based academic institutions that wanted to be involved in teaching or research relating to the multilateral trading system.  One example of this type of support was the seminars that were held for academics who wanted to be briefed on WTO matters.  Another example was the support that was provided to selected universities upon their request for the delivery of teaching on WTO-related matters. 
He continued by noting that two Geneva Weeks had been held in 2005.  He mentioned that in addition to the more traditional internship programmes in the WTO, the year 2005 also saw the inception of the Netherlands Trainee Programme (NTP).  He expressed his appreciation to the Government of the Netherlands for making the NTP possible.  The NTP had a heavy emphasis on needs assessment, as this was one of the areas that interns were asked to work on.  The ITTC Director said that the reference centre programme was also continuing.  The content of the programme was divided between the installation of new reference centres and the upgrading of older reference centres. Older reference centres were upgraded after three to five years.  The report also contained a relatively long description of partnerships and outsourcing.  There was an analysis by region and also an indication of what types of activities had been undertaken with the various partners and how complementarities were being sought. 
&& The ITTC Director said the final section of the report was devoted to the issue of funding.  In 2005, there was CHF 24 million in the Global Trust Fund (GTF).  An amount of CHF 21.5 million had been spent, representing approximately 90 per cent of the allocated funds.  Under the regular budget, CHF 4.6 million had been spent out of the CHF 5.3 million.  He said that taking into account the left over funds from 2005, as well as the pledges on record, an amount of CHF 15 million in fresh money was requested from Members.  Activities had gotten off to a good start in 2006 and money was being spent rapidly.  He, therefore, appealed to Members to provide the requested funds.  He said donors would be receiving a letter on this subject, which would serve as a follow-up to a first letter sent in November 2005.
&& The representative of the European Communities said the 2005 report provided a comprehensive overview of the trade-related technical assistance (TRTA) activities undertaken.  His delegation welcomed the high implementation rate across the board and the generally positive feedback.  He said that more emphasis could be given to a systematic approach to reflect the lessons learned and the areas where the WTO was trying to improve quality.  Examples included the issue of needs assessment and the selection of participants for activities organized by the Secretariat.  His delegation was pleased that the Secretariat had reported progress with needs assessment, but regretted that no mention was made on any progress made in selecting the right candidates for participation in TRTA activities.  He said his delegation found it surprising that Members did not seem to be making full use of the opportunity to request national activities.  He inquired whether there was a specific group of countries that did not request activities, and what could be done to encourage Members to become more active in this regard.
He said he wished to make some specific comments on various paragraphs in the report.  In paragraph 40, with regard to Geneva-based specialized courses, his delegation was interested in the methodology adopted.  He believed it was a useful approach to ensure follow-up on the SPS course through the establishment of an electronic platform and a stock-taking meeting.  He inquired whether the Secretariat could provide more detailed results of the methodology.  He also asked whether the Secretariat thought the methodology could be used in other activities.  With regard to paragraphs 124 to 127, he asked to what extent the academic support activities contributed to sustainable capacity.  He wondered whether the Secretariat could give a more detailed analysis of this point and in particular on concrete progress which could be made in building sustainable institutional capacities at national levels on WTO-related matters.  On paragraph 129, and in particular the sub-section on CBT modules, he inquired how many people used distance training modules.  His delegation also wished to know when the financial report and the technical cooperation audit report would be released.
&& The representative of Zambia said that many developing countries, and in particular LDCs, had benefited greatly from the WTO TA activities.  On behalf of the LDC Group, he thanked the Secretariat for the TA activities and the Government of the Netherlands for the NTP.  He hoped other Members would follow the example set by the Netherlands. With regard to the question on the lack of requests from Members for TA activities, he said that several requests from LDCs would be forthcoming.  This was due mainly to a recent meeting with the ITTC Director where it had been explained how to formulate appropriate requests.
&& The representative of Benin said the African Group greatly appreciated the WTO TA activities.  He said the report showed that there had been a range of activities in different areas.  There had also been useful cooperation with national and regional institutions.  His delegation recommended that this type of cooperation be stepped up.  With regard to national activities, he said some developing countries faced a number of constraints.  There were logistical and financial problems because such activities were meant to be organized and paid for by the countries.  He said it would be useful to think about how the Secretariat could help with the logistics and financial implications of national activities.  Another issue was that in practice it was difficult to harmonize dates and confirm the timetables for events.  Many activities therefore tended to be postponed.  This situation would improve as capitals became more flexible and benefited from the experience of ITTC.  He thanked the Secretariat for the quality of the TA activities and also thanked the Government of the Netherlands for the NTP.  His delegation urged other Members to follow the example of the Netherlands in this regard.
&& The representative of Japan said the report was very comprehensive in terms of the breakdown of activities by division.  In the area of needs assessment, he said the Secretariat had made a substantial effort, and improvements had been achieved.  He believed it might be useful for the WTO and bilateral donors to coordinate their efforts in the context of needs assessment.  His delegation shared the concern of others that some Members were not requesting national activities.  If there was some sort of systemic difficulty in requesting national activities, one idea could be to have an informal meeting to try to resolve the difficulties.  With regard to e-training and e-courses, he noted that this was mentioned in paragraphs 83 to 87 in the context of the Rules Division's activities, but was otherwise not included in a comprehensive manner in the report.  His delegation wished to know the extent to which e-training and e-courses were being used.  He inquired whether it would be possible in next year's report to have an independent section on this, as it would help to evaluate how to better utilize such training.
&& The representative of Djibouti said his delegation welcomed the methodology followed in the provision of WTO TA.  Djibouti had been benefiting from WTO TA at the national and the regional level since the establishment of the WTO.  He said that TA was one of the main reasons why developing countries were Members of the WTO.  TA was essential in allowing developing country Members to meet their WTO obligations, as well as to participate effectively in the negotiations and benefit from them.  However, TA seminars of two or three days were not long enough for officials from some developing countries to gain any concrete knowledge or benefit.  Seminars lasting a week or ten days would be more beneficial.  He said it was important to emphasize the important contribution of the Government of the Netherlands.  He believed this was the first time such an initiative had been taken in the WTO by an individual country.  It was vital that other donor countries follow the example of the Netherlands.  
&& The representative of Norway made the following statement:
"Norway is a firm supporter of the technical assistance and training programme through our annual contribution to the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund.  In our view, the annual report shows that the WTO and its Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation contributes substantially to the efforts being made in order to help integrating the developing countries into the multilateral trading system.  The principles and priorities fundamental to the technical assistance and training plan have been discussed extensively in this Committee on earlier occasions.  Hence, we will only give some few remarks.
The use of "needs assessments" could be broadened.  Such assessments could be used more frequently to ensure that the activities are designed according to beneficiary countries' needs and priorities.  National ownership should be an important element in the assistance activities. 
Partnerships with relevant institutions, organizations and academia will give synergies and added value.  It should be kept in mind, however, that such partnerships are coordinated and integrated with other relevant initiatives at the country level.
The Integrated Framework is a key instrument in assisting the LDCs.  We appreciate the participation of the WTO in the IF, as reflected in the annual report.  Our intention is to contribute substantially to an enhanced IF based on the work of the task force.
According to the annual report, LDCs have been associated with approximately 40 per cent of the assistance activities. From the Norwegian side, we are in favour of giving continued strong emphasis and priority to the LDCs in the technical assistance and training activities.
Reviews and evaluations are of great importance in order to make the assistance activities as efficient and useful as possible.  We look forward to the report and findings from the team from the Consumer Unity & Trust Society that will review the TRTA activities of WTO."
&& The representative of Egypt said that in comparing the present report to past reports, his delegation had observed that there had been an improvement and a positive evolution of concepts in the provision of TA.  There also seemed to be improvements in implementation efficiency.  The concept of participant days was welcomed.  His delegation noted with appreciation the internship programmes.  It was regretful, however, that not all interns could be accommodated in the WTO premises.  He said there was a need to improve the quality of the TA activities, in particular by including more advanced material.  He proposed that the ITTC should come up with a mid-term or long-term strategy when designing the TA Plan, so that allocations could be made for activities to be held a few years in the future.  With regard to partnerships and outsourcing, his delegation observed that useful foundations had been laid down.  However, there was still much to be done in this regard. He suggested that a forum for further discussion on partnerships could be held, perhaps on the sidelines of Geneva Week.  His delegation expressed its appreciation for the TA provided by WTO, and urged donors to provide the necessary funds to allow the TA activities to continue.
&& The representative of Colombia observed that there was an increasing number of countries requesting TRTA.  She noted that beneficiary countries did not always know exactly what type of assistance they required.  She, therefore, suggested that future annual reports could include information on successful TA activities so as to allow Members to learn how to request appropriate assistance.  With regard to the reference centres, she noted that beneficiaries were not always making full use of them.  She said that while the report was very comprehensive, it did not make any reference to monitoring or follow-up.  Her delegation felt that monitoring and follow-up were important and should be undertaken.  On the issue of the trade policy courses, she wondered whether it would be possible for participants from Member countries coming out of the courses to share their experiences with other Members.
&& The representative of Mongolia said his delegation was very appreciative of the initiative of the Government of the Netherlands.  He hoped that other donor countries would follow this example. He said that one way to make TA more effective was for recipient governments to be held accountable for the TA received.  These governments should, to the extent possible, make efforts to make appropriate use of the assistance available.  His delegation was willing during future informal consultations to share its ideas with Members on how to make WTO TA more useful for developing countries.
&& The representative of the United States said his delegation appreciated the informal consultations that had previously taken place to discuss the annual report.  He noted that some reasons why countries were not requesting national activities had already been given, but inquired whether the Secretariat could also provide some explanation.  His delegation appreciated the NTP, but also saw some practical limitations in terms of the number of trainees.  He wondered whether the ITTC had given any thought on means to conduct such a hands-on training in a broader way, assuming funds were available.  He agreed that partnerships were a useful means of delivering TA, and wished to know how relationships with partners could be further improved.  With regard to the Geneva-based specialized courses, he noted that SPS and dispute settlement attracted the most attention in 2005.  He inquired how the selection of topics for these courses was made.  Finally, he asked for clarification on the financial situation, and how the Secretariat had calculated that an amount of CHF 15 million of fresh money was required.
&& The Director of the ITTC said the Secretariat was doing all it could through correspondence, meetings and personal contacts to remind Members of their entitlements under the national activity programme.  It was for those Members not utilizing their opportunity for national activities to clarify why this was so.  The way the Secretariat budgeted for national activities was in terms of the cost of taking the resource person to the country.  The remaining costs of holding the activity had to be met by the beneficiary country.  He agreed with the observation made by the representative of Benin that national activities were frequently postponed after a date had already been fixed.  It then became difficult for resource persons to fit these activities into their busy schedules.  He said the Secretariat would continue to work with Members to try to deliver as many national activities as it was committed to.  That being said, 218 such activities had been delivered in 2005, which was a considerable amount.
He said the Secretariat was working hard on the needs assessments and more were being submitted.  Once a needs assessment was in place, however, it was for the beneficiary country to use it to identify its TRTA priorities and put forward appropriate bids for activities.  With regard to e‑training, he said that useful information could be found in paragraph 129 of the report.  Five on-line courses had been held, of which four were introductory courses on WTO.  Two of the introductory courses were in English, while one each in French and Spanish had been held.  A course on trade remedies for the Asia-Pacific region had also taken place.  As for CD-based distance learning, it was difficult for the Secretariat to assess how many people were actually benefiting.  What was known was that the Secretariat had sent out one thousand CDs in 2005.  Distance-learning was certainly one way to address the question of how to move towards organizing more advanced training courses.  In particular, participants in the advanced courses would be required to have already followed one of the e-training modules.
With regard to the academic programme, he said each regional trade policy course was organized in close cooperation with a partner university.  These partners were in the process of developing their own training activities on the multilateral trading system.  Workshops for academics were held to allow them to enhance their teaching, and documentation was also provided.  In addition, under the JITAP programme, reference centres had been set up in academic institutions.  There was, therefore, a sustainable capacity being built up in regionally-based academic institutions.  On the question of the appropriate duration of activities, he said this needed to be discussed and was a question of balance.  He noted that activities relating to some topics were now only being organized on a biennial basis.
On the issue of partnerships, he said the Secretariat worked closely with some institutions to ensure that there was not a duplication of work.  What was still lacking, however, was an information base on which to build a greater degree of coherence.  This was particularly the case with regard to bilateral donors.  The Secretariat would, however, try to move forward on this issue.  With regard to  internships, he noted the practical limits to the number of interns that could be accommodated in the Secretariat.  While some interns were currently being housed in their respective missions, the question of how and where to accommodate interns had not been resolved.  There were also signs that other Members may wish to offer similar internship programmes to the NTP in the future.  The question of the extent to which all interns could be accommodated was therefore a real issue that would have to be dealt with.  On the question of multi-year planning, he said this had been tried a few years ago.  However, multi-year planning was difficult unless multi-year financing was available, which was currently not the case.  It was difficult to move forward on a programme if it was not entirely clear where the financing for the programme would come from.  He said, however, that a multi-year plan certainly had some benefits and could be considered if a way was found to resolve these practical constraints.
&& The representative of Benin said he wished to clarify his earlier intervention regarding the problems faced by some countries when organizing national activities.  These activities had to be organized so that participants got the most out of them.  Relevant representatives from all over the country had to be brought together, and their transportation and accommodation costs had to be covered.  The budgetary problems of some countries made this difficult.  Funds needed to be voted for and allocated sufficiently in advance.  The Secretariat and its partners needed to take these problems into account so that the system could be improved.   
&& The Committee took note of the 2005 Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training and of all interventions.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The representative of India said he wished to raise the issue of negotiations being undertaken in other bodies of the WTO which could have a direct impact on the functioning of the CTD.  In particular, the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR) in the context of negotiations on regional trade agreements (RTAs) was in the process of discussing a transparency mechanism for notification and consideration of RTAs.  The Chairman of the NGR had prepared a paper on the subject.  Among the issues discussed in that paper was the issue of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  Since the operation of the Enabling Clause was the responsibility of the CTD, and that an item relating to notifications under the Enabling Clause was a standing item on its agenda, it was crucial that any discussions likely to impact the functioning of the Committee should be brought to its attention.  Accordingly, his delegation proposed that the NGR Chairman be requested to make a presentation in an informal meeting of the CTD on the negotiations on RTAs insofar as they dealt with notifications under the Enabling Clause.  This was particularly important given that participation of developing countries in the NGR was often rather low.  Since Ministers had agreed to a deadline of 30 April 2006 for a provisional decision on RTA transparency, his delegation proposed that an informal meeting of the CTD be called within the next few weeks.
&& The representative of Brazil said his delegation shared the concern expressed by the representative of India, and wished the CTD to be kept fully aware of the progress in the negotiations on RTAs.  He said the discussions on a transparency mechanism for RTAs were quite advanced and that there was a good possibility that the 30 April 2006 deadline would be met.  It was, therefore, important for the CTD to be briefed by the NGR Chairman in advance of this date.
&& The representative of Thailand said several delegations from developing countries did not participate fully in the discussions in the NGR.  He, therefore, supported India's proposal for the NGR Chairman to brief the CTD in an informal meeting.
&& The representative of the Philippines said his delegation supported the proposal made by India. 
&& The representative of the United States said his delegation appreciated the interest shown by a number of Members in the negotiations on RTAs taking place in the NGR.  Making the process as transparent as possible was to the benefit of all Members.  His delegation, therefore, supported the proposal made by India.  He additionally proposed that the Chairman of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) be invited to participate in the informal CTD meeting.  This was because the transparency mechanism being discussed in the NGR related to procedures that concerned the review of RTAs, and some of these procedures were already being applied in the CRTA.  He also suggested that delegations bring to the informal CTD meeting their representatives who covered the RTAs negotiations.
&& The Chairman proposed that his successor consult with the NGR Chairman and take appropriate action to allow the CTD to meet informally with the NGR Chairman to discuss the state of play of the RTAs negotiations, and in particular issues relating to Enabling Clause notifications.
&& The representative of the European Communities said the EC had submitted to the Secretariat a notification on its revised GSP scheme.  The notification was being prepared for circulation to Members.  His delegation looked forward to presenting the notification at the next meeting of the CTD and responding to any questions from Members on the notification.
&& The Chairman said that for transparency purposes he had agreed to make a short presentation in the CTD whenever possible on progress made with regard to the Strategic Review of WTO‑Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance.  He said that in consultation with the Steering Committee, a final selection was made by the consultants in the early part of 2006 of the countries to be visited for fieldwork.  The countries chosen were Bangladesh, Barbados, Cambodia, Ecuador, Kenya, Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Senegal and Yemen.  On 2 February 2006, a further meeting was held in Geneva between the Steering Committee, the Review Team of consultants and delegates from the countries identified for field visits.  The delegations were represented at Ambassadorial level and expressed their full cooperation.  The Review was progressing well.  The Inception Report including the Work Plan and the Review Matrix had been received.  The field visits were due to take place in March, following which the nine country studies would be prepared.  A mid-term review meeting to discuss the preliminary findings and recommendations of the Strategic Review was scheduled to take place in May 2006.  The meeting had originally been scheduled for April 2006, but had been postponed because of the heavy negotiating workload of Geneva-based delegations expected during that month.
He said that at the last meeting of the CTD, one delegation had requested more information on the selection process used by the Steering Committee.  He had since consulted with the other members of the Steering Committee and now wished to provide a response.  He said the Steering Committee would not be in a position to provide any other written reports on the selection process other than what would be found in the minutes of the present CTD meeting and the previous CTD meeting.  He said that after careful examination of over 40 bids, the Steering Committee established a shortlist of four candidates.  These included two based in developed countries and two based in developing countries. During the selection process, attention was focused on the following criteria:
Trade-Related Technical Assistance (TRTA) evaluation expertise;
TRTA capacity-building expertise;
Knowledge and experience in WTO trade policy and trade negotiations;
Extent of relevant experience with developing countries;
Capacity to mobilize relevant expertise from the South;
Whether the members of the suggested team had worked together before in comparable settings and on similarly complex tasks;
Whether the bidder had given any explanation on the methodology and the division of labour for the Strategic Review;
Whether the bid reflected a transparent division of the tasks and responsibilities of the team members;
Whether the bidding company had agreed on a system of quality control to guarantee overall adherence to the quality standards spelled out in the Terms of Reference (TOR) of the Strategic Review;
Whether the bidder would take care of the administration and backstopping of the Strategic Review;
The price of the bid.    
&& The Chairman said that the Steering Committee invited the four selected candidates to participate in telephone conferences held on 13 and 14 October 2005.  At these conferences all candidates were asked the same questions which aimed to verify their understanding of the TOR, and were invited to briefly state their approach to the review.  In addition, the candidates were asked to further improve their bids and provide additional information.  After considering the responses, the Steering Committee found that the offer by the Consumer Unity & Trust Society (CUTS) appeared to be the most complete, corresponding to all the required criteria.  The offer was also at a very competitive price.  Based on the unanimous decision of its members, the Steering Committee recommended that a contract be offered to CUTS.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE CTD
&& The Chairman said that the General Council at its meeting on 8 February had announced the new Chairpersons for 2006.  He was pleased to inform the Committee that Mr. Faizel Ismail, Head of the South African delegation to the WTO, had been chosen as the new Chairman of the CTD. 
&& The Committee elected Mr. Faizel Ismail as Chairman of the CTD.
The outgoing Chairman said that Mr. Ismail had been the Head of the South African delegation to the WTO since April 2002.  He was particularly well known in the development area, as he served as Chairman of the CTD in Special Session for two years.  Prior to coming to the WTO, he held several senior positions in the Department of Trade and Industry of South Africa, including Deputy Director General for International Trade and Economic Development.  He had also been South Africa's chief negotiator for a number of trade agreements including the South Africa-European Union Free Trade Agreement, the South Africa-Southern African Customs Union, the South Africa-Southern African Free Trade Agreement, the South Africa-Mercosur Trade Agreement and the South Africa‑India Trade Agreement. 
The incoming Chairman thanked Members for the confidence they had placed in him by electing him Chairman of the CTD.  He also thanked the outgoing Chairman on behalf of the Members and the Secretariat for steering the Committee and its Dedicated Session over the last year.  He said he was aware of some of the issues being treated in the CTD, but looked forward to the guidance and cooperation of Members.  He was aware of the importance of the CTD as the focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO.  He assured Members of his intention to continue to give a high profile to the work of the CTD and to its Dedicated Session.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said he had been informed that consultations had led to the proposal for H.E. Mr. Ian de Jong, Ambassador of the Netherlands, to serve a third year as the Chairman of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.  He asked if this was acceptable to Members.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman said that Ambassador de Jong had broad diplomatic experience.  Before taking up his post as Ambassador in Geneva, he served as Deputy Permanent Representative of the Netherlands to the European Union in Brussels and as Minister Plenipotentiary at the Netherlands Embassy in Bonn.  He was previously Director for Multilateral Aid in the Hague for five years.  He served in several other capitals including the Hague, Washington, Khartoum and Beirut.  He also served as an Executive Director of the Inter-American Investment Corporation in Washington.  Ambassador de Jong's long experience was a valuable asset to the work conducted in the Sub‑Committee.
&& The Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs said it was with great pleasure and humility that he accepted his re-election.  He was grateful for the confidence the LDC Group placed in him by supporting him for the position.  He also saw his re-election as a reflection of the commitment of the European Communities to the LDCs.  He said that subjects of special interest to the LDCs could be treated in a focused manner in the Sub-Committee.  These included market access for LDCs, trade-related technical assistance and capacity-building for LDCs, support for the diversification of LDCs' production and export base, mainstreaming of the Brussels Declaration and Programme of Action, participation of LDCs in the multilateral trading system, accession of more LDCs to the WTO, and follow-up to WTO Ministerial Decisions and Declarations including the developmental aspects of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.  The agenda of the next meeting of the Sub-Committee focused on problems related to preferential market access for LDCs and the options for LDCs to improve their competitiveness in the textiles and clothing business.  He said he looked forward to working closely with the CTD Chairman to see what could be done to assist LDCs.     
The meeting was adjourned.

__________

 The work programme was circulated as document WT/COMTD/56.

WT/COMTD/M/56 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/56 	Page  PAGE 17



 

 

 

 



