WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/58
29 August 2006


(06-4110)


Committee on Trade and Development
Fifty-Eighth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 6 JULY 2006

Chairman:  Mr. Faizel Ismail (South Africa) 


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196157" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC144196157 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196158" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC144196158 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc144196159" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc144196159 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc144196160" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc144196160 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196161" C.	Notifications Under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC144196161 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196162" -	Communication from the European Communities on the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196162 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196163" -	Communication from the United States on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, the Protocol to Amend the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196163 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196164" -	Communication from Japan on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN And the People's  Republic of China and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196164 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196165" -	Communication from Brazil on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196165 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196166" -	Communication from China on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196166 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196167" -	Communication from India on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196167 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196168" -	Communication from Pakistan on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196168 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196169" -	Communication from the European Communities – Responses to questions submitted by Brazil, China, India and Pakistan on the revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196169 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196170" D.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC144196170 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196171" -	Presentation by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196171 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196172" E.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in Order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected (WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196172 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196173" F.	Review of Steps Taken to provide Duty-Free and Quota-Free Market Access to Least-Developed Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC144196173 \H 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196174" -	Communication by Japan (WT/COMTD/W/150)	 PAGEREF _TOC144196174 \H 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196175" G.	Export Helpdesk for Developing Countries – Presentation by the European Communities	 PAGEREF _TOC144196175 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC144196176" H.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC144196176 \H 15



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in document WTO/AIR/2845/Rev.1 issued on 27 June 2006.  He said that he wished to add under "Other Business" the issue of electronic commerce (e-commerce) in the CTD, and that the Secretariat wanted to add an item relating to trade-related technical assistance and the financial situation of the trust funds. 
&& The committee adopted the agenda as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	&& COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES ON THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.2)
-	&& COMMUNICATION FROM THE UNITED STATES ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, THE PROTOCOL TO AMEND THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.3)
-	&& COMMUNICATION FROM JAPAN ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S  REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman recalled that the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China was notified to the CTD at the 52nd Session in February 2005 and that the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between ASEAN and China was notified to the CTD at the 54th Session in October 2005.  He said that communications raising questions on the notifications had been received from the European Communities (EC), the United States (US) and Japan and had been circulated as documents WT/COMTD/51/Add.2, Add.3 and Add.4, respectively.  He suggested that the three communications be treated together.  
&& The Chairman said that ASEAN and China had indicated at the last meeting of the CTD that responses to the questions were under preparation and would be ready shortly.  After having consulted with the Members concerned, he had been informed that the responses from ASEAN and China had been submitted bilaterally to each of the three Members that had raised questions. 
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation wished to receive the responses that had been submitted by ASEAN and China to the EC, the US and Japan.
&& The representative of Australia said that his delegation also wanted to obtain the responses and to see them circulated more widely in the interests of transparency. 
&& The representative of Japan confirmed that his delegation had received the responses to the questions it had raised.  His delegation was, however, also interested in seeing the responses to the questions raised by the EC and the US and was of the view that all three sets of responses should be circulated as a CTD document.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that while his delegation had received bilaterally the responses to the questions it had raised, it was also interested in the responses to the questions raised by Japan and the US.  His delegation believed that it was appropriate for all the responses to be shared with the Committee for the purposes of transparency.
&& The representative of the United States confirmed that her delegation had also received responses to the questions it had raised.  She echoed the views of others that the responses should be shared with all Members in the form of a CTD document.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation did not believe it had an obligation to submit the written responses for circulation as a CTD document.  He, however, indicated that bilateral consultations according to the provisions of the Enabling Clause could be held if any Member sought information on the ASEAN-China notifications. 
&& The representative of the Philippines, on behalf of ASEAN, said that while he understood the requests of some Members, the ASEAN member countries would have to consult further with China on the matter.
&& The Chairman noted that some Members were not in agreement on how to move forward in treating the ASEAN-China notifications.  He proposed to hold informal consultations with the concerned Members and to report back to the CTD at its next meeting.
&& The representative of Canada requested that the CTD revert to this agenda item at its next meeting.
&& The Chairman said that the item would be retained on the agenda for the next meeting in order to allow him to report on the outcome of his consultations with concerned Members.
&& The representative of the United States said that the Chairman's proposal seemed like a way forward.  She requested that the item remain on the agenda in its current form for the next meeting, and not be changed to reflect the report of the Chairman.  She also sought confirmation that the Chairman's report would not limit discussion by Members under the agenda item at the next meeting.
&& The Chairman said that the item would remain on the agenda and he would report under that item.  Members would be free to discuss the matter further after he had made his report.  
It was so agreed. 
-	&& COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)
-	&& COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
-	&& COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.3)
-	&& COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
-	&& COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised GSP scheme at the last meeting of the CTD.  Communications raising questions on the notification had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4 respectively.  At the last CTD meeting, the EC had responded orally to the questions from Brazil and China.  The EC had more recently submitted written responses to all four sets of questions, which were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  He said he would first ask the EC to introduce its responses, after which the floor would be opened.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the EC's written responses to the questions from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan had been circulated to all Members for purposes of transparency.  The responses were self-explanatory in terms of providing answers to the four sets of questions.
&& The representative of India said that the EC's responses had been received quite recently and his delegation was still studying them in detail.  It, however, appeared that the responses were fairly inadequate in terms of providing answers to India's questions.  His delegation would have more detailed comments and follow-up questions at the next CTD meeting and, therefore, requested that the item remain on the agenda for the next meeting.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the EC's answers to Pakistan's questions were currently being studied by her delegation, but that she could offer some preliminary comments.  She said that the EC's responses did not go into the detail necessary to adequately answer Pakistan's questions, and provided nothing additional to information that was already available.  For example, in its third question Pakistan had referred to Article 9, paragraph 3(b), of the special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance, which defined a vulnerable country as one whose GSP-covered imports into the EC represented less than 1 per cent in value of total GSP‑covered EC imports.  Pakistan had observed in its communication that a relatively high income country may fulfil the requirement of less than 1 per cent of the EC's GSP imports and qualify, while a low-income country with 1.1 per cent of GSP‑covered imports would not.  Pakistan's third question therefore asked whether the criteria used by the EC were objective, as some countries such as Pakistan might be marginalized.  Unfortunately, the answer provided by the EC did not address Pakistan's concern. 
As another example, she referred to the fourth and fifth questions by Pakistan.  These concerned the fact that the benefits under the special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance were confined to those countries that had ratified 14 of the 16 conventions specified in Annex III-A, and put them into effective implementation by 31 October 2005.  Pakistan wanted to know what would happen if a developing country were to subsequently ratify all of these conventions and effectively implement them.  The replies provided by the EC were, however, unsatisfactory.  She said that Pakistan in its sixth question had highlighted that the United Nations considered seven conventions to be core human rights conventions, and therefore wanted to know why the EC had only included six of them as criteria to qualify for the special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance.  Once again, however, the response from the EC did not adequately address the question.  In view of the unsatisfactory responses from the EC, her delegation remained unclear on a number of points concerning the EC's revised GSP scheme.  
&& The representative of China said that the responses from the EC to China's questions were still being studied by his delegation.  He said that his delegation had no comment to make at this time, but reserved the right to address the issue at a later date.
&& The Chairman noted that some delegations that had raised questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had indicated that the responses provided by the EC were not to their satisfaction.  He also noted that the delegations were still studying the EC's responses.  He, therefore, suggested that the Committee revert to this agenda item at its next meeting.  
It was so agreed. 
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
-	PRESENTATION BY THE FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION (FAO)
&& The Chairman said that, based on the discussion that took place under this agenda item at the last meeting of the CTD, an invitation to make a presentation to the Committee had been extended to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).  He was pleased to inform the Committee that the FAO had accepted the invitation and that a representative of the FAO was in attendance at the meeting.  He introduced Mr. David Hallam, who was the Chief of the Raw Materials, Tropical and Horticultural Products Service in the Commodities and Trade Division of the FAO. 
&& The representative of the Food and Agriculture Organization said that his presentation would focus on the work of the Commodities and Trade Division, which was concerned with the economic analysis of international commodity markets and related policy issues.  The Division followed all agricultural commodity markets and undertook studies on market outlooks and commodity strategy for FAO member countries.  It was involved in capacity-building activities, including in the trade area.  It also maintained a global information and early warning system (GIEWS) to assess the food supply situation in member countries and issue alerts or warnings if it looked like there would be a food crisis or shortage.  The Division collaborated with a number of institutions including the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the World Bank, the World Food Programme (WFP), the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC) and the international commodity organizations. 
&& The Division additionally provided the Secretariat for the Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP) and its sub-committees.  The CCP was one of the five big technical committees of the FAO Council.  Its mandate was to review international commodity market developments and to discuss related policy issues, and to report to the FAO Council.  The CCP, which met every two years, had a membership of approximately 120 countries.  It had a number of sub-committees including the so-called intergovernmental groups (IGGs) and the Consultative Sub-Committee on Surplus Disposal (CSSD).  The IGGs, of which there were about 12, provided an international forum for discussion of issues relating to particular commodities.  In recent years, trade policy issues had been central to the agendas of the IGGs.  The IGGs also acted as supervisory bodies for various development projects, and any proposals for projects funded by the Common Fund for Commodities had to be approved by the relevant IGG.  The CSSD's role was to monitor food aid shipments to ensure that they were not displacing normal commercial trade.  However, some major donors had in recent years chosen not to notify the CSSD, or had done so only after extensive delays.
He said that he wished to provide more detail on some aspects of the work of the Commodities and Trade Division.  The market outlook work of the Division was done primarily in collaboration with the OECD, and was very much based on economic modelling.  The objective of the Division's analytical work was to improve market transparency and to provide a foundation for FAO's advice to its member governments.  The Division was also interested in international commodity value chains and their implications.  The work of the Division was disseminated through a number of publications including periodicals such as the "Commodity Market Review" and the "State of Agricultural Commodity Markets", as well as technical studies and CCP and IGG documents.  He said he had also recently co-authored a book titled "Agricultural Commodity Markets and Trade".  All FAO publications were available on the FAO's website (www.fao.org).
He said that the FAO's analytical work confirmed the general perception of a fairly steady downward trend in commodity prices of between 1 to 2 per cent a year in real terms.  Prices also exhibited a high degree of volatility, though there appeared to have been a reduction in volatility after the 1970s.  The prices of several non-oil commodities exhibited similar trends, suggesting that there was a common explanation for the path they followed.  However, there was still disagreement among economists regarding the nature of the trend of commodity prices, in particular whether it was a steady and deterministic trend, a series of downward steps, or a more stochastic trend.  It was important to attempt to understand the nature of the trend, as this would shed some light as to whether supply control schemes in international markets would be effective.  He noted that prices of industrial products that had similar characteristics to agricultural commodities – for example, being homogeneous and mass-produced – behaved in the same way as commodity prices.  The reason that prices were declining was that technical change was reducing costs and increasing productivity faster than population and income growth were increasing demand.  The way to offset this trend was to improve quality.  Unfortunately, there was relatively less that could be done in the case of commodities to increase quality than with industrial products.  Commodity price volatility arose from exogenous shocks both on the demand side and the supply side, and were persistent for reasons including low demand and supply elasticities.  
He explained that the problems faced by commodity exporting countries were the same that had always existed.  The implications for these countries were a decline in their real exports, with the price fall not always offset by increased export volume.  The decline in real exports had adverse macroeconomic effects and  adverse effects on food security.  The situation was particularly severe for the approximately 43 countries that depended on one commodity – usually coffee, cotton, sugar or bananas – for 20 per cent or more of their export earnings.  It was, however, also worth mentioning that some developing countries were important food importers, and therefore gained from lower commodity prices.
With regard to the evolution of the income terms of trade of different groups of countries since the early 1980s, he observed that developed countries and developing countries (excluding LDCs) had been able to offset some of the decline of commodity prices by exporting more.  The LDCs had not, however, been successful in this regard.  The main reason for this was that the LDCs had not been able to fully share in the benefits of technology, which reduced costs and increased productivity.
On the question of the role of trade policy reform, he said that the FAO's view was that while the overall impact of trade policy reform and liberalization was positive, there were winners and losers among the developing countries.  He said that market access for tropical products was generally not a major issue, as tariffs on these products were low.  Sugar and cotton were different because of the high levels of domestic support in some countries.  Tariff escalation was also an issue for some commodities.  However, even if tariffs were no longer a problem, there were still serious supply-side constraints in many developing countries.  From the food importing side, liberalization would in the short run raise prices.  It would also mean more international competition for domestic production in developing countries, which these countries might not be prepared for.
He said that a number of possible types of actions to deal with the problems faced by commodity exporters were being discussed, but, due to the time constraint, he would discuss only one, namely producer‑only agreements on production and export controls.  The idea of these agreements was to restrict the supply of specific commodities on international markets in an attempt to raise prices.  It was similar to the international commodity agreements, but on a smaller scale.  The coffee export retention scheme of 2001 was the most recent example, and such schemes were also under discussion for other commodities such as tea, bananas and cocoa.  In order for such schemes to work, he said that it was necessary for a number of factors to be in place.  First, the members of the agreement had to control a high proportion of the world's production of the commodity in question.  Demand for the commodity also had to be price-inelastic, so that prices would increase more than proportionately when supplies were cut.  Members additionally had to be modest in their price objectives, and had to be highly committed to the scheme.  The issues to consider included how to ensure members' commitment and whether this would require the participation of importing countries, whether the schemes were compatible with WTO rules and what institutional mechanisms were necessary to administer and implement the schemes.
As an illustration of some of the problems involved in establishing such schemes, he said he wished to discuss the 2001 coffee export retention scheme.  This scheme was established in response to the collapse in coffee prices in the second half of the 1990s.  The idea was that coffee producers would retain 20 per cent of their exports with the objective of achieving a target price of between 95 and 105 cents per pound.  Nineteen countries had originally expressed interest in joining the scheme, but in practice only Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica and for a brief period Viet Nam, participated.  Exports and stocks therefore continued to rise and prices continued to fall.  He said that he had made some calculations based on a model of the coffee market, which showed that if all coffee producers and exporters had participated in the scheme, prices would have risen by 32 per cent and revenues would have gone up by 5.5 per cent, though it would still not have been enough to reach the target price range.  If only Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica and Viet Nam participated, prices would have risen by 17 per cent, but the revenues of the four countries would have fallen by 6.5 per cent.  Those countries that did not participate would have benefited from the 17 per cent price rise, and would also have enjoyed a revenue increase of 17 per cent.  There were, therefore, great incentives not to participate in the scheme, which was, in fact, what happened. 
In conclusion, he said that the commodity problem was essentially the same as it had always been, and LDCs were suffering the most.  Trade liberalization and policy reform had some benefits, but there was a need for capacity building and the raising of competitiveness in order to avoid adverse effects and to give to all developing countries the chance to take advantage of any new trading opportunities.  Supply control could work in principle, but successful schemes of this nature were difficult to put in place.  The same could be said of schemes designed to raise prices through promoting demand for commodities.  He observed that the key issue for developing countries and LDCs was to improve the competitiveness of their agricultural sectors.  This could be achieved through increased investments and a reversal of the downward trend in official development assistance (ODA) to the agricultural sector.  
&& The Chairman thanked the representative of the FAO for his presentation and opened the floor for questions and comments.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that at the last CTD meeting a representative of the International Coffee Organization (ICO) had remarked that the profits of the sellers of end products continued to rise, even while the downward trend in commodity prices continued.  She wondered if the representative from the FAO could comment on this.  She said she was also interested in the work of the CSSD and wondered whether there were currently any notification requirements relating to the movement of food aid shipments.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that he was interested in issues relating to diversification and competitiveness-raising amongst commodity producers and exporters and wondered whether the representative of FAO could talk about any work the FAO was doing in this area.  He also sought confirmation that the chart dealing with tariff escalation in the FAO representative's slide presentation was based on the EC's MFN tariffs and therefore ignored the large volumes of preferential imports that entered the EC at zero duty.  This was particularly true for imports from the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries, where there was no tariff escalation.  Finally, he inquired whether the representative of the FAO could elaborate on the FAO's collaboration with other institutions.
&& The representative of Nigeria asked how the FAO could enhance its operations to help developing countries benefit from commodity markets, particularly in Africa. 
&& The representative of the FAO, in response to the remark from Pakistan, said that he agreed that there was a large gap between prices at both ends of the value chain.  The difficulties arose when one tried to establish what was the fair share of the final price that was going to developing country exporters.  With regard to Pakistan's question on food aid shipments and the role of the CSSD, he said that notifications to the CSSD were largely voluntary. 
On the question from the EC on diversification and competitiveness-raising, the representative of the FAO said that in practice developing countries faced several obstacles in attempting to diversify or raise their competitiveness.  One obstacle related to the structure of international markets, and the fact that there were significant barriers to entry in activities with an important value-added component.  It was also important to keep in mind that benefits would not necessarily accrue to developing countries if several of them tried to diversify into similar products.  There was, therefore, a need for assistance to identify viable market opportunities and take advantage of those opportunities.  It was also a fact that standards imposed by some countries on imported goods were very high, and were often difficult to meet for developing country exporters.  With regard to the EC's question on the FAO's collaboration with other organizations, he said that his Division had recently worked with the World Bank on a study on non-traditional agricultural exports as a possible avenue for horizontal diversification.  Collaboration with the OECD on market outlook studies had also been undertaken.  In addition to the other organizations he had mentioned earlier, he said that his Division was also working closely with the EC, in particular on a major commodity strategy project organized by the EC and involving several international organizations including the FAO, UNCTAD, the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC) and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO).  He also confirmed that the chart dealing with tariff escalation in one of his slides did not take into account the preferences offered by the EC.
In response to the question from Nigeria on how the FAO could provide assistance to developing countries, he said that a country could make a request to the FAO for technical assistance.  The Commodities and Trade Division could, in particular, offer strategy advice and participate in capacity building activities.  He said that some commodity-related activities could additionally be supported by the CFC, though the CFC tended to support production-oriented projects more than initiatives for markets and marketing.
&& The representative of Zambia said that the final slide in the FAO representative's slide presentation provided some concluding comments and recommendations, but did not mention the problem of the concentration of market power in global chains.  He wondered whether this was because nothing could be done about the problem, or whether the issue had not been mentioned because it was not related to the work of the FAO.
&& The representative of the FAO said that the concentration of market power was an important issue, but one that was difficult to monitor and respond to.  The FAO was probably not the most appropriate international body to deal with it.  He said that there had been a lot of discussion on how producers in developing countries could organize themselves into cooperatives and other such arrangements in an attempt to rectify the situation, but he was not fully convinced that cooperatives could match the market power of some of the large retail chains. 
&& The representative of Pakistan said that she understood the aim of the CSSD was to  monitor food aid shipments to ensure that they were not displacing normal commercial trade.  She inquired whether any action was taken if it was found that normal commercial trade was being displaced.
&& The representative of the FAO said that action of this nature was not taken by the FAO.  The role of the CSSD was to monitor food aid shipments and publish its findings.
&& The representative of Kenya sought some clarification on producer-only agreements, as one of the negotiating proposals that had been put forward by the African Group concerned such agreements.  In particular, she wondered whether such schemes were compatible with WTO rules.  She also wanted to know what were some of the instruments that could be used for export control and inquired whether the FAO would see export taxes and export restrictions having a role to play in this regard.
&& The representative of the FAO said that he was not an expert on the question of the compatibility of producer-only agreements with WTO rules, though he agreed it was an important issue.  On the question of the instruments that could be used for export control, he gave the example of the scheme that had been put in place for coffee, where coffee was stocked.  The problem, however, was that the stocks in such schemes would "overhang" the market, which might counter any benefits from reducing exports.  A better solution would be to channel potential exports into other uses and remove them permanently from the market.  More generally for supply control, he said that it might be possible to operate a buffer stock scheme, but this required substantial institutional capacity which he did not believe any existing institution possessed.  He added that the recent history of quality improvement schemes showed some of the difficulties which existed in trying to control world markets when  importing countries did not fully participate. 
&& The committee took note of the presentation and of all interventions.
&& The Chairman said that the Committee had now heard a presentation from one Member – Malaysia – and had also heard presentations from the CFC, UNCTAD, the ICO and the FAO.  He believed that the presentations had been very useful in allowing the Committee to focus its work and discussions.  He, therefore, suggested that the CTD continue to hear from Members or relevant institutions.  Specific institutions that had been suggested in past discussions included the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), the World Bank and the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO).  He inquired whether any Member wished to make a presentation at the next meeting of the CTD, or whether the Committee wanted an invitation to be extended to any particular organization. 
&& The representative of Kenya drew the attention of Members to the proposal on commodities that had recently been circulated by the African Group and was contained in document TN/AG/GEN/18.  She said that her delegation would consult further with the African Group to see whether any country within the Group would like to make a presentation to the CTD at a future meeting.  She proposed that the International Cocoa Organization be invited to make a presentation at the next CTD meeting. 
It was so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED (WT/COMTD/W/143/REV.2)
&& The Chairman recalled that the Committee had agreed at its 56th Session on 3 March 2006 that its next review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations, based on a revised Secretariat document, would take place at the present meeting.  The Secretariat's paper on the "Developmental Aspects of the Doha Round of Negotiations" had, therefore, been revised for this purpose.  The revision, which had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.2, updated the status of the negotiations up to the Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC) meeting of 1 May 2006.  He said that there had been some developments in the negotiations since then, but given the amount of time required to prepare a document of this nature, including the time required for translation, it was decided that the second revision of the Secretariat paper would provide updates up to May.  He said that this should not stop the Committee from discussing the developmental aspects of the negotiations as a whole, including any recent developments.
&& The representative of Honduras said that special and differential treatment (S&D) was vital to many developing countries, including his own.  He explained that technical and financial assistance were also very important, as many developing countries did not have the necessary capacity to fully benefit from market access opportunities.  He said that in the section on services in paragraph 49 of the revised document, reference was made to the Hong Kong mandate relating to small economies in the services negotiations.  However, in the sections on agriculture and non-agricultural market access (NAMA), no mention was made of small economies.  As the Secretariat paper was to be periodically revised through the negotiations, his delegation wanted the next version to appropriately treat the flexibilities the small economies proponents were asking for in the negotiations.    
&& The representative of El Salvador said that his delegation agreed with the two conclusions from the Secretariat paper.  The first conclusion was that development issues were being discussed in all areas of the negotiations.  In this regard, he emphasized the importance of S&D for developing countries in the Doha Round.  The second conclusion in the paper referred to the large number of proposals which were aimed at addressing the developmental aspects in each area.  El Salvador agreed with the conclusion that the possible gains to developing countries would largely depend on the extent to which the proposals were accepted by Members and the manner in which they were operationalized after being adopted.  He emphasized that measures should be adopted and implemented.  He also made reference to a number of proposals of small economies in such negotiating areas as agriculture, NAMA and services, as well as a proposal for a second extension of the transition period for the elimination of export subsidies, which had a strong development component but which were not mentioned in the Secretariat paper.  He hoped that the Secretariat would mention these proposals when revising the paper. 
&& The representative of Nicaragua said that he agreed with Honduras and El Salvador that S&D was important for developing countries and was an integral part of the Doha Round.  In addition, effective technical and financial assistance was important for developing countries.  He said that his delegation would continue to support the proposals of the small economies and other proposals which corresponded to Nicaragua's development needs.   
&& The representative of Tanzania said that he wished to make a comment on paragraph 68 of the Secretariat paper in the section on trade facilitation.  He said that all Members knew the benefits that would arise from facilitating trade, but developing countries had also stressed the cost of implementing trade facilitation measures.  It was for this reason that developing countries were asking for technical assistance and capacity building.  Care should be taken to accurately reflect the discussions that had taken place in the trade facilitation negotiations.
&& The representative of Guatemala supported the interventions made by Honduras, El Salvador and Nicaragua.  He said that the Secretariat paper was a factual document which attempted to reflect the development-related proposals which had been submitted in the various negotiating bodies.  His delegation wanted to see the small economies' proposals reflected in the Secretariat paper, and suggested that the paper could make reference to document WT/COMTD/SE/W/21 which had been submitted by the small economies in the CTD in Dedicated Session.  The document contained a summary of the proposals that had been made by the small economies.  
&& The representative of Pakistan said that she wished to make a comment on paragraph 48 of the Secretariat paper in the section on services.  She said that while the paragraph made reference to the negotiations on domestic regulation, the advanced stage of these negotiations had not been appropriately reflected.  Her delegation, therefore, requested the Secretariat to treat in more detail the status of the negotiations on domestic regulation. 
&& The representative of the United States said that the Secretariat paper was a living document which continued to evolve.  While her delegation had not yet had the opportunity to review the paper in its entirety, she wished to note that the revision rightly put the benefits of liberalization and substantial reductions in tariffs foremost in its discussions on the possible gains from the Doha Round.  Her delegation believed that the core contribution to development in the Doha Round would come from global market opening and the creation of new trade flows.  She said that her delegation was disappointed that the Secretariat had little new material to work with when revising its paper since there had not been much progress in the negotiations, but hoped that there would soon be more material to incorporate in a new revision of the Secretariat paper.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation was pleased to note that a number of comments it had made on the previous version of the Secretariat paper had been incorporated in the revision.  The revised paper was being studied by his delegation and comments would be submitted in due course as necessary.  He believed that the paper provided a very useful overview of the negotiations and agreed that it should be updated regularly and used as a basis for discussions. 
&& The representative of Costa Rica said that his delegation had made extensive comments on the first version of the Secretariat paper.  The revised paper was currently being studied by his delegation, but he wished to make some preliminary comments.  He said that his delegation had observed in the first version of the paper that reference to the offensive and defensive interests of developing countries had been made in the section on NAMA but not in the section on agriculture.  He recognized that the revised paper had treated many of his delegation's concerns and was more balanced than its predecessors.  However, while the revised paper did mention the delicate balance of Members' offensive and defensive interests in market access, he believed that a sufficiently clear reference had not been made to the balance of offensive and defensive interests with regard to S&D in the NAMA and agriculture negotiations, which Costa Rica believed was important.  He agreed that the Secretariat paper was a living document that should be under constant revision as developments took place in the negotiations. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the revised Secretariat paper provided a useful update of the status of the negotiations.  The paper also reminded Members that there was more to the negotiations than the 'triangle' of issues that was often referred to, namely market access and domestic support in agriculture as well as industrial market access.  In addition to other aspects of the agriculture and NAMA negotiations, it was important to keep in mind the other areas of the negotiations including services, rules, trade facilitation, geographical indications and the LDC-specific elements.  Furthermore, there were subjects that were not formally part of the negotiations but were important complements to the Doha Round, such as technical assistance or the Integrated Framework (IF).  Another example was Aid for Trade, which was understandably not treated in the Secretariat paper but on which work had advanced in the last months.  He said that the paper also provided a reminder of the diversity of interests among Members and the negotiations that remained to be undertaken in order to reach a conclusion to the Doha Round as soon as possible.  While his delegation was still reviewing the details of the paper, he said that the paper was useful in providing a global picture of the areas under negotiation.  His delegation would continue to work with Members to achieve an adequate development dimension to the Doha Round and to progress on other outstanding issues relating to development such as Aid for Trade and the operationalization of the enhanced IF.
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation had undertaken a preliminary review of the revised Secretariat paper and had some textual suggestions to make, which he would transmit to the Secretariat in the next few days.
&& The representative of Zambia said that Annex F of the Hong Kong Declaration, referred to in paragraph 72 of the revised Secretariat paper, was a framework agreement and that Members were to discuss how to implement the proposals contained in that Annex.
&& The Chairman said that delegations seemed pleased with the basic idea behind the Secretariat paper and the fact that it attempted to provide an overview of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  While it was not easy to reflect the concerns of all Members, he believed that the balance would improve though each revision of the paper.  He encouraged Members to submit their comments in written form to the Secretariat.  He hoped there would soon be substantial progress in the negotiations so that a revised Secretariat paper could be prepared to reflect these developments.  He proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions and continue its discussion under this agenda item at its next meeting. 
It was so agreed. 
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
-	COMMUNICATION BY JAPAN (WT/COMTD/W/150)
&& The Chairman said that a communication under this agenda item had been received from Japan and had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/150.  He said he also wished to mention that the LDC Group had recently made a submission on the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access.  The submission had been made in the CTD in Special Session, the Negotiating Group on Market Access and the Committee on Agriculture in Special Session and was contained in document TN/CTD/W/31, TN/MA/W/78 and TN/AG/GEN/23.  He also made reference to an earlier proposal by the LDC Group on rules of origin that had been submitted in the same three bodies as documents TN/CTD/W/30, TN/MA/W/74 and TN/AG/GEN/20.
&& The representative of Japan said that he wished to highlight some important messages contained in document WT/COMTD/W/150.  Paragraph 2 of the paper indicated that Japan was fully committed to implementing its "Development Initiative for Trade" and to providing DFQF market access for products from LDCs.  He said that his government was currently in the preparatory process for the necessary legislative amendment and was conducting hearings with all parties including domestic interest groups and beneficiaries.  In this regard, paragraph 6 of the document indicated that the governments of LDCs would have opportunities to express their interests and needs through diplomatic channels.  After concluding the hearings, a draft proposal on the amendment would be prepared by the end of 2006.  As mentioned in paragraph 9 of the document, the draft legislation would be discussed in the Japanese Diet in around February 2007.  Given that the Japanese fiscal year began in April, the procedures were being conducted with a view to providing the new DFQF treatment as early as the 2007 fiscal year.  He said that his delegation was willing to provide to the CTD details of Japan's DFQF market access provisions for LDCs, and urged other developed countries, and developing countries declaring themselves in a position to do so, to notify the progress they were making in implementing the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs. 
&& The representative of Zambia, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that the LDC Group was encouraged by the positive efforts that were being made by the Japanese government towards implementing the Hong Kong Decision.  However, notifications on implementation were just one aspect of the Decision.  She confirmed that the LDC Group had recently tabled two proposals, one relating to rules of origin and the other on market access, and said that the Group believed that the appropriate body to discuss the proposals was the CTD in Special Session. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation took note of the submission from Japan and looked forward to future submissions keeping the CTD informed of Japan's implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs.  
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation appreciated the opportunity to continue the dialogue in the CTD on the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision and hoped that other Members shared the US' commitment to transparency.  She said that the submission by Japan was appreciated, and that her delegation looked forward to learning more about the implementation plans of other Members, including developing countries.  The intention of her delegation was to continue to provide information to WTO Members on the domestic consultative process in the US and how Members could participate in the process. 
&& The committee took note of all interventions.
EXPORT HELPDESK FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES – PRESENTATION BY THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES 
&& The Chairman introduced Mr. Matthew Baldwin, who was the Head of the unit dealing with market access and trade relations with the US, Canada, the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), Australia and New Zealand in the EC's Directorate-General for Trade.  
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the EC's Export Helpdesk for Developing Countries (EHDC), launched in February 2004, was a free online service.  It was a concrete and practical tool designed to help developing countries integrate further into the global economy.  While the EC already offered preferential access to its market for products from developing countries and LDCs, the EHDC provided direct help to developing country exporters to allow them to learn about and benefit from the EC's preferential trade programmes. 
He said that the EHDC could be visited online at: http://exporthelp.europa.eu.  From the EHDC homepage, several types of information could be obtained by clicking on the relevant links, including information on the EC's import tariffs, rules of origin, customs documentation requirements, tax requirements and trade statistics.  Visitors could also click on the increasingly popular "marketplace" link, where requests and offers on particular products from importers and exporters were compiled.  By clicking on "links" from the EHDC homepage, the visitor had information on other useful websites.  Visitors could also send in a specific question by clicking on "contact" from the homepage.   
He said that the principal goal of the EHDC project was to provide a "one-stop shop" for information on exporting from a developing country to the EC. Confirmation of the importance of this service was provided by the growing statistics of its use.  When the service began in 2004, about 1,500 visits were recorded per day.  The figure rose to 3,700 visits per day by the end of 2005, and the latest figures showed 5,000 visits per day.  About 140 detailed questions were being received per month and between 80 and 90 offers and requests were being placed on the "marketplace" section every month.  The main visitors to the EHDC website were from Latin America, accounting for 60 per cent of developing country visitors.  About 20 per cent were from Asia and only 6 per cent from the ACP countries.  The country which used the service most was Peru, followed by Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Colombia and Uruguay.  It was difficult to identify all the reasons why the Latin American countries were using the service more than other developing countries, though there was evidence that the limited access to informatics and networks was the reason behind the relatively low usage rate in Africa.  The EC was making efforts to inform as many developing country exporters as possible of the EHDC, and was also keen to receive feedback on how the service could be improved. An internal assessment of the EHDC was additionally being undertaken by the EC.    
&& The Chairman thanked the representative of the EC for the presentation and opened the floor for questions or comments.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that her delegation had once submitted through the EHDC website a question on the EC's rice regime, but had not received a response.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that it was rare that a response was not sent to a question received.  He did not know what had happened in the particular case referred to by the representative of Pakistan, but asked her delegation to re-submit the question.  On a more general note, he said that while the EHDC was a very useful tool for developing country exporters, it could not promise too much.  It certainly was a good starting point for exporters in developing countries, but it was important for them to use the service to, for example, build relationships with importers in the EC.  He continued by saying that there were some services run by individual EC member states which were also useful.  For example, the Swedish government ran a system called "Open Trade Gate" and the Netherlands had a fee-paying consultancy service to help exporters work out an export plan.  To conclude, he said that the main objective of the EHDC and other similar services was to help developing country exporters gain real and concrete benefits from market access opportunities in the EC. 
&& The committee took note of the presentation and of all interventions.   
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to raise the issue of e-commerce in the CTD.  He said that the CTD was one of four subsidiary bodies designated to carry out work on e-commerce under the WTO Work Programme on e-commerce.  However, the CTD had agreed at its 53rd Session in May 2005 that it would only revert to the agenda item concerning e-commerce if requested to do so by Members.  It was for this reason that e-commerce had not been on the CTD's agenda since the May 2005 meeting.  He continued by saying that Members had agreed in paragraph 46 of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration to reinvigorate the Work Programme on e-commerce, including the development-related issues under the Work Programme.  In light of paragraph 46 of the Hong Kong Declaration, he asked Members whether they wished to treat  the issue of e-commerce once again in the CTD.
No Member took the floor.
&& The Chairman said that Members possibly needed some time to reflect on the matter, and proposed that the item concerning e-commerce be placed on the agenda for the next CTD meeting. 
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman said that a representative of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) wished to make an intervention relating to trade-related technical assistance and the financial situation of the trust funds.
&& The representative of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation said that the financial situation concerning the funding of technical assistance (TA) was critical.  There was at present an amount of CHF 22.9 million to finance the activities included in the 2006 TA Plan.  This was CHF 1.1 million short of the 2006 target amount of CHF 24 million, which was to have been received in the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF) by 30 June 2006.  The target date had been missed, and the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration had been informed of the critical financial situation on 7 June 2006. 
He explained that the amount of CHF 22.9 million consisted of an opening balance of CHF 7.6 million carried over from the previous year, fresh money contributions received in 2006 of CHF 11.8 million, earmarked funds already paid of CHF 0.9 million and outstanding pledges of CHF 2.6 million.  In order to meet the target amount of CHF 24 million for 2006, it was necessary to receive the CHF 2.6 million in outstanding pledges and additional contributions of CHF 1.1 million.  He said that expenditure in the DDAGTF up the present time amounted to CHF 17.5 million, representing an implementation rate of 73 per cent, but that further implementation of the 2006 TA Plan could continue only as far as the balance in the DDAGTF permitted.  He added that, on the assumption that the target amount for 2007 would remain CHF 24 million, further contributions of CHF 6 million would need to be pledged and paid by the end of December 2006.  This was necessary in order to build up a 25 per cent reserve for 2007, in accordance with the requirements of the Terms of Reference of the DDAGTF.  On the basis of the figures quoted, he asked donors to make urgent contributions to the DDAGTF. 
He said that he also wished to address the Committee on the subject of the Mission Internship Programme (MIP), which was a programme financed by contributions from Denmark and Ireland to allow LDCs and other small and vulnerable economies (SVEs) the possibility of having additional staff working in their missions.  To date, there had been very few applications for the MIP, and a substantial amount of funds were, therefore, still available.  He, however, warned that the funds may have to be returned if they were not utilized soon, and therefore encouraged applications to the programme.  He said that the ITTC had circulated a note to Members at the end of May 2006, outlining the requirements to qualify for the MIP and how to apply.  The application process consisted essentially of sending a letter either to the WTO's Human Resources Division or to the Director of the ITTC. 
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation had made a contribution to the DDAGTF a few days ago.  He inquired whether the representative of the ITTC in his presentation had included this contribution as funds already received.
&& The representative of Costa Rica said that he had noted that the MIP was a programme to assist LDCs and other SVEs.  He said, however, that there was currently no definition of SVEs in the WTO.  He, therefore, sought clarification as to which developing country Members apart from LDCs could apply to the programme.
&& The representative of Ecuador said that her delegation would be pleased to submit an application for the MIP if it met the requirements.
&& The representative of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation, in response to the question from Japan, said that the Japanese contribution had been counted as pledged money in his summary of the financial situation.  However, the categorization of the Japanese contribution did not make a difference to the fundamental issue, which was that the funds in the DDAGTF were below the target amount of CHF 24 million.  In response to the remarks from Costa Rica and Ecuador, he said that while the donors had some prerogative to decide which countries could benefit from the MIP, attempts would be made to accommodate as many requests as possible.  Up to the present, the majority of applications had been accommodated.
&& The representative of Rwanda thanked Denmark and Ireland for the MIP and expressed the hope that his delegation would be able to benefit from the programme.
The meeting was adjourned.
__________
 An online demonstration of the website was given.  

WT/COMTD/M/58 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/58 	Page  PAGE 17



 

 

 

 



