RESTRICTED
WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/15
2 April 1997
ORGANIZATION
(97-1313)

Committee on Trade and Development Original: English
Fifteenth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 21 MARCH 1997

&& Chairman: H.E. Mr. D. Baichoo (Mauritius)

1. && The Committee on Trade and Development adopted the agenda as contained in WTO/AIR/548.

(i) Agenda Item B: Work Programme of the Committee for 1997

2. && The Committee agreed to the proposed dates for its future meetings in 1997: 20 May,
26 September and 17 November.

3. && The Committee then turned to its proposed Work Programme for 1997. The Chairman drew
attention to the document entitled "Update of Work Carried Out By the Committee on Trade and
Development”. ’ Pursuant to the outcome of his informal consultations, he proposed that, for the
first half of year, the focus of the Committee’ s work be on technical assistance activities, with a particular
emphasis on implementation modalities. He suggested that it be the core item for discussion at the
Committee's next meeting. For the second half of the year, he proposed that the Committee undertake
a review of the participation of developing countries in world trade. He recalled that the Committee
had looked at this issue last year, on the basis of Secretariat documentation covering the past twenty
years. ? He proposed that, this year, examination would focus on a shorter time period, covering the
past 4-5 years, which included the 2 1/2 years since the WTO entered into force. The Secretariat could
be requested to prepare background papers to provide the facts, while the Committee would analyse
the data, drawing out themes which might, for example, point to certain policy conclusions, or to features
of market access developments, or to aspects of a more systemic nature related to WTO Agreements.
He continued by saying that, following consultations held with delegations, he felt that, while the
Committee should keep under review the implementation of WTO provisions relating to the special
and differential treatment of developing countries in the multilateral trading system, a another major
review was best carried out in 1998. He recalled that the Committee had done a major review in 1996.
This year, he noted that several of the specialised WTO Committees would be examining the
implementation of the special and differential treatment provisions of particular WTO Agreements:
for example, on TBT, SPS, Textiles and Clothing and Rules of Origin. He said that the Committee
would not lose sight of such an important matter. However, he was of view that it might be more
constructive for the Committee to undertake another review of the issue in 1998 rather than this year,
to allow more experience to be gained and to provide the Committee with a more medium-term picture
of implementation across-the-board on which to base its discussions.

4. && The representative of Morocco said that his delegation was of the view that the Committee
should keep under continuous review the provisions on special and differential treatment, in accordance with the Decision on Measures in Favour of Least-Developed Countries. The Chairman asked for
examples, to which the representative of Morocco replied that those relating to the Agreement on TRIPS
constituted one example, but that he would need more time to present a list of other examples.

5. && The representative of Canada said that his delegation considered favourably the proposed review
of the participation of LDCs in world trade as part of the Committee's Work Programme for 1997,
but that he was not in a position today to present a definitive view.

6.&& The Committee took note of the statements made.

(ili) Agenda item C: WTO Technical Cooperation and Training Activities as
They Relate to Developing Country Members 

- Implementation Modalities

7. && The Chairman recalled that the Secretariat had circulated general information about technical
cooperation activities of the WTO in 1996 are contained in documents WTO/COMTD/W/14 plus
Addendum 1, WT/COMTD/21 and WT/COMTD/23. Regarding implementation modalities, the
Secretariat had circulated a revision of its non-paper on implementation modalities.* At the Committee's
last meeting, it was agreed that the Secretariat would revise the non-paper further to incorporate
comments from delegations. He noted that no written comments had been received thus far, and urged
that submissions be made quickly. He recalled that representatives from the ITC and UNCTAD had
addressed the Committee at its last meeting in relation to technical cooperation activities of their
respective organizations. Their comments had been incorporated into the Note of the Meeting.* In
addition, the Draft Annotated Outline for the Manual on Technical Cooperation and Training Activities
had been circulated.* It provided an overview of technical cooperation activities carried out by the
WTO since its entry into force, and a synopsis of the Comprehensive and Integrated WTO Plan of
Action for the Least-Developed Countries.° The Draft Annotated Outline was merely indicative at
this stage, and would benefit from the views of the delegations. He requested that the Secretariat finalize
the Manual before the Committee's next meeting, planned for May. The Secretariat was also reviewing
its technical cooperation programmes. This review took into account the various sources of funding
presently available, including those financed by the WTO regular budget, the WTO Trust Fund for
LDCs, and other ear-marked funds provided by certain Members. In conformity with the provision
of Paragraph 4(a) of the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation,’ the Secretariat was in the process of
preparing a comprehensive three-year plan, and the corresponding annual programme for 1997. In
addition, the Secretariat was also preparing a computer-based interactive technical assistance and training
package, to be used to introduce the WTO rules, rights and obligations in the same manner as through
a general seminar. Its main support was a CD-ROM, but it would also be produced in a set of diskettes,
taking into account hardware available in the beneficiary countries. Dissemination of the package would
also, at a later stage, take place through the Trade and Development Web Site to be established under
the WTO-World Bank Information Technologies for Development Project, in collaboration with other
international institutions such as UNCTAD and the ITC. Moreover, support would be provided to
users through the Web with Forums for questions and answers to be set up in the Trade and Development
Web Site.

8. && The Chairman continued by saying that he wanted to share with delegations that he was exploring
possibilities with senior management in the WTO to scale-up the technical cooperation activities of
the WTO, in response to a general desire expressed by delegations. He was not in a position today
to give more details, but hoped to be able to do so in the very near future, at which time the Committee
would revert to this matter.

9. && The representative of Switzerland presented proposals concerning the implementation modalities
of WTO technical cooperation. Hereferred to the Secretariat’ s non-paper on implementation modalities,
dated 3 February 1997. He cited Section 2, Paragraph A, and welcomed the idea that an official or
an office be designated as the central point for interaction with the WTO, and suggested that it also
serve the same purpose for all trade-related technical cooperation activities. Concerning Section 2,
Paragraph B, he suggested that the selection of participants should also be done according to objective
criteria to be defined by the Technical Cooperation and Training Division (the TCTD henceforth) of
the Secretariat, and should include qualifications, experience, activities in the WTO relevant field,
etc. Concerning Section 3, Paragraph C, he referred to the statement that the TCTD "...shall, within
the areas of competence and expertise of the WTO, develop, execute and participate in inter-agency
programmes” and asked wether the verbs “develop” and “execute” meant that it would become
responsible for the elaboration and administration of inter-agency programmes. If so, he wondered
if the Secretariat had the necessary experience and human resources to carry out such functions.
Concerning Section 4, he recalled that the WTO Council had decided that extra-budgetary contributions
for technical cooperation should be transferred into a Trust Fund, while such activities should follow
the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation, and that the budgetary proposal should contain an estimate
of work hours allocated by each WTO division. Since the Three-Year Plan would be the principal
instrument to manage technical cooperation, he suggested that it be carried out in two stages. First,
the TCTD should submit a draft Three-Year Plan no later than 1 September in the year preceding the
projects proposed to ensure that they be consistent with the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation.
They should contain descriptions and estimated costs, in addition to proposed funding for projects.
The Budget Committee would then decide on the share of the regular WTO budget to be allocated,
taking into account voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund. The Trust Fund should be composed
of two windows, with one ear-marked for particular projects and one non-ear-marked. The non-ear-
marked window could be used to finance any project from the Three-Year Plan. Contributions to the
Trust Fund should be accepted only for projects which appeared on the Draft Three-Year Plan. In
the second stage, the TCTD would propose a revised Three-Year Plan which would indicate the modes
of delivery of every program, including the implications in terms of resources and the funding
arrangements. The CTD would then adopt the finalized Three-Year Plan, if possible before the end
of each year. Finally, he noted that his delegation would submit its proposals in writing, incorporating
any suggestions from delegations.

10.&& The representative of Morocco stressed the importance of the proposed Manual and hoped
it would be as practical and brief as possible, with updates as necessary. He was pleased that a Three-
Year Plan had been considered, as it would contribute to the efficiency of technical cooperation activities.
He suggested that more information be provided about the Integrated Program for Africa between the
WTO, the ITC and UNCTAD, since it had offered a good example of cooperation. He urged that
evaluations should result in effective review and be done at an integrated-program level.

11. &&The representative of Canada emphasised the importance which his delegations attached to
the Manual and hoped that it would be a constant reference tool which would be updated if and when
necessary. He suggested that, in the context of this exercise, WTO might want to consult other
institutions which provided technical cooperation, either on a multilateral or bilateral basis, to identify
any overlaps or gaps. The Manual would also be a useful input for the High-Level Meeting on Least-
developed countries.

12.&& The representative of Cuba stressed that implementation modalities in general should be flexible
mechanisms to respond to the needs of recipients on an equitable basis, and in compliance with the
Guidelines for Technical Cooperation. He hoped that developing countries in all regions would benefit
and that universality be ensured. He welcomed the suggestions of the representative of Switzerland
regarding a focal point to enhance coordination of trade programs among all institutions. He hoped
that the Three-Year Plan would be a simple procedure and would not emulate some of the mid-term
reviews in the UN system, which sometimes ran the risk of distracting from the technical assistance
efforts themselves.

13.&& The representative of Egypt welcomed the non-paper on implementation modalities, and stressed
that the modalities not deviate from the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation. She was looking forward
to receiving the written proposal by the representative of Switzerland, and asked how the date of
1 September mentioned in relation to the Draft Three-Year Plan would be reconciled with the date
of 31 October set out in the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation. She said that the proposed focal
point might be difficult to establish, due to the diversity of technical cooperation within a country,
ranging from TBT to agricultural programs, and other matters. She asked the Secretariat how it would
handle requests for technical cooperation from Members; wether preferences would be given on a regional
basis, in order of submission, or if some other methodology would be used. She supported the
preparation of the Manual.

14.&& The representative of Japan referred to Paragraph 4(d) of the non-paper on Implementation
Modalities, and asked whether technical cooperation provided by the WTO would be based exclusively
on the requests of Members as stated. He wondered whether provisions of technical cooperation by
donor countries would be excluded as a result. The representative of the Secretariat responded that
the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation stated that the Secretariat would respond to requests since
it operated on a demand-driven basis. However, he acknowledged that it would be necessary to take
into account that certain donor funds had conditions or priorities.

15.&& The representative of India noted the significance of the provisions in Paragraph 2(b) of the
non-paper on Implementation Modalities, regarding the objective criteria for the selection of participants,
which was also highlighted by the representative of Switzerland. He was of the view that the Manual
was the most important project of the Committee at this moment and emphasised that it should be based
on the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation. He referred to Paragraph 3 of the Draft Outline for the
Manual regarding the determination of beneficiaries, and said that resource-constraints should be taken
into account. Concerning Paragraph 4, he asked what was meant by “geographical balance”.
Concerning Paragraph 5, he suggested that training activities should also include national institutions
in the recipient countries, in the light of the high costs of training in Switzerland.

16. && The representative of Zimbabwe urged that the views of recipient countries be considered in
determining technical cooperation and emphasized the importance of adhering to the Guidelines for
Technical Cooperation. These activities should allow for flexibility, simplicity, and adaptability vis-a-vis
the beneficiaries. He hoped that the Manual would be produced as soon as possible, and would be
reviewed and updated as necessary. He looked forward to receiving the written submission by
Switzerland, and mentioned that his delegation would have additional ideas regarding implementation
modalities at a later stage.

17. && The representative of Bangladesh referred to Paragraph 2(a) of the non-paper on Implementation
Modalities and noted that most recipient countries had organizations responsible for external resources,
so there should be little difficulty in locating a central focal point. Concerning Paragraph 5, he urged
that beneficiaries be involved to the fullest extent possible, so that technical cooperation programs would
be framed in accordance to their needs. Although bilateral donors had expertise in certain areas, balanced
negotiations would provide a better framework for the implementation of the projects.

18. && The representative of Pakistan said his delegation would forward comments regarding the non-
paper on Implementation Modalities in writing. He appreciated the comments provided by the
representative of Switzerland, and supported its proposal regarding a focal point for all institutions.
Although the idea could be pursued in the long term, he was of view that it would be difficult, as various
Ministries dealt with different aspects related to trade. He supported the element on training of trainers
as noted in paragraph (v) of the Annex of the non-paper on Implementation Modalities, and asked
wether the Secretariat had any prior experience in this regard. He was of view that the discussion
regarding geographical distribution should be based on the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation and
not impact the priorities already set.

19.&& The representative of Japan wanted to clarify a possible misinterpretation of his prior question
regarding the basis of determining need, and emphasized that technical cooperation should be demand-
driven. He noted that the entire Japanese Cooperation Program was based on this principle.

20.&& The representative of El Salvador welcomed the continuing relationship with the TCTD. She
recalled that since last year, her delegation had expressed its support for practical training programs
for officials. She requested further consideration of this matter by the Secretariat and added that her
delegation would be willing to cooperate. She would provide comments later on the substance of the
Manual. She hoped that geographic balance would be maintained.

21. && The representative of Australia said that the Manual had the potential of being most useful
and asked for clarification regarding Paragraph 3 of the Draft Annotated Outline, concerning the countries
engaged in the process of accession to the WTO. She noted that assistance to these countries was funded
separately from the budget for technical cooperation. Although she did not want to deny support to
acceding governments from the WTO, she suggested that such support be considered separately from
other technical cooperation activities as assistance to acceding governments was structurally different.
She suggested that the language be rephrased accordingly.

22. && The representative of Haiti referred to Paragraph 3 of the Draft Annotated Outline of the Manual
and supported the inclusion of the private sector as a beneficiary of technical assistance. He asked
the Secretariat to clarify how this would be carried about since it traditionally dealt only with
governments. In doing so, room for manoeuvre should be provided in order to avert possible obstacles.

23. && The representative of Madagascar referred to Paragraph 1 (vii) of the non-paper on
Implementation Modalities, and requested clarification. He urged avoiding discrimination against
countries that were less well-equipped. He suggested that data be provided via the Internet, which
could reduce headquarters resources, or travel of experts. He recalled that the Director-General had
organized a meeting with the World Bank recently about related issues and wondered about the proposed
solutions.

24. && The representative of Norway said that his delegation would provide comments at a later stage.

25. && The representative of Sri Lanka hoped that the Three-Year Plan would be flexible, timely and
pertinent to the needs of LDCs. He emphasized the need for greater availability of WTO consultants,
particularly to assist with procedures regarding anti-dumping and countervailing duties. He said that
special emphasis should be placed on the Manual.

26. && The representative of Cote-d-Ivoire said that donors should not be refused to give technical
assistance. She asked for clarification on Point 2(c) on the non-paper on Implementation Modalities,
and wondered who the local trainers would be selected. It could raise issues of availability. The
Chairman replied that the recipient government would ultimately be responsible for selecting local
trainers.

27. && The representative of Zimbabwe hoped that the Manual would be produced by May, and
supported the ideas presented thus far in the Draft Annotated Outline.

28. && The Chairman urged delegations to submit their comments in writing to enable the Secretariat
to take them into account in revising the non-paper on Implementation Modalities.

29. && The Committee took note of the statements made.

(iv) Agenda item D: High-Level Meeting on Least-Developed Countries

- Progress Report by the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee
on Least-Developed Countries

30.&& The Chairman recalled that preparations for the High-Level Meeting would be a priority for
delegations for the first half of this year, and be dealt with primarily by the Sub-Committee on Least-
Developed Countries. He invited the Chair of the Sub-Committee to take the floor to give delegations
a progress-report on the state of preparations.

31. && The Chair of the Sub-Committee said that the Secretariat had booked the large UN General
Assembly conference room at the Palais des Nations for 26-27 June. She recalled that, at its recent
meeting on 28 February, the Sub-Committee had agreed that the views of the least-developed countries
should be one of the parameters on which the Meeting should be built. Accordingly, the Secretariat
had begun a process of informal consultations with representatives of least-developed countries.
Following letters that were sent to the IMF, World Bank and UNDP, inviting these organizations
to co-organize the High-Level Meeting with the WTO, ITC and UNCTAD, the Secretariat held its
first inter-agency meeting on 20 Marchin WTO. The Secretariat had reported to her that this meeting
had gone well; that the UNDP, World Bank and IMF were fully seized of the importance of the High-
Level Meeting and were actively engaged in helping in whatever way they could to prepare for it,
and that further regular meetings of an inter-agency nature would take place. As Ambassador Baichoo
had already mentioned at the informal meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development on
Wednesday, he, Mr. Richard Eglin from the Secretariat and herself would be visiting the World Bank
and the IMF in Washington from 2-4 April, with a view to jump-starting the preparatory process.
The Secretariat aimed to be in a position to circulate a draft Agenda for the High-Level Meeting by
the end of April, based on the Joint Informal Note by the ITC, UNCTAD and WTO Secretariats, dated
13 February. A preliminary budget estimate was currently being prepared by the Secretariat. A Trust
Fund had been set up in the WTO Secretariat. She urged any delegation who would be willing and
in a position to make a financial contribute to the HLM, to do so by means of this Trust Fund. Although
this Fund would be managed by the WTO Secretariat, the HLM would not be financed out of the WTO
budget, but rather by individual governments, irrespective of their Membership of WTO or the United
Nations.

32. The Chair of the Sub-Committee continued by saying that the Secretariat was collaborating
closely with the other core intergovernmental agencies, and particularly with ITC and the World Bank's
IFC, to enlist the active support of the private sector for the Meeting. The Secretariat was in the process
of organising a separate development-NGO seminar a few weeks before the Meeting, to support the
Meeting and to enlist the participation of NGOs where possible; some of them were very active in
least-developed countries. It would be good to have them on board as allies.

33. && The representative of Bangladesh noted deep appreciation for the Chair's efforts, especially
towards associating the LDCs in the preparatory process. The High-Level Meeting should be objective-
oriented, and would require representation from developed countries as well. He hoped that the results
would be tangible, measurable, and achievable. He had taken every opportunity to publicize the meeting,
and, in this context, cited his appeal at the recent Human Rights Forum.

34. && The representative of the United States appreciated the Chair's efforts and said that his delegation
would continue to contribute to the meeting's objectives. He was of view that the most important
outcome of the High-Level Meeting should lead to a better awareness of technical cooperation activities
extended by the parties to the Meeting. Thus far, an information gap existed in terms of activities
offered by the World Bank and the IMF, especially regarding capacity building in LDCs. Since the
proposed date for the Meeting at the end of June was only about 90 days away, his delegation was
of view that this date was premature, raising concerns that the Meeting would be held, but would
lack tangible achievements. His delegation was of the view that the Meeting should not be held at
the end of June, but rather at a later stage. He requested the Secretariat to undertake logistical
arrangements to consider alternative dates early in the Fall of this year. A later date would allow for
greater coordination among co-organizers, and for consultations with the private sector. In regard to
participation, he supported the inclusion of all least developed countries, regardless of WTO membership,
all WTO Members as well as those governments who were in the process of acceding to WTO.

35.&& The representative of Nepal, as observer, was pleased that input, in terms of priorities of the
agenda, was sought from the LDCs themselves, and noted progress in consultations with Members
in Geneva. He hoped that the draft agenda would be circulated as soon as possible to allow for
preparation time, and that this Meeting would be different from other meetings which had failed to
produce results. He urged that the Meeting take place as early as possible to maintain the momentum,
and was encouraged that it would seek the participation of the private sector, and that NGOs would
be involved prior to the High-Level Meeting.

36. && The representative of Canada recalled that his delegation had initially proposed the idea of
a High-Level Meeting. It's main purpose was to better integrate, as well as to enhance the efficiency
of, trade-related technical assistance, with a view to ensuring avoidance of gaps or overlaps. He
recalled that the discussions within this Committee in the Fall of last year, the contents of its report
to the General Council, and the Ministerial Declaration done in Singapore had all emphasized the
importance of an integrated approach in the trade-related technical assistance activities of the various
Organizations, with special emphasis to increasing efficiency in the provision of technical assistance
for human and institutional capacity building. Notwithstanding, his delegation could also support other
elements, insofar as they were set out in the WTO Plan of Action for Least-developed Countries,
including further market-access liberalization as long as that was understood to be on an autonomous
basis. Delegates should be careful not to go beyond the parameters of what had already been agreed
in the Plan of Action. His assessment of the present state of preparations for the High Level Meeting
was less optimistic than that of the Chair. Important substantive elements of the meeting's agenda
had yet to be agreed by Members; discussions with some of the institutions had indicated that a heavy
participation and co-organizer status had not always shown the required enthusiasm. He cited a recent
letter sent by the WTO to the World Bank and IMF, and expressed some doubt as to whether all
delegations would support the ideas contained in this letter. In addition, he believed that discussion
with these organizations thus far had not been as enthusiastic as anticipated. He was concerned about
the lack of engagement by Members in the preparatory process, as manifested by a lack of input for
example through non-papers. The recent meeting of the Development Assistance Committee of the
OECD had also made him less optimistic, as this meeting, (held primarily to discuss ways the DAC
could contribute to a successful High Level Meeting), had been only sparsely attended by officials
with a trade policy background. Greater national coherence between trade and development policies
among DAC members had consequently not been advanced as much as had been hoped. For these
reasons, he was of the view that holding the High-Level Meeting by the end of June would be risky
and difficult. There was no question but that the main interest which had to be pursued was a successful
conference which achieved some concrete results; the date was from this perspective of second order
of importance.

37. && The representative of the European Communities said that in an organizational sense, the target
date of 26-27 June for the High-Level Meeting could be achieved. The rest would be a matter of political
will. His delegation supported the proposed date, and encouraged other delegations to do so.

38. && The representative of Norway thanked the Chair for her efforts, and said that it was his
delegation’ s view that it was possible to hold the Meeting by the end of June. Preparations were already
under way, and he interpreted the Singapore Ministerial Declaration to imply that the proposed time,
"as soon as possible”, was part of this mandate. In order to keep this deadline, it was important
to have a focused agenda which would lay the foundation for tangible results. He was of view that
market access was extremely important, and urged that it should receive as much attention as trade-
related technical cooperation.

39. && The representative of Switzerland said that the High-Level Meeting should be prepared in a
careful manner in order to achieve operational and specific results. The date should be set in light
of the preparations made by Members. While he had no objection to a meeting in June, he was aware
that essential conditions were not yet met, and should be reached quickly if the target date was to be
kept.

40.&&  The representative of Japan said that his delegation attached fundamental importance to a
successful High-Level Meeting and stressed that such an objective required a focused agenda. He
supported the statement by the representative of Canada who emphasized that the core element of the
agenda should be capacity building. As regards timing, he hoped that the High-Level Meeting would
be well-prepared. He was not yet in a position to say whether the end of June was an acceptable date.
His delegation was, however, not wedded to the end of June.

41. && The representative of Korea said that, even though he had not received official instructions
from the home government, he supported the High-Level Meeting and hoped that it would be successful
and productive in terms of principles and values. More clearly defined objectives for the Meeting
were needed. Regarding the matter of the date, he was of the view that the date should be set as a
function of the time factor needed to ensure a successful and meaningful outcome of the Meeting.

42. && The representative of Madagascar noted that this was the third meeting in which the High-Level
Meeting was discussed. He supported the June date and stressed that the meeting was a first phase
in an ongoing process. He did not understand the anxiety among certain delegations as regards timing,
as the problems were formidable and needed priority attention. He hoped that the preparatory process
would be carried out in a more expeditious manner, and said the current pace was too slow. The High-
Level Meeting should designate concrete objectives according to initiatives which have been expressed
by the LDCs themselves. In this light he suggested that a memorandum be drafted setting out the needs
of the least-developed countries, based on ideas clearly expressed by the least-developed countries
themselves.

43.&& The representative of Haiti acknowledged the concern by some delegations over timing, but
was of the view that the impetus was present. He urged that preparations for the High-Level Meeting
be sped up in a calculated way with a view to keeping with the June deadline. Later, if insurmountable
difficulties would arise, the timing could be reevaluated. To realize this objective, he urged that
delegations be prepared to hold additional meetings if and when necessary.

44. && The Chair of the Sub-Committee acknowledged that difficulties existed in the preparatory process,
and agreed that much work had still to be done. She said that this was exactly why she would need
support and appealed to the delegations of the United States and Canada, among others, for their
confidence, and support for her upcoming visit to Washington. She was convinced that the High-Level
Meeting would take place as scheduled. She intended, soon after her return from Washington, to
organize an informal meeting of the Sub-Committee to assess the situation®. The participation of
UNCTAD was set. As regards the participation from governments at the Meeting, she said that it
would be difficult to exclude members of other institutions, just because they were not a Member of
WTO, and proposed that they would all be invited. Regarding the agenda, she said that the parameters
were clear and were based on the WTO Plan of Action for Least-developed Countries. Further discussion
on this point would delay the meeting further. She would be available for informal consultations.
Given the fact that World Bank, IMF and UNDP were being as invited as co-organizers, it was desirable
to offer a sort of co-ownership of the Meeting to these Organizations.

45.&& The representative of the United States stressed that his prior comments were not directed towards
the current pace of preparations. He supported the Chair's efforts, and said that the preparations for
the High-Level Meeting would not have come this far without her initiatives. However, the preparatory
process was complicated and would take on greater risk with the current target date. A Meeting as
early as planned would be a gamble which might affect the achievement of a tangible outcome. He
would be open to revisiting the issue after her visit to the Bank and the Fund in Washington.

46.&& The representative of Norway was of view that too much time had been already been spent
in the preparatory process for the High-Level Meeting. He believed that delaying the meeting until
the Fall would result in a loss of focus, especially after the summer holidays. He urged that it be held
as planned.

47. &&The representative of Canada replied that the Committee on Trade and Development needed
first to reach a consensus on the central focus of the High-Level Meeting before deciding upon a date,
and noted that there still existed differences of view between his delegation and that of Norway as to
what should constitute the central focus of the Meeting. Until these substantive differences had been
resolved and the broad lines of the agenda for the Meeting agreed, discussions over a date for the
Meeting would not go far.

48. && The Committee took note of the statements made.

(v) Agenda Item E: Other Business 

8 This informal meeting of the Sub-Committee has been scheduled for 8 April 1997

49. && The representative of Switzerland introduced his country's revised schedule for the General
System of Preferences (GSP), which had been notified to the WTO. The list would be distributed
soon’,

50. && The representative of Canada requested that his delegation's detailed comments regarding the
preparation process of the High-Level Meeting, which he had transmitted to the Secretariat at the last
meeting of the Committee in February, be incorporated in the Minutes of that meeting’®.

51. && The representative of Bangladesh expressed his delegation's appreciation of the new GSP scheme
of Switzerland.

52.&& The Chairman recalled that the Committee had received requests from certain intergovernmental
organizations for observer status. The list of these Organizations was included in document
WT/COMTD/W/22. His informal consultations had indicated that delegations would prefer to wait
until the consultations, being carried out by the Chairman of the General Council on this matter, had
been concluded before taking up the issue in the Committee. He therefore intended to set this matter
aside for the time being in the Committee.

53.&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation had not yet reached
a definitive view on the issue of observer status, and that it would hold further consultations. He hoped
that the Chairman would keep in contact with the Chairman of the General Council on this matter.
He recognized the specificity of the nature of this Committee and put Members on notice that his
delegation might, at an appropriate time, request consideration of this item in this Committee.

54.&& The Committee took note of the statements made.

 

° Notification of changes to Switzerland's GSP have subsequently been circulated in document
WT/COMTD/N/7

10 Subsequently circulated in document WT/COMTD/M/14/Rev. 1
