RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/7"

19 August 1996

ORGANIZATION

(96-3203)



Committee on Trade and Development
Seventh (Special) Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 18 JUNE 1996

Chairman: Mr. Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)

A. Adoption of the Agenda

1.&&  The Chairman welcomed the Secretary-General of United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD), Mr. Rubens Ricupero, the Executive Director of the International Trade
Centre (ITC), Mr. Denis Bélisle, the Director-General of the World Trade Organization (WTO),
Mr. Renato Ruggiero and the Chairman of both the WTO's General Council and UNCTAD's Trade
and Development Board, Ambassador William Rossier and said that he was confident that they shared
his views on the need for increased coordination and cooperation between institutions having a mandate
in trade and development. He and the Members of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD)
looked forward to hearing their views on this subject and other matters related to trade and development.

2. && The Chairman informed Members that, pursuant to a request made by some Members at the
Sixth Session, the Secretariat had made available in the room a paper which detailed the respective
functions of the WTO, UNCTAD and ITC as regards the provision of technical cooperation. He noted
that this paper was one of the reference documents of UNCTAD IX.

3. && The Chairman proposed that, since the question of observer status for intergovernmental
organizations had not yet been resolved in the General Council, the CTD follow its ad hoc procedures
and invite to its Eighth Session the same organizations which were invited to that day's meeting. The
Committee so agreed.

4.&&  The Committee adopted the agenda as contained in document WTO/AIR/354. The Chairman
indicated that he would be discussing the organization of the next meeting under agenda item
"Other Business”.

B. && Trade and Development Activities of Intergovernmental Organizations pursuant
to UNCTAD IX

5.&&  The Chairman recalled that the terms of reference of the CTD mandated it to "serve as a focal
point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO, and its relationship
to development-related activities in other multilateral agencies”. He noted in this context that, at
UNCTAD IX, governments and institutions had shown their commitment to development, which
underscored the perception that trade was an engine of growth and development and that, hence, efforts
to increase the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system remained a top
priority.

6. && The Secretary-General of UNCTAD said that his long-time experience with development-related
activities in multilateral institutions included his Chairmanship of the CTD of the GATT. His
commitment to development had made him acutely aware of the need for cooperation among therelevant
institutions with a view to increasing synergies and to furthering the interests of developing countries
in a more effective way. That day's meeting was very unique from that perspective, as it had brought
together the heads of some of the principal institutions with a mandate in trade and development.
Development had been at the centre of the agenda of the international community for many years;
however, with the increasingly important role played by developing countries, it had moved to a higher
plane. The increase in the participation of developing countries in the global economy had been
demonstrated frequently in recent years, including during the Uruguay Round negotiations. Developing
countries were at the time the locomotives of the world economy and could be credited for having
played their part in the recovery of industrial countries; the size of the imports of the ten leading Asian
developing economies was comparable to that of the United States, or of the European Communities.
The surge in imports in many developing countries and the liberalization of their trade regimes had
had several important ramifications. Of fundamental importance was the acknowledgement that
industrialized countries could not dictate global monetary and trade policies by themselves, nor manage
the global economy effectively without engaging developing countries in a sustained dialogue. These
new developments had implications for the work of organizations such as WTO, ITC and UNCTAD.
The existence of the CTD stemmed from the recognition that trade had the power to set the process
of development in motion. Gone were the days when "export pessimism" held sway among developing
countries; in contemporary times, the role of trade in development had been accepted by almost every
country. Integrating developing countries into the multilateral trading system was no longer optional
either for developing countries or for the industrialized countries. The fortunes of all countries were
intertwined, and the expected benefits from integration easily outweighed the perceived costs.
A recent World Bank report had stressed the need for significant policy adjustments in
industrialized countries aimed at curbing fiscal deficits and bringing inflation under control. It was
only through the adoption of structural reforms that unemployment could be reduced in industrial
countries. Further progress was needed in global trade liberalization. There was a risk that the
multilateral trading framework, based on a balance of rights and obligations, would be challenged by
protectionist pressures as resources moved out of labour-intensive industries in developed countries.
Another serious challenge was posed by the large divergence in performance among developing countries.
The issue of the marginalization of weaker countries from the mainstream of economic activity needed
to be urgently addressed. Triggered by structural problems, these countries were unable to compete
in a liberal trading environment, or influence the current framework for the conduct of trading relations.
These challenges required developing countries to be properly equipped to enable them to absorb the
shocks that would flow from reduced preferential margins. Developed countries should honour their
Uruguay Round commitments with respect to the use of trade-restrictive remedies such as safeguards,
anti-dumping and countervailing measures. The provisions of the Ministerial Decisions on Measures
in Favour of Least-Developed Countries, and on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects
of the Reform Programme on Least-Developed and Net-Food Importing Countries should be faithfully
implemented.
The pace of trade-liberalization in developing countries had been impressive over the last decade.
The reform policies of 70 developing countries during this period was matched by only three countries
of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). However, tariff peaks
and tariff escalation still impeded exports from developing countries. While domestic corrective measures
in developing countries were imperative, these should be accompanied by the adoption of internationally
supportive measures. A favourable external environment was sine qua non for the success of domestic
policies. The importance to the global economy of outward looking trade policies of developing countries
could not be overstated. Such outward looking policies had increased intra-trade among developing
countries and had provided the necessary boost to the global economy. Between 1985 and 1990, intra-
trade among developing countries increased by 12 per cent; and trade with OECD countries increased
by 10 per cent during the same period. Developing countries were at the time active players; their
increased significance needed to be reflected in their share in the decision-making process.
The competence of UNCTAD to look at the relevant issues from a development perspective
in a globalizing and liberalizing world economy was confirmed at the recent UNCTAD IX, held in
Midrand, South Africa. The work programme which was adopted at the meeting projected a supportive
role for UNCTAD, which was expected to use its expertise to assist developing countries in increasing
their participation in the international trading system; in strengthening their capacity in the services
sector; in examining the relevance of competition legislation for economic development; in reviewing
the link between trade and environment from a development perspective; and in reviewing the links
between foreign direct investment, trade, technology and economic development. UNCTAD 's mandate
was extended to seek to enhance the capacity of countries to improve their investment climate.

10.&&  Mr. Ricupero drew particular attention to the future work programme of UNCTAD in the area
of investment. According to the mandate given to it, UNCTAD should identify and analyze the
development implications of issues connected with a multilateral framework on investment. He indicated
that UNCTAD was willing to respond to the request of developing countries that a pilot seminar be
organized with a view to encouraging the private sector to increase investment flows to countries which
were receiving trifling amounts.
He noted that existing trade concepts and trade instruments could loose some of their validity
due to globalization. In drawing a parallel to UNCTAD IX, he said that the forthcoming Singapore
Ministerial Conference should rethink the tasks ahead, choose priorities and select tools for cooperation.
Ministers needed to address the implications for development policies of the extension of multilateral
trade disciplines to non-trade areas.
The UNCTAD IX Conference had reaffirmed UNCTAD's position as the focal point in the
United Nations’ system for the integrated treatment of different elements of the world economy from
adevelopment perspective. As an essential complement to its policy-oriented analytical work, UNCTAD
would strengthen its technical cooperation programme and give priority to assisting developing countries
in their efforts to develop and strengthen their institutional and human capacities. Experience had shown
that an exclusive reliance on improving market access conditions was not enough; it was common
knowledge that some beneficiary countries were unable to make full use of their Generalized System
of Preferences benefits. Cooperation and coordination with WTO and ITC was an important element
of UNCTAD's work, and was manifested in the joint programmes established for the benefit of Africa.
 He urged the Director-General of the WTO to bear in mind some of the concerns expressed
at UNCTAD IX as well as developing countries’ concerns with respect to the Singapore agenda, at
the forthcoming G-7 meeting in Lyon.

14.&&  The Executive-Director of the ITC said that ITC's sole field of activities consisted of technical
cooperation. After thirty-one years of work in trade promotion and export development, and on the
basis of its own substantial technical expertise and experience, six distinct core services had been
identified which responded to the priority needs of recipient countries. The guiding principle was to
concentrate on those areas where ITC's expertise could have a visible cost-effective impact on trade
development efforts. The six distinct core services rendered to recipient countries were as follows:
(i) product and market development: identification of new marketing opportunities in collaboration
with local exporters and assisting them to adapt their products to the market requirements;
(ii) development of trade support services: aware that problems related to packaging or to quality
assurance, legal aspects of international trade, export financing and export insurance needed specialized
skills which were unavailable locally, the ITC had designated focal points in the recipient countries
and assisted them in developing such capacities; (iii) ensuring reliable business information: ITC had
identified appropriate sources of information and demonstrated how they could be used in the recipient
countries; where information was not readily available, ITC's market news service, used in conjunction
with UNCTAD's Trade Points, could provide such information to exporters and other interested parties;
(iv) human resource development: a separate unit in ITC taught staff how best to train people and assist
them in developing new training tools. The aim of this service was to ensure efficient foreign trade
operations based on relevant knowledge and adequate skills; (v) international purchasing and supply
management: ITC had adapted specialised techniques to ensure cost-effective procurements. This service
was in high demand in the recipient countries; and (vi) analysis of the needs and design of programmes
which would have maximum impact on the trade performance of recipient countries: some of the
programmes attempted to link trade policy and trade promotion activities. The specialized expertize
of the ITC in this area was evident as its services were being increasingly demanded by a wide range
of firms and institutions. The ITC was currently helping the World Bank to draw up a programme
which would attempt to solve some of the problems facing African countries.
 The prime focus for ITC was the business community; over the years it had developed close
contacts with institutions such as the Export Promotion Boards, the Chambers of Commerce, Exporters
Associations, Manufacturers Association and exporters who wished to use specialized skills to improve
their services. The ITC used its contacts with the business community to ensure that tools which were
being developed were relevant to export activity, limiting itself to practical action-oriented assistance.
He believed that in this way, ITC most usefully complemented the work done by the WTO and
UNCTAD.

16. &&  The Director-General of the WTO thanked the Secretary-General of UNCTAD for his strong
and clear political message and shared his view that priority be placed on a strong collaboration between
UNCTAD, ITC and WTO. In this context he welcomed Mr. Bélisle's statement on the activities of
the ITC. He also agreed with the views expressed in respect of the growing importance of developing
countries, not only in terms of their participation in the WTO, but also in their contribution to the
world economy and to the growth of industrialized countries. Interdependence was growing and the
three institutions had a responsibility to sustain this interdependence and to strengthen the relationship
between the developing and developed world so as to ensure the continued dynamism of the world
economy. He was of the view that urgent action was needed to redress the problems of countries
marginalized in the process of globalization. Every effort was needed to incorporate these countries
into the mainstream of economic activity. The participation of the heads of the various institutions
in the meeting was proof of the growing importance of developing countries in the world economy.
It underlined a strong will to collaborate and the determination to fight the marginalization of the least-
developed countries.
 He noted that the WTO, contrary to UNCTAD and ITC, was a new organization. It was
evolving with the multilateral system and with globalization. Globalization had its own dynamism.
For instance, information technology was evolving, independent of any intervention by governments
or institutions; the same was true for investment flows. They would continue to develop at
unprecedented rates, whether or not there were multilateral agreements covering these new developments.
However, in the absence of multilateral disciplines, developments in these sectors would depend only
on the interplay of forces where market power would be the deciding factor. On the other hand, rules
and disciplines, negotiated multilaterally in the WTO, would ensure that those developments would
occur inside a framework of rules and disciplines. Even in the absence of any agreement on investment,
investment would continue to develop. For example, according to UNCTAD's Annual Investment
Report, shares of developed countries in 1992 amounted to 65 per cent, in 1993, 62 per cent, in 1994,
58 per cent and in 1992, it went up to 66 per cent. Those figures for developing countries were, in 1992,
32 per cent, in 1993, 35 per cent, in 1994, 39 per cent and in 1995, it went down to 30 per cent.
An agreement on investment in the WTO would, however, provide an international guarantee, especially
important for the developing and the least-developed countries, which were certainly the least privileged
in terms of foreign investment. A multilateral agreement on investment was bound to encourage foreign
direct investment to least-developed countries.

The choice was between a rules-based world economy and one based on power.

18. && The Director-General saw his invitation to the G-7 meeting as an acknowledgement that the
WTO had a relevant message which should be heard. He would use that occasion to highlight the
dilemma of least-developed countries which, due to structural problems, were not yet able to benefit
from the process of globalization. The theme of WTO's participation would be the question of how
marginalization of the least-developed countries could be reduced, and what could possibly be done
to enhance their integration into the international trading system. He would base his intervention on
the two Marrakesh Decisions in favour of the least-developed countries and on net-food importing
countries and emphasise the need for Members to honour their commitments in favour of least-developed
countries in terms of increasing access to their markets and in terms of technical cooperation. A major
effort in the area of technical cooperation was needed, with a view to assisting developing countries
to establish and strengthen their institutional and human capacities.
The WTO had initiated a collaboration with the UNCTAD and ITC on technical cooperation;
it was in the process of developing relations with the Common Fund on Commodities with a view to
assisting developing countries in their efforts to diversify their export structures. Collaboration with
the World Bank could, he hoped, lead to the use of new technologies to improve and extend the reach
of technical cooperation. He was hopeful that through improved collaboration, a much greater impact
could be made with present resources.
He strongly encouraged inputs from the developing countries on ways to enhance the integration
of the least-developed countries into the multilateral trading system. He urged the CTD to come forward
with a non-paper on this issue, pursuant to the Decision on Measures in Favour of Least-Developed
Countries, with a view to its incorporation in the preparatory process for the Singapore Ministerial
Conference. The Committee's views were necessary in this process. He also encouraged developing
countries to come forward with inputs on any other issue for the preparation of the Singapore Ministerial.
He concluded by saying that work in the WTO in the next few years, which would often be of a technical
nature, would nonetheless be very relevant in shaping the mould of the next century; it called for
maintaining and enhancing a strong relationship between developed and developing nations.

21. &&  The Chairman of the General Council of the WTO said that it would be no easy task, after
this show of competence from the Secretary-General of UNCTAD, the Executive Director of the ITC
and the Director-General of the WTO, to put across what he considered to represent something of the
views of the Members in this discussion. As someone who held responsibilities within both the WTO
and UNCTAD and who had participated in the UNCTAD IX Conference in Midrand, he was well
placed to note the new and real complemenarity between UNCTAD and the WTO. This complementarity
was no longer theoretical, as had previously been the case - wishful thinking as it were - but rather
a tangible reality on which Members had to build. The ITC, which had done some remarkable work
in recent years, served as a model for this. He thought that a special tribute to the Executive Director
of the ITC and his team was in place for the Centre's achievements. He was aware how difficult the
task was, which made the achievements all the more praiseworthy.

22.&&  Ambassador Rossier concurred with the three previous speakers that the meeting was symbolic
from that point of view, although it was necessary to epitomize the symbol, something the Chairman
had achieved by convening that meeting.
Complementarity between the Organizations had at that time become a reality because at Midrand
an important measure had been taken: the open or latent areas of conflict between the two Organizations,
UNCTAD and WTO, adversely affecting their capacity for action and synergy to the detriment of the
Members, had been eliminated. The ground had currently been prepared to enable us to put into effect
the substantial synergies among the three Organizations.
From the point of view of the Members, these synergies could and should be put into effect
in at least four priority areas. First of all, a synergy had to be created among the three Organizations
in the area of international trade in goods and services and commodity issues. At Midrand, an essential
task for UNCTAD had been defined in terms of maximizing the positive impact of globalization and
liberalization with a view to sustainable development, by facilitating the effective integration of developing
countries into the global economy, especially the least developed countries. Globalization was a
recognized phenomenon and it had to be exploited to maximum effect for the benefit of developing
countries. A cooperation approach had therefore to be developed within the global economic and trade
system, rather than an approach that was marginal or outside the system. In this connection, UNCTAD
had been given an important role in support of developing countries, support that was clearly linked
to the results and implementation of the Uruguay Round. The second area in which synergy could
and had to be put into effect was technical cooperation. At Midrand, UNCTAD's technical cooperation
activities had been grouped together in order to give them the profile sought by Member States. It
was agreed that technical cooperation priorities would be dictated by the priorities in UNCTAD's work
programme so as to avoid the inconsistencies encountered in the past. The Trade and Development
Board was assigned the task of developing a three-year technical cooperation plan (an indicative three-year
revolving programme). The task had thus not been entrusted to the Secretariat but to the Board itself,
albeit with Secretariat assistance. Lastly, the Board was responsible for ongoing monitoring of these
technical cooperation activities. A "demand driven" rather than a "supply driven" approach to technical
cooperation had therefore been chosen, even though a certain balance had undoubtedly to be maintained.
This approach was not devoid of interest for WTO and he had understood that the Chairman had recently
taken some extremely worthwhile initiatives in this respect. The third area for synergy between the
two Organizations was investment. UNCTAD had been given very clear terms of reference, which
could no doubt help WTO in dealing with the subject because they included defining and analysing
the consequences for development of the possible formulation of a multilateral framework for investment.
This simple sentence, which was nonetheless of substantial importance, showed that this was one of
the main areas in the terms of reference assigned to UNCTAD by the Member States. There was a
potential for coordination and synergy which WTO had to turn to good account. Lastly, there was
the area of new and emerging issues. UNCTAD could and had to provide assistance in considering
these issues. There could be significant synergy in this area between WTO and UNCTAD, especially
in relation to analytical information.
 In his view, these four areas of cooperation were the most important. There were undoubtedly
others. The efforts made by the Secretariats with regard to coordination of technical cooperation activities
were commendable. The Director-General and the Secretary-General had already referred to this.
From the point of view of Members, however, one had undoubtedly to go further. Following Midrand,
looking ahead to the Singapore Conference and the implementation of the Uruguay Round, it was
important that cooperation among the three organizations should be strengthened by directly involving
Members in defining this cooperation. Members had to build on the efforts and measures taken by
the executive heads of the organizations. They had to feel closely involved, parties to the dialogue
among the three members of the family present at that meeting and in the cooperation efforts with other
international organizations, for example, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
This was essential with a view to ensuring that funding was maintained and even increased. He suggested
that the WTO had to try to develop the same type of mechanism as existed in UNCTAD and ITC with
a view to involving Members closely in dialogue and technical cooperation. He was of the view that
the CTD was the appropriate body for this, a sentiment which was probably shared by a large number
of WTO Members. It had not to be forgotten that the commitment of Members towards coordinated
technical assistance could in no way be compared with the situation a few years ago. The current
political environment was very different but also unfortunately the financial situation. This development
compels a total commitment to a task of the utmost importance for world trade and consequently for
peace as well.

26. && The representative of Singapore agreed with the Director-General of the WTO on the significance
of that meeting of the CTD. He complemented the vision of the Chairman to bring together the Heads
of the three Organizations. The main responsibility of the Committee was development, which was
also at the heart of the work programme of the organizations present at that meeting. From that
perspective, that day's meeting could be said to be an historic event. At the heart of the notion of
development was that of equity, which, in his view, had not been emphasized in the WTO so far.
In the spirit of globalization and liberalization, the element of equity had to be taken into account if
there were to be a balance of interests among members of the international community. Increased
cooperation between the WTO, UNCTAD, ITC, World Bank and the IMF would greatly benefit the
world economy, provided the concepts of development and equity were made integral parts of their
programmes. As host to the Ministerial Conference, his government expected a substantial contribution
from the organizations with a view to enabling Ministers to address issues relating to capacity-building
and development in the context of trade. Referring to the paper circulated by the ITC, he stated that
the characterization of the WTO as a platform for negotiations of multilateral trade rules and
commitments did not fully take into account the other functions of the organization. As an institution,
the WTO was also concerned with trade-related issues as was evidenced by this discussion in the
Committee on ways to respond to the changing global economic environment.

27. &&  The representative of the European Communities joined in thanking the Chairman's successful
efforts to give the Committee a higher political profile. His delegation agreed that priority be given
to the integration of developing countries in the multilateral trading system. Their active participation
in the process of globalization was necessary to overcome marginalization. The situation of least-
developed countries needed the attention of the international community, which should intensify its
efforts to assist them in achieving economic development. He agreed with the representative of Singapore
that the meeting was unique, and noted the will of the organizations present to work together to achieve
common goals. Members were faced with the challenge to bring back into the mainstream those who
were being side-lined by the process of globalization. While recognizing that less financial assistance
was available, he observed that the synergy of available financial assistance and liberal trade policies
could lead to economic development. Developing countries which had achieved an enviable level of
development should seek to increase access to their markets for the benefit of weaker developing
countries; and developed countries should seek to maintain healthy and social policies offering a political
and legal environment conducive to rapid investment and development.

28. && The representative of Canada said that the Chairman's dynamic and imaginative leadership
had brought new vigour to the Committee. Dwindling resources in the present global environment
had imposed its own logic of closer cooperation among organizations. The thoughtful interventions
of the heads of WTO, UNCTAD and ITC had displayed the will to overcome these constraints through
effective cooperation, which would reduce or eliminate any overlap in functions. Investment was an
area where extensive cooperation between the institutions could yield positive results if advantage were
taken of the respective fields of expertise of the organizations. The strong analytical skills of UNCTAD
could be paired with the experience of the WTO in negotiating rules. The contribution of all the relevant
institutions would ensure a balanced multilateral agreement.

29. && The representative of Bangladesh, in welcoming the collaboration between WTO, ITC and
UNCTAD, expressed the hope that the expectations of the least-developed countries, which were
marginalized in the process of globalization, would be fulfilled. Technical assistance alone would not
be enough; there was no dearth of ideas, only the lack of will. Noting that, according to certain reports,
the level of assistance from the biggest trading partners was declining, he called for action at the political
level. In that context, he looked to the Lyon G-7 summit and the Singapore Ministerial Conference
for a positive outcome.

30. && The representative of the United States noted the importance of that meeting and welcomed
the participation of the heads of the various organizations. He was certain that the leadership, pragmatism
and creativity which Mr. Ricupero had displayed as head of Brazil's negotiating team in the Uruguay
Round would be useful in his capacity as Secretary-General of UNCTAD. The United States was of
the view that there currently existed an unprecedented opportunity for cooperation among international
organizations with a mandate in trade and development. The inclusion in the multilateral system of
new areas provided both opportunities and challenges for developing countries, which should take the
steps necessary to participate in the global economic system. There was clearly a need for assistance
to be provided to countries which were unable to make use of the options available. His authorities
were expecting UNCTAD, after the meeting in Midrand, to implement reforms aimed at narrowing
its scope, at increasing transparency and complementarity and at improving governance. He noted
ITC's pragmatic approach of meeting selected needs of developing countries in areas of its institutional
strength. Focusing on realistic programmes of practical benefit would enable taking advantage of the
respective fields of expertise of each organization in the most useful way, for the benefit of developing
countries. The recent tri-partite arrangement on technical cooperation for Africa illustrated the
determination of the various organizations. Efforts should be intensified to develop programmes which
best suited the needs of developing countries. He requested that, at an appropriate time, information
be provided on the cooperation agreement between UNCTAD and the WTO.

31. && The representative of India thanked the Chairman for his initiative in convening that special
meeting. The CTD needed to consider three items in the statement made by the Secretary-General
of UNCTAD at a future date. The first was that liberalization efforts of developing countries had
surpassed those of developed countries. The second concerned the difficult external environment which
had contributed to the poor performance of many developing and least-developed countries. The third
related to the mandate given to UNCTAD for studying inter alia, issues relating to investment. He
could not accept the views of the Director-General of the WTO on the need to have a multilateral
agreement on investment. While fully accepting the principle of the superiority of a rule-based system
over a power-based one, he cautioned against legitimacy inadvertently being given by the WTO to
a power-based regime. He agreed with the representative of Singapore that the WTO should be bound
by principles of equity, else there would not be any justification for drawing a distinction between
a power-based system and a rules-based system. The paper circulated by the ITC presented some useful
ideas, but it was up to the CTD to determine its own agenda.

32. && The representative of Mexico stated that the meeting was an historic event which ushered the
CTD into a new and challenging phase. Thanking the Chairman for having brought together people
of knowledge and vision, he saw the gains that could be reaped from an extensive cooperation and
coordination between the organizations, especially if each concentrated on its area of expertise.
Recognizing the dynamics of a changing global environment, he said that the contractual approach
of the WTO, the integrated and interdisciplinary development work of UNCTAD, and the technical
cooperation work of the ITC, which focused primarily on enterprises, were all of fundamental importance
in the quest to integrate developing countries, particularly the least-developed ones, into the multilateral
trading system.


33. && The representative of Korea said that the informative and insighted interventions of the lead
speakers would be helpful in setting the future direction of the work in this Committee. His delegation
fully supported cooperation between WTO, UNCTAD and ITC, especially where they produced tangible
results such as the joint programme on technical cooperation for Africa. Pooling resources had many
spin-offs including the possibility of attracting additional funds from donors. His authorities were
committed to promoting cooperation among international organizations.

34.&&  The representative of Japan welcomed the present meeting as heralding cooperation and
coordination between UNCTAD and the WTO. He looked forward to a formal arrangement between
the two Organizations which would take into account the complementarity of their roles.

35. && The representative of Switzerland said that her delegation was conscious of the benefits that
could be gained from cooperation and coordination among the organizations with a mandate in the
field of trade and development. Her delegation had always stressed the point that cooperation would
result in the full utilization of existing capacity and avoidance of duplication. The partnership for growth
and development presaged at UNCTAD IX should be followed up, particularly in areas such as technical
cooperation and investment measures. The adequate involvement of Members was crucial, with a view
to ensuring that such cooperation among organizations was in accordance with their mandate. From
that perspective, the CTD was on the right path. She welcomed UNCTAD's initiative to analyze the
inter-relationship between development and foreign direct investment, trade in technology and related
financial issues, and said that such initiatives complemented and supported the work of the WTO.
To minimize inconsistencies and duplication, each organization should concentrate on matters within
its domain and expertise: the WTO could concentrate on managing and monitoring the legal framework,
dispute settlement, rule-making and trade negotiations, UNCTAD could analyze development-related
trends in trade, wider development issues, consensus building, dissemination of information, and provide
technical assistance in cooperation with WTO and ITC. While there was the potential for least-developed
countries to benefit from WTO agreements, coordinated assistance from the international community,
particularly the international financial institutions, was required so as to enable these countries to
implement the necessary domestic reforms needed to position them in the new international economic
environment and to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the Uruguay Round. The possibility
of granting further preferences to least-developed countries should be looked into.

36. &&  The representative of Peru said that the meeting was not only an historic event but also an
historic challenge. It should be ensured that developing countries benefitted fully from the cooperation
and coordination among the various relevant organizations. Political will was necessary if this goal
was to be achieved. His delegation looked forward to sharing in the benefits which could be gained
from the work of the WTO and UNCTAD in the area of investment.

37. && The representative of Senegal thanked the Chairman's effective guidance of the Committee
in its work and the genuine commitment shown by Messrs. Ruggiero, Bélisle, Ricupero and Rossier
to the fuller integration of developing countries in the multilateral trading system. She noted that the
perceptions about trade and development had changed greatly and in the right direction. Combining
the pragmatism of the WTO with the experience of UNCTAD and ITC had been the missing link.
Her authorities were committed to doing what was necessary at the domestic level so as to make best
use of technical assistance. Technical cooperation could not lead to sustained development, unless
the beneficiaries themselves were committed to overcoming poverty and underdevelopment. Thanking
the ITC and UNCTAD for their assistance, she said that the Dakar Trade Point was very active; a
delegation from her country would shortly be visiting South-East Asian countries to learn from the
experience of those countries who had succeeded in achieving phenomenal economic growths. Expressing
her appreciation for the assistance provided by the WTO, she said that work was in process to bring
domestic provisions in line with the provisions of the WTO Agreement. In concluding, she reaffirmed
Senegal's faith in the efforts of UNCTAD, WTO and ITC.

38.&&  The representative of Norway noted the uniqueness of that meeting and its focus on
complementarity between the WTO, UNCTAD and ITC. This complementarity required each
organization to respect the limits to its mandate. A limited scope did not imply limited importance;
rather it meant clear specialization which had to be consciously cultivated. He agreed with the
representative of Korea that attracting financing would be facilitated by the establishment of integrated
programmes. He shared the concern of the Secretary-General of UNCTAD in respect of the slow
pace of development in some developing countries. His delegation was of the view that this was an
important issue, perhaps the most pressing one. Supporting the strengthening of coordination in particular
with the IMF and World Bank, he underlined that initiatives from recipient countries to develop, for
instance, the legal framework to facilitate investment and international trade were indispensable. His
authorities were giving serious consideration to the two Marrakesh decisions in favour of least-developed
countries and on net-food importing countries.

39. && The representative of Egypt said that the concurrence of Ambassador Rossier's roles as Chairman
of the General Council of the WTO and Chairman of the Trade and Development Board of UNCTAD
was a good illustration of the benefits from synergy. The prime reason for coordination was to increase
the benefits to developing countries and to further their integration into the world economy. The cost
of duplication and overlap was borne by developing countries and should be avoided. Coordination
which respected distinct mandates would increase synergies. She said that, justas WTO had participated
at UNCTAD IX, UNCTAD should have a role at the Singapore Ministerial meeting. She cautioned
against an early discussion of WTO rules, since this would be premature. It would be necessary to
be realistic in respect of the ability of developing countries to cope with the new disciplines and rules
imposed by the WTO Agreement. She welcomed Ambassador Rossier's clear assertion that UNCTAD
had been mandated by governments to define and analyze the consequences for development of a
multilateral agreement on investment. She also agreed with his statement that developing countries
would benefit from increased cooperation between UNCTAD and the WTO on the new issues and
welcomed such cooperation. She agreed with the representatives of Mexico and Switzerland that the
competence of each organization should be clearly demarcated.

40. && The representative of Hong Kong complimented the Chairman's imaginative and creative handling
of the deliberations in the Committee. Results were likely to be achieved if the institutions cooperated
in the areas where their competencies overlapped. The guiding principle should be that each institution
should concentrate on matters falling within its sphere of responsibility. Globalization presented both
opportunities and challenges for developing countries. It was imperative that the international community
as represented in this Committee adopt measures which would ensure that every country benefitted
from the process of globalization. Developments taking place in the business community should not
be ignored. He agreed with the representative of Singapore that the WTO was not only a negotiating
body, but that it also had to respond to changing economic realities by initiating discussions such as
the one currently taking place with a view to formulating appropriate policy responses.

Al.&&  The representative of New Zealand thanked the Chairman for the active focus he had given
to the agenda of this Committee. Integrating developing countries into the multilateral trading system
and giving particular attention to the needs of the least-developed countries were major tasks of the
CTD. The challenges of globalization and liberalization required effective cooperation among all the
relevant organizations. Duplication of functions should be removed, as it was not in the interest of
developing countries. He hoped that the valuable analytical input which had come from UNCTAD
over the years would continue and be complemented by the rule-based work of the WTO. He agreed
with the representative of Singapore that the perspectives of the IMF, World Bank, UNCTAD and
ITC needed to be taken into account so as to give a more focused approach to technical assistance.
His delegation endorsed Ambassador Rossier's emphasis on the importance that recipient countries
themselves set priorities for technical cooperation, and that they contribute actively to the process of
discussion and decision-making.

42. && The representative of Djibouti endorsed the WTO Director-General's statement saying that,
as long as there was no multilateral agreement on investment which guaranteed private investments,
there could not be any long-term development.

43.&&  The representative of Mauritius, while agreeing on the significance of that meeting, said that
it was necessary to go into the details of technical assistance. Concerns needed to be addressed such
as a decrease in the financial resources devoted to programmes for training of middle-rank management
officials.

 
44.&&  The representative of Pakistan, while agreeing on the importance of that meeting, said that
he could not share the optimism expressed on the growth prospects for developing countries. Formidable
development challenges were before them. The extent to which developing countries could take
advantage of the opportunities offered by globalization was limited. Coordinated efforts by the WTO,
UNCTAD and ITC could go a long way in helping developing countries to increase their participation
in the multilateral trading system. He saw a role in this regard for the CTD.

45. && The representative of Australia thanked the initiative and dynamism of the Chairman in organizing
that meeting and looked forward to more of such meetings in the future. It was a pleasure to have
the heads of WTO, UNCTAD and ITC address this Committee. He welcomed the resolve for greater
cooperation in implementing the Midrand Declaration, and the commitment to avoid duplication of
work and obtain the most effective results from technical cooperation. He looked forward to developing
countries, especially the least-developed ones, increasing their participation in the global economy.

46. && The representative of Kenya said that this was an historic event which had given the opportunity
to Members to hear very comprehensive presentations on technical assistance. UNCTAD IX had
established a Commission to identify and discuss opportunities arising from Uruguay Round agreements,
and to assist developing countries in their efforts to increase their participation in the multilateral trading
system. Improved coordination and cooperation between the organizations was imperative. The needs
of developing countries which had been performing poorly should not be ignored. Putting emphasis
on failures in African countries without acknowledging positive developments did not reflect reality.
She asked that the organizations indicate the elements which constituted the favourable climate for
investment in countries which had undertaken major economic reforms. She welcomed the recent visit
to Kenya of the Director-General of the WTO. A business guide on the results of the Uruguay Round
and a seminar organized by the ITC in cooperation with the WTO constituted a practical example of
cooperation and coordination.

47. && The representative of Poland welcomed the joint trade promotion plans of the organizations.
His government was a strong advocate of outward-oriented policies: his country had benefitted from
the adoption of such measures. He welcomed Ambassador Rossier's positive assessment of the increasing
complementarity of tasks of the organizations, and stated that it would be helpful if their respective
competencies were clearly defined.

48. && The representative of Hungary said that the establishment of WTO was a positive development
against the background of the differences and complementarities of the role of each organization in
fields such as technical cooperation. Extensive cooperation and coordination among the organizations
was imperative. Investment was one area which would benefit from joint WTO/UNCTAD efforts.

49. && The representative of Sri Lanka said that the meeting carried historic dimensions for collaboration
in trade and development. He welcomed the commitment to collaborate and requested whether such
collaboration between organizations could benefit countries such as his. His country had liberalized
its trade regime, but had no domestic legislation on anti-dumping and countervailing measures.
Developing countries, including his, had recently been the target of many anti-dumping actions. The
Understanding on Dispute Settlement postulated assistance to developing countries in their efforts to
respond to such arbitrary commercial practices. Tangible technical assistance in the form of effective
legal advice was needed to defend their legitimate rights.

50. && The representative of the Czech Republic said that the results of the Uruguay Round, the
conclusions of UNCTAD IX and the definition of priority areas by the ITC presented a beach-head
for fulfilling the objective of integrating countries into the international trading system. The clear vision
evident in what he had heard that day augured well for establishing priorities. He endorsed the priorities
set by Mr. Bélisle on behalf of ITC.

51. && The representative of Brazil agreed that governments and organizations should organize their
work on the basis of cooperation and harmony, and welcomed the opportunity provided at this meeting
to hear the heads of UNCTAD, ITC and WTO.

52.&&  The Chairman said that the discussion had been both interesting and thought-provoking. As
an important first step, the meeting had underlined the need for harmony and cooperation among the
institutions. He agreed with Ambassador Rossier that Members themselves had the responsibility to
determine their own needs and expectations from the organizations. It would also be necessary to
harmonize the objectives of the WTO and the initiatives resulting from UNCTAD IX. He took note
of the comments on ITC's non-paper which set out what the organizations were doing. Further thought
and clarification in respect of the role of the CTD vis-a-vis UNCTAD was needed. Given the increasing
importance of developing countries in the world economy and the challenges facing least-developed
countries, the CTD was perhaps the best forum for discussing tangible initiatives for the integration
of these countries into the world economy. The recommendations of the CTD could be presented to
the forthcoming Ministerial Conference in Singapore. He intended to have informal consultations with
Members in response to the request from the Director-General of the WTO for an input from the CTD.
He welcomed the level of cooperation and coordination among the institutions in respect of the
programming and execution of technical cooperation projects. He commended the Swiss delegation
for its very interesting ideas. He was of the view that the guidelines, which the CTD was developing,
were a further step in the process of integrating technical cooperation efforts so as to enhance
development and to ensure increased participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading
system.

53. && The Committee took note of the statements made by the Secretary-General of UNCTAD, the
Executive Director of ITC, the Director-General of the WTO and the Chairman of both the WTO's
General Council and UNCTAD's Trade and Development Board and of the comments made.

Cc Other Business

54.&&  The Chairman indicated that, with respect to implementation, he had contacted chairpersons
of the various WTO bodies to find out how commitments made in favour of developing countries in
the Uruguay Round agreements were being implemented. Following consultations with Members on
the outline of the study on the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system,
an amended outline had been prepared and sent to delegations reflecting some of the concerns raised.
Since no comments had been received on the amended version, he had instructed the Secretariat to
proceed with the preparation of the study. The study was expected to be completed before the summer
break. He indicated that, at the next meeting scheduled for 12 July, he intended to consider the
implementation of Uruguay Round commitments made in favour of developing countries, using as
an input the responses from the Chairpersons of the various WTO bodies. Guidelines on technical
cooperation would also be on the agenda. Delegations would have the benefit of an analytical summary
of ideas raised at the last meeting and a report on the replies to the questionnaire.
