WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/78
21 April 2010


(10-2078)


Committee on Trade and Development
Seventh-Eighth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 18 MARCH 2010

Chairman:  H.E. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)


 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538411" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC259538411 \H 1
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538412" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC259538412 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc259538413" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc259538413 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc259538414" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc259538414 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538415" C.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC259538415 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538416" -	gulf cooperation council (GCC) notification of customs union	 PAGEREF _TOC259538416 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538417" D.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC259538417 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538418" -	general council decision of 14 december 2006 (wt/l/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC259538418 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538419" -	transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements – draft   proposal by brazil, china, india and the united states (job(08)/103/rev.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC259538419 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538420" E.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC259538420 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538421" F.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC259538421 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538422" G.	election of the chairperson of the sub-committee on least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC259538422 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC259538423" H.	election of the chairperson of the committee on trade and development	 PAGEREF _TOC259538423 \H 6



ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 78th  Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3512 issued on 24 February 2010.  He drew Members' attention to agenda item C concerning notifications under the Enabling Clause, and in particular the sub-item relating to the notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union.  He said that he had been consulting with the concerned delegations on this matter, and that he would be asking his successor in the Chair to continue these consultations.  Therefore, while the sub‑item appeared on the agenda for the present meeting, he did not intend to open the floor for any discussion on it.
&& The representative of Egypt thanked the Chairman for the informal consultations that had been held on the GCC Customs Union notification.  His delegation looked forward to further consultations by the new CTD Chairman on this matter, which had systemic implications for developing countries.  He said that any progress or outcome of the consultations should be reported at the next CTD meeting under the agenda item in question.
&& The Chairman said that this was the intention.
&& The representative of India supported the statement by Egypt.  He said that his delegation would have preferred it if the Chairman had made his comments on the GCC Customs Union notification under the agenda item in question, rather than at the beginning of the meeting.
&& The Chairman said that he wished to add a matter under "Other Business" concerning the periodic update of the Secretariat paper on the Developmental Aspects of the Doha Round of Negotiations.  He proposed that the agenda item relating to "Other Business" be considered before the agenda items relating to the elections of the Chairpersons of the Sub-Committee on LDCs and of the CTD. 
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with an update on the regional trade agreements (RTAs) notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs.  He firstly informed Members that two notifications under the Enabling Clause had been made in 2010.  The notification of the India-MERCOSUR Agreement had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/31, while the notification of the India-Afghanistan Agreement had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/32.  It was envisaged that the two agreements could be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD in early 2011, though this remained to be confirmed. As for the Chile-India Agreement – which was notified in 2009 – he said that it would be considered at the CTD's 4th Dedicated Session in June 2010.  Members had been informed earlier in the year by fax that the Factual Presentation on the Chile‑India Agreement had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/RTA/4/1. 
He next turned to the three RTAs involving non-WTO Members that had previously been notified under the Enabling Clause.  With regard to the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA), he recalled that he had informed Members at the last CTD meeting that – in line with the procedures being followed in the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) – the consideration of the Agreement would need to wait until all the parties had ratified it.  As for the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA), he said that the Secretariat was waiting for confirmation that Afghanistan's membership in SAFTA had been ratified by all the parties concerned.  Once this information was confirmed, and depending on data availability, the Secretariat would schedule the consideration of SAFTA accordingly.  Finally, he informed the Committee that no data had yet been received on the India-Bhutan Agreement.  Since the consideration of this Agreement would need to wait until all the requested data had been submitted to the Secretariat, he urged the concerned parties to provide the data as soon as possible.
	-	GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL (GCC) NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMS UNION
No discussion took place under this sub-item. 
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS 
	-	GENERAL COUNCIL DECISION OF 14 DECEMBER 2006 (WT/L/672)
	-	TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS – DRAFT 		PROPOSAL BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND THE UNITED STATES (JOB(08)/103/REV.1)  
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The Council had since extended the deadline to its July 2010 meeting.  
He recalled that the proponents of a Transparency Mechanism (TM) for Preferential Trade Arrangements (PTAs) – Brazil, China, India and the US – had briefly introduced their revised draft proposal at the last CTD meeting.  On the basis of the revision – circulated in document JOB(08)/103/Rev.1 – he informed the Committee that he had continued his informal consultations in the small-group format, which had been very constructive.  He expressed his appreciation to the delegations that had participated in these consultations, and in particular the proponents for the significant efforts they had made – and continued to make – to address the concerns and specific drafting suggestions of delegations.  His assessment, on the basis of the discussions that had taken place in the consultations, was that important progress had been made in efforts to iron out the remaining outstanding issues.  He said that he had requested the proponents to continue to work with other delegations and with the Secretariat in order to come up with a text that could be considered by the CTD.  He would also be providing his successor in the Chair a full briefing on the state of play of the negotiations.  He concluded by expressing hope that the CTD could agree to the PTAs TM very soon, and in particular before July 2010, when the CTD Chair would next report to the General Council on this matter.
&& The representative of the Dominican Republic said that her delegation found the proposed PTAs TM to have a higher level of requirements and obligations than the TM for RTAs.  This implied an extra burden for countries with notification obligations, especially developing countries.  For example, unlike the RTAs TM, she noted that the draft proposal on the PTAs TM had provisions for a series of continuous reports.  Another example related to the number of deadlines to be observed.  She made reference in this regard to the requirement to notify a PTA no later than three months after the arrangement had entered into force, as well as the date of 30 June to notify any changes affecting the implementation of a PTA.  Her delegation sought an explanation as to whether the introduction of such specific dates was due to the nature of PTAs, particularly since the provisions in the RTAs TM were more flexible.  More generally, she inquired why there was a need for such a high level of requirements, which in some cases appeared to go beyond the mandate of the WTO.  While all Members were in favour of transparency, she observed that there was a need to achieve a balance between the need for transparency in PTAs and the burden that would be imposed on many countries from the implementation of the PTAs TM.  The resources needed for the preparation of complete lists of all preferential benefits for each partner at the tariff-line level, within specified time-limits, was an example.  She added that there was insufficient clarity on which parties or Members would be required to make notifications under the PTAs TM.  Addressing such issues would smooth the way for the adoption of the draft proposal.
&& The representative of India thanked the Dominican Republic for the comments and requested that they be provided in writing to the proponents.  He said that the proponents would give these comments their highest consideration when finalizing the text of their proposal. 
&& The representative of St. Lucia, on behalf of the ACP Group, said that many of the concerns raised by the ACP Group had been taken on board by the proponents in document JOB(08)/103/Rev.1.  A few issues remained to be settled, and the ACP Group intended to continue its consultations with the proponents. 
&& The Chairman said that one of the considerations guiding the discussions in the small-group consultations was that the PTAs TM should impose as little burden as possible on Members, as well as on the Secretariat.  He invited Members that had specific comments on the proponents' revised draft proposal to join the informal consultations.  Since the ACP Group and the group of small, vulnerable economies (SVEs) were already represented in the consultations, for the sake of efficiency, he invited delegations in these groups to submit their comments to their group representatives.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  He recalled that the CTD had to date undertaken four of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision.  
&& The representative of Brazil recalled the announcement concerning DFQF market access made by the Minister of External Relations of Brazil at the Seventh WTO Ministerial Conference.  In particular, in line with the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, the Minister had announced Brazil's decision to grant, by mid-2010, DFQF market access for products from LDCs covering 80 per cent of all tariff lines.  The concessions would increase in successive instalments until 100 per cent of tariff lines were covered.  The implementation of the DFQF scheme was currently under discussion within the ambit of an inter-Ministerial working group, which would establish the parameters for the application of the scheme.  Topics under discussion included the legal instrument for the adoption of the scheme, applicable rules of origin, and a technical assistance mechanism for the LDCs wishing to benefit from the scheme.  The working group would continue to meet on a regular basis and the outcome of its work would be announced in the coming months.  He said that this update had also been provided to Members at the last meeting of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.
&& The representative of India said that his country was the first developing country to announce a comprehensive scheme under the DFQF mandate to provide zero-duty and preferential market access for all LDCs.  In particular, the Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for LDCs was announced by the Indian Prime Minister on the occasion of the India-Africa Forum Summit of African Heads of States and Governments and their official representatives in New Delhi in April 2008.  India had taken the utmost care to ensure that the DFTP Scheme was not a mere token measure, but provided effective and substantial market access to products of export interest to LDCs.  Given India's large market and the demand for products of interest to LDCs, his delegation was confident that the DFTP Scheme would play a key role in ensuring that the share of LDCs in India's imports grew at an accelerated pace.  The Scheme was comprehensive, simple and non-reciprocal.  It provided preferential market access on tariff lines that comprised 92.5 per cent of the global exports of all LDCs.  Products of immediate interest to LDCs which were covered under the DFTP Scheme included cotton, cocoa, aluminium ores, copper ores, cashew nuts, cane-sugar, ready-made garments, fish fillets and non-industrial diamonds.  Only 6 per cent of lines were in the exclusion list of the Scheme.  
The Scheme was open to all 49 LDCs, including 33 African LDCs.  It was procedurally simple to operate and required individual LDCs to submit a letter of intent and the list of agencies authorized to issue certificates of origin.  To date, 21 LDCs had submitted letters of intent but only 14 had provided the details of the agencies which would be responsible for issuing certificates of origin, as required under the Scheme.  The Scheme was fully operational for these 14 LDCs.  His delegation urged the remaining LDCs to finalize their internal processes and to intimate to India their willingness to benefit from India's substantial market access opening to the LDCs.  He said that India would carry out more outreach activities in order to disseminate the benefits of the Scheme for LDCs. India was also ready to dovetail this Scheme with other technical assistance activities that India provided to LDCs.
&& The representative of Bangladesh emphasized the importance of the Hong Kong Decision for LDCs.  He called on all Members to honour at the earliest the commitments that they had made at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman said that he wanted to raise a matter concerning the Secretariat paper on the Developmental Aspects of the Doha Round of Negotiations.  He recalled that the paper was being periodically updated in the context of the Committee's discussions on paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration, and that Members had recognized its value.  While the agenda item in question was no longer appearing on the agenda of each CTD meeting, he pointed out that the Secretariat paper had not been updated since May 2007.  Since a number of developments had taken place in the negotiations since then, he believed that it would be useful if the Secretariat were to update the paper.  He hoped that this was agreeable to Members.
&& The representative of the United States thanked the Chairman for bringing this matter to Members' attention.  She said that her delegation needed some time to consider the proposal by the Chairman.  
&& The Chairman suggested that the US delegation remain in touch with the Secretariat on this matter.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that he had been informed that consultations had led to the proposal for Ambassador Jean Feyder of Luxembourg to serve for another year as Chairman of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.  He asked whether this was acceptable to Members.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman said that it was a great pleasure for him to welcome Ambassador Feyder to serve for another year as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  Ambassador Feyder had vast experience in development issues.  He was long responsible for development cooperation in his country, and this experience was valuable for the work of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.  The numerous posts he had occupied in his career included Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the European Union and Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations in New York.  He currently served as Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations Office, the International Organizations and the WTO in Geneva. 
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
&& The Chairman said that the General Council at its meeting on 22 February had announced the new Chairpersons for 2010.  He was pleased to inform the Committee that H.E. Mr. Erwidodo of Indonesia, Ambassador and Deputy Permanent Representative in charge of WTO matters, had been chosen as the new Chairman of the CTD.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Erwidodo as Chairman of the CTD.
The outgoing Chairman said that Ambassador Erwidodo had been in his current position since October 2008.  His previous position was Director-General of the Trade Research and Development Agency at the Ministry of Trade.  While in this position, he also served as Vice-Chairman of the National Tariff Team and the Vice-Chairman of the Negotiating Team on Agriculture in the National Team for International Trade Negotiations.  He was formerly Director of the Centre for Social and Economic Research on Forestry and Estate Crops at the Ministry of Forestry and Estate Crops, and Deputy Director for Research at the Centre for Agro-Socioeconomic Research in the Ministry of Agriculture. 
&& The incoming Chairman thanked Members for having placed their trust in him to chair the CTD.  He also thanked the outgoing Chairman for his work over the last three years.  He emphasized the importance of the CTD as the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO.  He assured Members of his intention to continue to give a high profile to the work of the Committee, which included the work of the CTD in Regular Session, the work on Aid for Trade, and the work of the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on Small Economies and on RTAs.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
WT/COMTD/M/78 Page  PAGE 6



	WT/COMTD/M/78 	Page  PAGE 5



 

 

 

 



