WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/48
29 March 2004


(04-1415)


Committee on Trade and Development
Forty-eighth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 18 FEBRUARY 2004

Chairperson:  H.E. Mr. Habib Mansour (Tunisia) for items A-B
and H.E. Mr. Trevor Clarke (Barbados) for items C-K

Subjects discussed:

 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316434" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC68316434 \H 1
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316435" B.	Election of the Chairperson	 PAGEREF _TOC68316435 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316436" C.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC68316436 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc68316437" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc68316437 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc68316438" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc68316438 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316439" D.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC68316439 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316440" E.	Notifications under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC68316440 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc68316441" (i)	Notification from Iceland (WT/COMTD/N/17 and Corr.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc68316441 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc68316442" (ii)	Notification from Australia (WT/COMTD/N/18)	 PAGEREF _Toc68316442 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316443" F.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries (WT/COMTD/W/113)	 PAGEREF _TOC68316443 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316444" G.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC68316444 \H 16
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316445" H.	Electronic Commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC68316445 \H 22
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316446" I.	Work Programme for 2004	 PAGEREF _TOC68316446 \H 24
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316447" J.	Election of the Chairperson for the Sub-Committee on Least‑Developed Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC68316447 \H 27
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC68316448" K.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC68316448 \H 28


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft Agenda for the meeting was contained in Airgram WTO/AIR/2240 of 27 January 2004.  He proposed that item "I", the "Election of the Chairperson", be brought forward and be dealt with before item "B" relating to "Observers".  
&& The representative of the European Communities indicated that his delegation wished to share information under "Other Business" on the "Expanding Exports Help Desk" which was a database recently launched by the European Communities' Commission.
The agenda was adopted as amended.

ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON
&& The Chairman said that the outgoing Chairman of the General Council H.E. Mr. Carlos Pérez del Castillo at the General Council's meeting of 11 and 12 February had announced that his consultations had led to the suggestion for H.E. Mr. Trevor Clarke of Barbados to be elected as Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD).  
&& The Committee elected H.E. Mr. Trevor Clarke of Barbados as Chairman of the CTD.
The outgoing Chairman said that Ambassador Clarke was a man of communication and great thought whose strategic vision was always backed by a plan towards obtaining concrete results.  That was not surprising given his engineering background and management career both at the corporate and community levels which had culminated in his being awarded the Barbados Centennial Honours (BCH) in 2000, and Gold Crown of Merit (GCM) in 2003 for his work in telecommunications and industrial development.  Before arriving in Geneva, Ambassador Clarke was the trade representative of the Barbados Private Sector Trade Team for which he recruited and coordinated a team of professionals to look after the interests of the Barbados private sector in all matters related to the regional, hemispheric and multilateral trade negotiations.  At the same time, Ambassador Clarke was Executive Vice President of Cable & Wireless West Indies Ltd. with responsibility for the business performance of the company’s telecommunications operations on five islands in the Eastern Caribbean, including Barbados.  He also guided the merger of the domestic and international carriers in Barbados, which were both majority owned by Cable & Wireless, and he led his Government's negotiations for the transition from monopoly to the competitive supply of telecommunications services, while preparing merged companies for competition.  He said that he was certain that the Committee would achieve positive results under Ambassador Clarke's able Chairmanship. 
&& The Chairmanship of the Committee was accordingly handed over by Ambassador Mansour of Tunisia to Ambassador Clarke of Barbados. 
The incoming Chairman thanked Ambassador Mansour on behalf of the Members and the Secretariat for the good work he had done in steering the work of the Committee over the last year.  He said that it was his intention to move the work of the Committee even more decisively in 2004.  Any urgency on his part was due to the fact that the Committee had a lot of work to carry out in a faster and more decisive manner.  He thanked Members for the confidence that they had put in him and said that, in accepting the Chairmanship he was well aware that the challenge of leadership depended on the support of the followers.  He said that success of the Committee required Members' support and an urgency towards finding conclusions on those issues to which a solution could be found.  
OBSERVERS
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite the following intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the African Union (AU);  the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the South Pacific Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  Following the decision taken by Members at the Committee's previous meeting those organizations had been invited to that day's meeting.  He therefore proposed that, in accordance with the Committee's procedures, those organizations also be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.  
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman said that, at previous meetings, the Committee had also had before it a number of outstanding requests for observer status.  Those came from the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities.  As positions of delegations were well known and on the record, he proposed that, unless there had been any recent change in Members' positions, the Committee revert to those requests at its next formal meeting.
It was so agreed.

TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
&& The Secretariat said that the note on "Technical Assistance: Outstanding Business" contained in document WT/COMTD/W/123 was self-explanatory and referred to the outstanding issues that had not been approved as part of the adoption of the 2004 Technical Assistance (TA) Plan.  Those issues related to two items, one was the regional trade policy course for francophone Africa, and the other was the outreach activities which had both been placed in an Addendum (WT/COMTD/W/119/Rev.2/Add.1) to the 2004 TA Plan.  Members would recall that the venue for the regional trade policy course for francophone Africa had not been determined at the last meeting and the Committee had agreed that the implementation of the four trade policy courses could begin once that issue had been resolved.  Document WT/COMTD/W/123 informed Members of the Director-General's decision, after the necessary consultations, of holding the course at the Université Mohammed V (Souissi) in Rabat in the latter part of 2004.  With the resolution of that issue, the four regional trade policy courses, including the one for francophone Africa, could be reintegrated into the 2004 TA Plan and a revision of the Plan would be issued.  That would leave only the outreach activities in the Addendum to the 2004 TA Plan.
&& The representative of Mauritius, speaking on behalf of the African Group, expressed satisfaction with the resolution of the venue for the regional trade policy course for francophone Africa, an issue that had remained outstanding for quite some time.  He said that efforts had been made to identify an African university where the course could be held.  The African Group was aware that it had been a difficult issue to resolve and thanked the Director-General who had been a linchpin in the process, and all those that had played a role in resolving the problem.  Members were aware how important TA was for Africa and his delegation was pleased that Kenya would host the regional trade policy course for anglophone Africa and that Morocco would host the regional trade policy course for francophone Africa.  His delegation hoped that the Secretariat would take the measures necessary to ensure that those courses could begin as soon as possible.  He said that the Secretariat had mentioned that the courses would be held in the latter part of 2004 and hoped that the courses would be successful.  It made no difference whether those courses were for anglophone or francophone Africa since all African country Members needed TA, especially in 2004.  Both Robert Zoellick and Pascal Lamy had stated the importance of not wasting any time in 2004 and TA was of utmost importance for Africa to be able to participate in the negotiations.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation was pleased that the issue relating to the venue for the regional trade policy course for francophone Africa had been resolved and hoped that those courses would begin quickly.  Her delegation was also grateful that the success of the pilot courses had led to the extension of such courses to the Caribbean region.  The Canadian Government had already contributed money towards the support of that course and would make an announcement of its contributions to the ongoing 2004 TA Plan at the next meeting of the CTD.
&& The Committee took note of the oral report and the statements made and adopted document WT/COMTD/W/123.
&& The Chairman said that the Secretariat would give a brief update regarding other technical cooperation and training matters.
&& The Secretariat said that it wished to bring the Committee up to date on TA activities carried out until mid February 2004.  The Secretariat had begun its consultations with Members on a number of policy-oriented issues such as needs assessment, how to engage least-developed countries (LDCs) more actively in TA activities, and on some evaluation and monitoring issues.  The Secretariat intended to continue with those consultations on a regular basis.  With respect to the implementation of the 2004 TA Plan, the Secretariat reported that 48 activities had been carried out to date and that dates had been confirmed for another 77 activities.  Those 125 activities were equally split between regional and national activities. The Secretariat would provide fuller reporting as required in the periodic reports.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation was pleased that the consultation process was underway and had proceeded in the manner that Members had agreed when adopting the 2004 TA Plan.  The first phase of the consultations had been devoted to deciding on the issues that needed to be addressed and when those issues would be considered.  His delegation looked forward to the continuation of that consultative process.  It was also pleasing to hear that the implementation of the 2004 TA Plan had begun well.  That demonstrated the Secretariat's ability to both implement the 2004 TA Plan and deliver on the consultation exercise to pursue improvements and mutually beneficial progress.  It was good that a resolution had been found on the venue for the regional trade policy course for francophone Africa, an important element of the 2004 TA Plan which could be reinstated in the programme of courses to be carried out in 2004.
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation was grateful for the informal process of consultations that was underway which would improve as it proceeded and speed up the delivery of the 2004 TA Plan.  She proposed that a list of all the trade-related technical assistance (TRTA) requests received by the Secretariat from beneficiary countries be made available to Members.  That was particularly important for bilateral donors to ensure co-ordination and allow them to offer assistance when engaging in bilateral activities in the beneficiary countries.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made.

NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
Notification from Iceland (WT/COMTD/N/17 and Corr.1)
&& The Chairman reminded Members that the Committee had referred two notifications to the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries (Sub-Committee) for substantive consideration and reporting back, namely the notification by the Government of Japan contained in document WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.12 and the notification by the Government of Iceland contained in document WT/COMTD/N/17 and Corrigendum 1.  He said that the Chairman of the Sub-Committee had written to the previous Chairperson of the CTD to inform Members about the deliberations in the Sub‑Committee with respect to those notifications.  The Chairman of the Sub-Committee had then informed Members that the Sub-Committee had welcomed the initiatives taken by the Governments of Iceland and Japan.  A copy of the letter with the report on the proceedings in the Sub-Committee was made available at the meeting.
&& The Chairman went on to say that the Committee had two notifications before it, an old and a new one.  The first notification from the Government of Iceland (WT/COMTD/N/17 and Corr.1) had remained on the agenda of the CTD upon the request of one delegation.
&& The representative of Paraguay thanked the delegation of Iceland for its communication in response to its question concerning the notification of the Government of Iceland of 10 October 2003 communicating its decision to grant unilateral duty-free and quota-free market access for products from LDCs.  He noted that the Government of Iceland did not apply import quotas to products covered by the concession.  His delegation therefore considered that it would be appropriate to amend the notification by deleting the words "and quota-free market access" which was not applicable.  He reiterated his delegation's view that when the intention was to remove quantitative restrictions in favour of developing countries, that had to be notified under Article XIII of the GATT and not under the Enabling Clause, which only covered duty exemptions.  He said that his delegation was not against the granting of tariff reductions for LDCs under the Enabling Clause.
&& The representative of Iceland said that she was pleased to clarify that the scope of the measures provided for in the notification related to tariff measures.  She said that the notification of the Government of Iceland was a reply to an appeal by a former Director-General to Members to grant duty-free and quota-free market access for LDCs, and the notification therefore also mentioned that the Government of Iceland did not apply any quotas to any WTO Members.  Her Government was reluctant to amend the notification since the notification did not prejudice under what article it was notified.
Notification from Australia (WT/COMTD/N/18)
&& The Chairman said that it was important that work within the WTO was carried out in the most efficient way possible.  He reminded Members that, at its 32nd Session, the CTD had decided that any market access measures taken specifically in favour of LDCs under the Enabling Clause, and therefore notified to the CTD, be transmitted to the Sub‑Committee for substantive consideration with the request that the Sub-Committee report back to the CTD on its discussions.  Following the waiver adopted in 1999, developing countries who improved market access for products originating in LDCs notified such measures to the Council for Trade in Goods (CTG).  The CTG therefore also decided to transmit any such notifications to the Sub‑Committee for substantive consideration and reporting back.  The objective of those decisions by the CTG and the CTD was to allow for a unified consideration in one forum, i.e. in the Sub-Committee, of measures taken in favour of the LDCs, but without any change in existing notification obligations.  The intention was thus to make the system more efficient by considering notifications of the same type in one forum.  However, in a few instances in the past, that decision had led to a duplication of discussions relating to notifications of market access improvements for LDCs in the CTD and in its Sub-Committee.  He therefore reminded Members of the decision to refer notifications of market access improvements for LDCs to the Sub‑Committee for substantive consideration there.  However, he said that should Members wish to add to the discussions held in the Sub-Committee, they had a possibility of doing so at the time when the Sub-Committee reported back to the CTD.  In keeping with his statement he suggested that the CTD refer the notification form Australia, without discussion, to the Sub-Committee for substantive consideration and reporting back, following the reporting procedures agreed to at the 32nd Session of the Committee.
&& The representative of Australia said that his delegation accepted the suggestion made by the Chairman of referring the notification to the Sub-Committee and would engage in a more substantive discussion at that time.  His delegation believed that the initiative by the Government of Australia of providing duty-free and quota-free access for LDC exports set a high standard with no products excluded and no phasing in periods.  It also contained a broad definition of local content in order to assist LDCs meet the rules of origin.  His delegation looked forward to elaborating on those components of the decision that the Government of Australia had taken at the Sub-Committee.  That initiative, which had been introduced in July 2003 was a visible demonstration that trade-related support to developing countries could and should extend beyond aid.  The Government of Australia maintained a strong coherence between its aid and trade policies in that regard.  The Government of Australia had increased its trade-related aid funding by more than 70 per cent which amounted to spending approximately $A 31 million on TRTA in 2003-2004.  He said that his delegation looked forward to a more detailed discussion in the Sub-Committee.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made and referred the notification from the Government of Australia to the Sub-Committee for substantive consideration and reporting back, following the reporting procedures agreed to at its 32nd Session.

DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES (WT/COMTD/W/113)
&& The Chairman said that, at the last meeting, Members had had before them both the initial submission made by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda (WT/COMTD/W/113) and the inventory prepared by the Secretariat contained in document WT/COMTD/W/121.  Members had then suggested that the discussion be referred to that meeting.  
&& The representative of Kenya said that the inventory prepared by the Secretariat was comprehensive and her delegation, despite its limited capacity, had been able to make a first reading of the papers in the inventory and would briefly highlight some of the issues raised in those papers.  She said that one of the issues that had struck her delegation was that most of the world’s poor lived in countries which were dependent on exports of one or two primary commodities for the bulk of their export earnings.  That demonstrated the link between commodity dependency and poverty.  Another point was that the secular trend towards declining prices of those commodities was continuing.  The upward trend in the past two years of the prices of some agricultural commodities was largely due to unfavourable weather conditions in the main producing countries or political uncertainties in some of those countries.  Additionally, prices continued to be volatile for most of those commodities.  She said that past efforts made at the international level to stabilise prices through commodity agreements had failed.  That was due to the suspension of economic clauses which enabled the international organizations dealing with coffee, cocoa, sugar and rubber to intervene in the markets to stabilise prices when they were falling.  She said that primary commodity producing countries had been persuaded to liberalize internal markets by abolishing inter alia marketing boards which hitherto ensured that farmers received minimum prices for their production.  The farmers were therefore left completely to the mercy of market forces.  Another point that had struck her delegation was that purchasing power had become increasingly concentrated in the hands of a few foreign companies.  Large trading companies dealing in many commodities were being replaced by more specialized companies.  As an example she mentioned that only five companies accounted for half of the trade in green coffee, while cocoa trading companies in London had fallen from 30 to 10 companies.  Half of that trade was now controlled by chocolate manufacturers.  Both those trends represented the concentration of buying power in the hands of a few companies who could as a result dictate prices.  She said that almost all the studies emphasized that the only long term solution would be the diversification of production in other agricultural crops or the encouragement of the development of manufacturing or service sectors.  However, most of the studies also demonstrated that past experience had shown that it would be difficult to find another agricultural crop that was suitable for production.  A few of the studies also recognized that for a large number of countries which were dependent on exports of a few primary commodities, diversifying into the manufacturing or service economy was likely to be a long term objective as it would take years to develop the physical and human infrastructure that was needed for their development, not mentioning the transfer of appropriate technology.
She went on to say that most of the studies in the inventory, particularly those by experts from the International Financial Institutions, referred to the important role that commodity derivative instruments could play in reducing price volatability and providing predictability in producer's earnings.  Some commentators, however, considered that even though those private sector instruments could be useful in covering risks arising from temporary fluctuation in prices, they would not have perceptible effects where there was a persistent decline in prices as a result of structural over supply.  The coverage of risks under those instruments was also fairly limited.  While for metals like copper, it might have been possible to cover risks up to three years, for agricultural commodities, the coverage was limited to a few months,  generally three months.  The experience had further shown that those instruments were used in some developing countries through the financial support from foreign banks.  The instruments also enabled exporters to cover their risks and the benefits were rarely passed on to the farmers whose day to day livelihood was dependent on export earnings.  She said that the summary of the findings which her delegation had made might not fully reflect the various nuances and emphases that were placed by the authors in coming to those conclusions.  Despite those limitations, her delegation considered that those findings and conclusions could provide two useful guidelines for Members' discussions.  First, diversification was not going to provide an immediate answer to the problems for a large number of developing countries heavily dependent on exports of primary commodities.  Despite the assistance that might be provided to them in transforming their economies into manufacturing and service economies, most of those countries, and particularly those in Africa, would continue to depend on exports of commodities for a long period of time, perhaps even for the next two to three decades.  Second, despite all the enthusiasm shown by International Financial Institutions for the market-based financial instruments like commodity derivatives, their use would have little effect in dealing with situations where the decline in prices was due to a disequilibrium in demand and supply caused by structural over supply.  As had been emphasized in their submission (WT/COMTD/W/113) the crisis situation that had been created in the trade of commodities like coffee and cocoa was due to structural oversupply in the world market.
She continued by saying that she would suggest how future work in the Committee on the issue could be organised.  In that context, she recalled the progress made before Cancún on the commodity issue and its inclusion in paragraph 28 of the Cancún draft Ministerial Text.  That underscored the importance of the issue and the need to find a solution in a rule based system.  She noted that there had been no controversy at Cancún on the issue and therefore urged Members to continue to engage constructively in discussions on commodities in the spirit of paragraph 5 of the Cancún Ministerial Statement.  In doing so, Members needed to bear in mind that the long term solution to the commodities crisis would need a multifaceted approach.  In that regard, although the primary responsibility for discussions on the issues raised in their submission should remain in the CTD, there was a need to involve other WTO bodies, as stated by her delegation at previous meetings.  Towards that end, her delegation intended to submit an additional proposal specifically highlighting which issues should be handled by other working groups and negotiating bodies.  That proposal would borrow heavily from the illustrative list of elements for action highlighted in paragraph 37 in document WT/COMTD/W/113.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation had taken note of the intervention made by the representative of Kenya regarding its analysis of some of the main arguments from the studies listed in the inventory.  His delegation had also listened attentively to the pragmatic approach suggested by the delegation of Kenya on the possible way forward on the commodity issue in the CTD, or perhaps in other relevant WTO bodies as might be agreed by the Committee.  His delegation welcomed the submission that the delegation of Kenya intended to make identifying elements from its submission which could perhaps be forwarded to relevant WTO bodies for in-depth discussions.  He said that in his delegation's view, the key element was to recognize the seriousness of the long-term decline in commodity prices and its trade and developmental impact on many primary commodity exporting developing countries, something that was of legitimate concern to the WTO.  He recalled the comments made at previous meetings that that was an area in which it would benefit to explore cooperation with other international organizations such as UNCTAD which had carried out considerable work.  He said that the issue was important and that his delegation looked forward to further inputs from the delegation of Kenya with a view to structure future discussions.
&& The representative of Colombia said that the inventory prepared by the Secretariat was detailed and complemented the submission made by the delegations of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania.  Her Government attached great importance to and followed closely the issue of commodities and even had experience in producing some primary commodities such as coffee and cocoa.  She said that her delegation believed that the CTD could play an important role.  It was therefore important to continue work on that issue in the Committee.  The submission by the delegations of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania considered important elements from which the Committee could draw specific objectives to focus its work on.  Members should also consider how other WTO bodies or international institutions could contribute and report to the CTD.
&& The representative of Brazil said that the issue of commodities was a sensitive one.  It was an important issue in the ongoing negotiations and his delegation supported Kenya's initiative of referring it to the appropriate WTO bodies. That would allow the discussions to proceed effectively, not only for the benefit of the proponents but also to the benefit of a large number of developing countries that were affected by the declining terms of trade for primary commodities.
&& The representative of Cuba said that her delegation agreed with the substantive analysis carried out by the delegation of Kenya on the trade of primary commodities.  The problem of declining prices for primary commodities was aggravated by the structural dependency of more than half of the developing countries in such products.  Those countries were involved in negotiations which needed to ensure access for primary commodities to the international market.  Other issues that exacerbated the situation included environmental standards and sanitary and phytosanitary measures as well as the direct link between declining commodity prices and foreign debt.  A Working Group on Trade, Debt and Finance had been set up where proposals from the CTD on primary commodities could be dealt with.  She said that her delegation fully supported the recommendations contained in document WT/COMTD/W/113 and believed that it was time for the Committee to put forward concrete objectives in order to move forward in that area within the WTO.
&& The representative of Cote d'Ivoire said that 40 per cent of Cote d'Ivoire's export earnings were derived from primary commodities.  His delegation could not be indifferent when considering the decline in prices for primary commodities and welcomed the statement made by the representative of Kenya.  He said that he regretted that his delegation had not been more involved in the discussions on the issue due to the political climate in Cote d'Ivoire.  However, his delegation would begin to make serious efforts towards increased participation.
&& The representative of Ecuador said that the Government of Ecuador depended on the export of primary commodities, particularly in connection with the payment of its foreign debt.  He said that it was important to carry out joint activities with other international organizations on primary commodities.  His delegation had taken note of what the representative of Kenya had said and agreed on the need to draft concrete proposals on commodities.
&& The representative of China said that the commodity issue was of great importance to developing countries, particularly low and middle income countries.  Many of those countries relied heavily on the export of commodities for economic development.  However, over the past years the decline in prices for primary commodities was an issue which had not only been discussed in the WTO but also during the GATT and in other international organizations.  He believed that an urgent solution needed to be found on that issue.  He said that, in addition to the activities that needed to be carried out in cooperation with other international organizations, such as UNCTAD and the World Bank which were part of the WTO's coherence policy, the WTO needed to make efforts in the area of trade and development.  As far as the development aspects were concerned he said that his delegation would join others in further deliberations and explore means of helping resolve the issue for developing countries as soon and as effectively as possible.  As far as the trade-related aspects were concerned, he said that the election of the Chairpersons of the different negotiating bodies meant the resumption of the Doha Round negotiations.  In that connection, he drew Members' attention to the work of the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture which was of great importance to the work on commodities.  He said that there were three pillars of the agricultural negotiations which were of relevance to the export of primary commodities.  The high level of domestic support and export subsidies provided by developed country governments to their agricultural commodity producers meant that developing country exports could never be competitive.  That was a problem.  With respect to market access, tariff peaks and tariff escalation were obstacles to developing country commodity exports.  Members needed to exert their influence in the CTD and in the negotiations of the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture in order to accelerate the negotiations on agriculture for them to assist in resolving the issue of declining prices for primary commodities.
&& The representative of Barbados said that the inventory prepared by the Secretariat would be an important tool in Members' deliberations on the issue of commodities.  She said that the representative of Kenya had ably highlighted the problems faced by commodity-export dependent countries and pinpointed the numerous challenges faced by those countries in finding sustainable and effective solutions to their dire situation.  She reiterated her delegation's full support for the initiative being spearheaded by the delegation of Kenya.  The commodity issue was also an issue and problem of significant importance to producers in her country.  Her delegation agreed with the representative of India and others that had indicated that the WTO should collaborate with other international organizations such as UNCTAD, which were also undertaking work in that area.  She emphasized that commodity export dependency was clearly a trade issue.  The WTO Membership therefore needed to work in a constructive manner with an aim of formulating concrete and positive measures to address the trade-related problems of commodity export dependency.
&& The representative of Rwanda said that his delegation supported the statement that had been made by the representative of Kenya and supported the remarks made on moving forward in the CTD and in other WTO bodies on the problems pertaining to primary commodities.  He said that it was clear from the various studies that, among the various ways to address the problem, diversification was no longer a solution, especially for LDCs.  Analysis had shown that the decline in prices of primary commodities would continue due to the structural problems in international trade.  He said that he would share the experience of his country.  When he was young, people would sell coffee in the summer.  Families could then use the proceeds to buy various household utensils and other essentials.  That was no longer possible because prices had dropped and farmers could no longer afford to grow coffee.  The decline in prices for primary commodities affected households as well as trade because importers could also benefit during the coffee selling season.  He said that it was important for the Committee to discuss the different aspects of the declining prices of primary commodities and, on the basis of the aspects mentioned by the representative of China, see how they could be addressed.
&& The representative of Senegal said that the decline in prices for primary commodities was of particular importance to developing countries as a vast majority of them depended on trade in primary commodities and were in the early stages of development.  It was therefore important that those countries be able to use export earnings from primary commodities for economic development.  He said that his delegation supported the proposals made by the delegation of Kenya and the other co‑sponsors of the submission and believed that the WTO needed to seriously address the issue in order to find adequate solutions to the problems faced by many developing countries in the trade of primary commodities.  That would help address developing country needs in the multilateral trading system and be consistent with the goals of the WTO.
&& The representative of Benin said that the decline in prices for primary commodities was an important issue as developing countries depended mainly on the trade of primary commodities, with most of them depending on a single primary commodity. His delegation therefore firmly supported the recommendations made by the delegations of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania in their submission.  He underlined the need to find appropriate solutions to solve the situation of countries that depended on the trade of primary commodities.  That solution could be found if Members showed a spirit of solidarity and ensured that their work was guided by a sense of purpose in finding a consensus solution to the issue.  He said that the inventory prepared by the Secretariat illustrated that the trade in primary commodities was a sensitive and important issue because since the 1950's development economists and researchers had studied it and underlined the necessity to find adequate solutions to the problem.  Raul Prebish had studied the problem which was still causing problems 50 years later.  He said that the inventory would allow Members to pinpoint elements that would contribute to finding appropriate solutions to the situation faced by primary commodity export dependent countries, integrate them into the multilateral trading system and eradicate poverty.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had reviewed many of the documents contained in the inventory and was considering that information in an attempt to see how the issue of declining prices for primary commodities might be addressed.  She said that the inventory demonstrated that that issue had been a topic of great academic interest for a number of years and commanded significant attention by the international community.  There were many issues that Members could focus on in the inventory, but she would highlight those that had caught her delegation's attention.  The study by Dehn, J. (2000) "The Effects on Growth of Commodity Price Uncertainty and Shocks," World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2455 concluded that the price shocks had negative effects for countries that were not diversified and earlier work by Paul Collier in 1999 had illustrated that the policies in place in some countries compounded problems of growth created by those price shocks.  The difficulties were clear but many of the strategies that had been taken by Governments and international organizations in the past had proven somewhat ineffective.  The study by Cashin, Liang, and McDermott pointed to reasons why past experience had not been effective and to the fact that research suggested that price stabilisation schemes and compensatory mechanisms were likely to be ineffective because the low price levels tended to persist.  There was some encouragement in a study by Yabuki, N., Varangis, P. and Larson, D. F. (1998) "Commodity Risk Management and Development," World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 1963 where they took note of the rise in market-based commodity risk management instruments over the last 10-15 years.  Those authors also suggested the scope for international institutions, national governments and the private sector to improve access to those types of derivative markets.  That was welcome news and it was also welcome news that the World Bank Global Economic Prospects Report suggested a rise in international prices in cotton and rubber for example.  She said that there had certainly been some price rises and her delegation did not share the view of the representative of Kenya on the precise reasons for that.  Her delegation continued to consider the appropriate role of international institutions in addressing the problems related to the commodity issue.  However, her delegation continued to believe that the answer did not lie in schemes to manage global supply.  Her delegation believed that market-based approaches were most likely to produce positive results.
She continued by saying that her delegation had also highlighted that the best approach was to recognize that Members had a common desire to make their industries more competitive and diverse and that that was a starting point.  There were proven ways to accomplish that objective and there were well known ways to attract investment, particularly in higher value added sectors.  That meant a need for appropriate policies at the national level, including among others, a commitment to better governance and enhancing accountability.  Other constructive approaches included improving efficiency in commodity production, encouraging vertical and horizontal diversification of exports, increasing responsiveness to changing market conditions and improving transparency through exchanges of views and information among producers and consumers.  Of particular importance to the CTD in that regard was contemplating the role of the WTO on that issue.  Her delegation continued to believe that the WTO was a forum to address the trade policy related aspects of that issue and believed that the potential of the Doha Round to open markets and remove market distortions was the key to the WTO's contributions.  She said that she agreed with the representative of China that the Committee on Agriculture had an important role to play in trying to find WTO solutions as part of a policy mix to solve the problem of declining prices for primary commodities.  Although her delegation viewed the analysis of risk management strategies for commodity prices as outside the scope of the WTO, it might be an area for further research or TA from UNCTAD and where coherence among international institutions that were assessing and evaluating the problem would be appropriate.  She noted that a number of private sector participants and developing country governments had increasingly used commodity derivative markets to hedge price risks.  They came from Argentina, Brazil, China, Hungary, India, Malaysia, Philippines, South Africa and Zimbabwe.  As Members considered how to proceed in the CTD, the WTO and elsewhere, she said that her delegation continued to have strong reservations regarding initiatives to stabilise commodity prices through supply management, including such actions as reducing production, buying buffer stocks, forming international commodity cartels or banning exports of low quality products.  She said that there were a number of proposals contained in document WT/COMTD/W/113 that moved in that direction and her delegation did not believe that they suggested productive ways to advance discussions on the issue.  Her delegation was prepared to participate actively in the discussions but Members needed to find a constructive and appropriate way of defining a work programme that would be consistent with WTO objectives.
&& The representative of Australia said that the implications of declining prices for developing countries was an issue which his delegation had a great degree of sympathy for and on which it was important to find solutions.  In that regard his delegation welcomed the inventory prepared by the Secretariat.  He said that an initial review of the inventory had raised some issues that he wished to comment on.  First, the issue of commodities was complex and there was a wealth of information on it.  Second, there were a number of institutions, such as UNCTAD, that had a role to play in addressing the problem.  There therefore was a need for policy coherence in the way that Members approached the issue.  Third, work could be done in the WTO to contribute to the serious problem of low commodity prices.  In that regard, as his delegation had mentioned at previous meetings, there was a particular role for the agriculture negotiations to play in delivering on the Doha mandate in an area where the WTO had specific trade-related work it could do and which could make a real contribution to overcoming the commodity problem.  He therefore supported the comments made by the representative of China.  His delegation wished to await the paper that the delegation of Kenya had said it would submit before deciding how to proceed with the agenda item in the CTD.  He said that it was also unclear how the overall negotiations under the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) would proceed in 2004.  That had to be known before referrals of various issues to other WTO bodies could be considered.  However, by the time the new paper was submitted Members might know more about the state of the overall negotiations, and the direction of the agricultural negotiations in particular.  The issue of falling commodity prices was important and his delegation could understand the frustration felt by the proponents.  There were serious issues that had to be addressed and his delegation would aim to be constructively involved in future discussions on the issue in the CTD.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation did not have any specific comments on the inventory.  The reason was not that his delegation had been idle.  In fact, his delegation had been active with respect to the issue of commodities and the European Communities' Commission had, the previous week, issued a set of proposals for an EU action plan in the area of agricultural commodities.  In addition, a specific proposal for an action plan between the EU and Africa in the commodity sector of cotton had also been issued at the same time.  If any Member had perused those proposals, it would have seen the seriousness with which the European Communities' Commission and its member States were addressing the whole issue of commodities and commodity dependency.  The initiative taken by his delegation had been inspired by the calls and proposals made by the delegation of Kenya and other proponents in the run-up to the Fifth Ministerial Conference in 2003.  The proponents had provided added focus to the issue and had stressed the importance of the exercise.
He continued by saying that he would provide a brief introduction to his delegation's proposals which would be further discussed with the member States of the European Communities (EC) in the European Council and the European Parliament.  He said that the proposals already showed the direction of thinking and confirmed the orientation his delegation had presented in earlier discussions on commodities in the CTD.  The first thing to note was that commodity-related issues were complex, and that both trade and developmental aspects had to be addressed.  It was also an area involving many players.  Any action therefore had to be contemplated at several levels, including the international community, what could be done by his delegation alone, and action to be taken and policy choices to be made at the national level, especially by countries who were dependent on commodities.  Similarly to other areas of development policy, there was a need for a partnership between individual governments and the international community to support the international community in finding the answers to the problems faced by commodity dependent developing countries.  The responsibility was shared and action had to be taken across the board.
He went on to say that he would give Members an idea of the range of issues addressed by his delegation.  His delegation had explored the possibility for action in six areas, action that either had to be taken by his delegation, international organizations, or developing country governments.  The first issue was to put commodity dependence high on the international agenda.  That had already been achieved thanks to the efforts made by the proponents before the Fifth Ministerial Conference.  In parallel to putting it on the international agenda, the issue had to be integrated into development strategies applied at the national level.  In addition, the link to poverty alleviation and other developmental aspects had to be made.  The second area related to what the appropriate response to the long-term price decline of commodities should be.  He said that it might be difficult to reverse the economic reality of that trend.  However, ideas on how to deal with the situation might be explored for example at the regional level through cooperative efforts by developing countries themselves to promote supply-side improvements and by arranging cooperation among producers in order to improve quality and enhance services.  The third area was risk-management and access to finance.  The European Communities' Commission had tabled a proposal concerning a specific measure that it operated for ACP countries under the Cotonou Agreement.  The proposal, if enacted, would simplify the operation of that scheme to allow more developing countries to benefit from it.  The fourth area was support for diversification.  He agreed with the representative of Kenya that it was an issue of diversifying down the production chain for value-added but also possibly diversification into other goods and services.  The fifth area included efforts to enhance sustainable corporate practices and investment in commodity dependent developing countries.  That related to private-sector behaviour in terms of corporate social responsibility, other codes of conduct and promotion of public/private partnerships and international competition.  The final, but not the least important area, related to the WTO and support for the successful integration of commodity dependent developing countries into the international trading system.  He said that he agreed with the representatives of China, the United States and Australia that the WTO could primarily offer support through the ongoing DDA negotiations.  He said that it was well-known that his delegation supported an immediate resumption of negotiations and their rapid conclusion, as well as an outcome that would support the pro-development aspects set at the Fourth Ministerial Conference when the negotiations were launched, including in the areas of agriculture and non-agricultural market access.  The objective Members were striving for where reductions in trade-distorting subsidies in the agricultural sector, market-access improvements across the board, not only for imports into developed countries but also in a way which would support expanded possibilities for South-South trade, as well as the elimination of export subsidies.  His delegation had put forward proposals for the elimination of export subsidies on products of interest to developing countries and was awaiting a response to its proposals in the negotiations.
He further said that it followed from that brief overview of the proposals tabled by his delegation that the EC as a whole took the questions put on the table by the commodity dependent developing countries seriously.  That did not mean that the answers would always be found in the CTD, or even in the WTO.  There was a need for a parallel response from other agencies and from the donor community in terms of TA and capacity building.  His delegation looked forward to further discussions on the precise follow-up to the proposals for further work which the representative of Kenya had indicated would be submitted in the near future.
&& The representative of Uganda said that there was no contradiction between the inventory prepared by the Secretariat and the document submitted by his delegation and the delegations of Kenya and Tanzania.  He said that the majority of the delegations that had intervened on the issue of declining commodity prices had recognized the existence of a problem and shown a clear understanding of it.  Second, Members had also realized that the problem was multifaceted and that it could be partly resolved in the WTO and partly by other institutions dealing with the issue such as UNCTAD, ITC, and the Common Fund for Commodities.  It could also partly be dealt with by financial institutions, even though it primarily had to be addressed by the governments of the countries affected.  However, all of the actors mentioned had to play their roles.  He said that there had been a few divergent views, but that they had been expressed in good faith.  Those views were that the governments of the countries affected had to address the issue of democracy, production had to be diversified and be geared to increase value-added, and that efficiency had to be improved.  He said that he did not object to that, but said that many Members had already done so in the context of their structural adjustment programmes as well as by own efforts to address those issues.  However, his delegation still insisted that declining commodity prices was a trade and development issue which had to be appropriately dealt with within the WTO.  Paragraphs 37 to 40 of the paper submitted by his delegation and the delegations of Kenya and Tanzania contained concrete proposals on how to proceed.  An additional paper would also be submitted which would concretize how those delegations wished to proceed.  He said that he wished to see an endorsement by the CTD for the commodity issues to be taken up in other relevant WTO bodies.  Other institutions and the countries affected should also play their parts.
&& The representative of Zambia said that his delegation supported the proposals put forward by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, and he believed that those proposals required favourable consideration.  As a point of information, he said that Zambia was dependent on the export of copper.  In 1969, one tonne of copper exported would enable the purchase of a Jaguar car.  Three years later, the required amount of copper for the same purchase was twenty times higher.  In February 2004, one Jaguar car could only be purchased for eighty times the amount of copper needed in 1969.  The commodity issue had to be discussed in different institutions and fora of which the CTD was one, in order for a solution to be found.
&& The representative of Cuba said that the commodity issue would naturally give rise to controversy in the CTD.  Her delegation was ready to consider any approach and any proposal that could lead to a solution for commodity dependent exporters.  The issue required a constructive response, both by various international institutions and by individual countries, as far as the different options were concerned.  Even if commodity dependent countries were recommended to increase their use of market access opportunities, diversify production, increase the share of higher value-added goods, improve technology and develop export capacity, they would still face problems as they lacked the infrastructure, technology, financial and human resources necessary to follow the recommendations.  The financial resources available went towards repaying existing external debts.  She therefore wondered how commodity-dependent developing countries could use increased market access if they lacked the productive capacity.  Solutions to the problems faced could only be found in a multi-facetted approach.  The elimination of developed country subsidies might help solve the problem.  There were interesting figures for cotton in that respect.  Direct aid and buy-support to the cotton industry was US$ 5,8 billion for 2001 and 2002 and US$ 3,8 billion for 2002 to 2003.  The Government of the United States had supported its cotton industry for US$ 3 billion in 2001 and 2002, and US$ 2 billion in aid in 2003 and 2002.  Without those subsidies the price of cotton would have been 70 per cent higher in 2001/2002 and 15 per cent higher in 2002/2003.  The loss of income for farmers in Sub-Saharan African countries was around US$ 920 million in 2001/2002 and represented US$ 230 million in 2002/2003.  That was why her delegation considered that the WTO had an important role to play in solving the problems through the agricultural negotiations.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that his delegation welcomed a discussion of commodity issues in the WTO both because the topic related to an important development problem and because it had an interface with the WTO.  Increasing the knowledge at the WTO about the issue was relevant in the context of the ongoing negotiations and could bring about a better outcome of the negotiations.  An important contribution by the CTD could be to discuss the whole range of relevant issues in order to provide delegations with the basic facts which would enable them to bring up the relevant topics in the respective negotiating bodies, such as the Special Sessions on agriculture and non-agricultural market access.  Knowledge could be built in the CTD through the inventory which contained useful information for further in-depth studies.  He asked if the transfer of know-how could be undertaken in a more condensed form and suggested that the CTD invite the relevant international organizations to present their views and report on their work.  Another way would be for the WTO Secretariat to elaborate a synthesis of the topic, explaining the current state of know-how in the specialized fora, tackle the reasons for the crisis, elaborating on the instruments currently discussed, and describe the advantages and problems with such instruments.  However, there were clearly no easy solutions as the topic had been on the agenda for almost 50 years.  That was why the CTD should undertake a more in-depth analysis.
&& The representative of Tanzania associated his delegation with the statement made by the representative of Kenya.  He also thanked those delegations that had expressed their support for the issue of declining prices for primary commodities to be taken up in a serious and structured manner.  He emphasized that for the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda and for many other developing countries, the issue was a reality whose importance was not only confined to trade, but also to development and needed to be comprehensively addressed.  In addition to continued internal restructuring of developing country economies, in many cases as a result of advice of the World Bank, the IMF, or other institutions, it was high time that the WTO addressed the matter as it related to the fundamental objectives of the WTO itself.  He said that WTO Members should benefit from a multilateral trading system based on fairness, which ensured that its benefits accrued to all Members.
&& The representative of Kenya said that the inventory prepared by the Secretariat had proven that there was a trade problem in the commodity area, and as it was a trade problem, it had to be addressed by the WTO.  As it also related to development it should be dealt with in the CTD which was the WTO body focussing on trade and development issues.  All Members seemed to recognize that there was a problem.  However, he said that his delegation saw it from a different angle, and believed that the problem had to be tackled from a united front.  The inventory had proven that commodity prices had fallen to their lowest levels.  That was also demonstrated by the example provided by the representative of Zambia.  Falling commodity prices had accentuated the debt problem and made debt repayment more difficult.  It was no surprise that 60 per cent of the value of what was produced in Africa went towards repayments of debt.  Savings could thus not be accumulated for development.  That was the reason why Part IV of GATT 1994 was as relevant to the commodity issue in 2004 as it had been in the 1960's when it had been incorporated into the GATT.  Some Members might believe that falling commodity prices was not a trade issue.  However, it was more of a trade issue than anything else, even if it was dealt with by other organizations, such as UNCTAD and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).  If the relevant articles of GATT 1994 were considered, and Article XXXVI in particular, it was clear that almost all paragraphs referred to commodity prices and the need to help developing countries improve their export earnings.  In addition, Article XXXVIII related to joint action and that was where the coherence, referred to by some delegations such as China, came into the picture.
A number of delegations had said that the issue could only be resolved through the current negotiations.  It was correct that part of the problem could be solved through the negotiations.  That was the case for the issue of adding value if tariff escalation and high tariffs were addressed in the negotiations.  Issues such as market entry barriers and some of the rules might nevertheless not be dealt with as they were not being addressed in the ongoing negotiations.  It was clear that issues relating to falling commodity prices were dealt with elsewhere, such as the work on trade, debt and finance which considered the debt problem affecting many African countries.  Those countries could be taken out of the debt-trap if the issue of falling commodity prices was addressed, which would make them earn more foreign exchange to repay their debts and still save for development.  The Working Group on Trade, Debt and Finance therefore had a role to play.  The Working Group on Trade and Transfer of Technology also had a role to play as value was added through technology and as the issue of adding value was discussed there.  He asked how accessible new technologies were since the TRIPS Agreement came into force.  That was the type of question Members had to ask themselves, and that was why the problem had to be tackled within the WTO.  He further asked whether domestic policies in the major importing countries were completely unrelated to the issue.  In addition, he asked what those Members did to address their domestic policies which affected commodity prices.  It had to be kept in mind that the prices were not set in the commodity producing countries, but elsewhere.  The blame should therefore not be shifted to the domestic policies of the producing countries, even if the measures taken in the producing countries did have a role to play.  That was nevertheless not where the main problem lay.  The global picture had to be clear before national situations were examined.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the ongoing discussion in the CTD on commodities was positive and he thanked the delegations of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania for their submission.  His delegation agreed that the issue was important, even if it was not a new one on the international scene.  It had been discussed for some forty, fifty years.  He said that his delegation was grateful for other Members having brought the issue to the WTO as, like many other speakers, his delegation believed that it was a trade and development issue.  He said that he was pleased to see that there was recognition by the larger membership that it was a multi‑facetted issue and that it involved many other international institutions, other than the WTO.  He said that his delegation was in favour of the proposal made by the representative of Switzerland to invite representatives from other international organizations with a direct relevance to the subject matter to share their views with the CTD.  That could be educative and helpful in carrying the work of the CTD forward.  He said that he was perplexed, in light of the history of the WTO, of sending an important subject such as commodity prices to other WTO bodies.  He said that his delegation recognized that it was relevant to agriculture and that the aspects of the discussions were relevant for non-agricultural market access.  However, his delegation was still sceptical to dividing the work of the CTD and sending the composite work of trade and development in relation to commodity prices in pieces to other bodies.  History had shown that nothing had been achieved wherever that approach had been taken.  He said that, although it was unfortunate to have to state it, his recollection told him that that might be a dangerous path to follow.  While having a more in-depth discussion of the subject, there was a need to keep the issue within the ambit of the CTD as it was a pure trade and development matter which could be supplemented by views of other international organizations.  He said that his delegation in large supported the content of the paper submitted by the delegations of Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania.
&& The Chairman said that he looked forward to receiving the specific proposals foreshadowed on how the matter should be dealt with in the CTD at the next meeting.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made.

PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& -	Presentation by the Legal Affairs Division on the Developmental Aspects of the Dispute Settlement Negotiations
&& The Chairman said that the next item, which related to paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, was a standing item on the Committee's Agenda which dealt with how the CTD, within its mandate, could help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected in the negotiations.  At the last meeting of the Committee, it had been suggested that a representative of the Secretariat be invited to explain the developmental aspects of the dispute settlement negotiations.  As Members also had requested, a fax had been sent to Members the previous day containing some written information regarding the presentation.
The Secretariat said that the fax that had been sent had not included a checklist of documents issued in the context of the DSU negotiations.  That checklist was therefore available in the room.  The work on the review of the Dispute Settlement Understanding (DSU) had a long history.  It had started prior to the Seattle Ministerial Conference and had continued in various formats until the Doha Ministerial Conference and the Doha Ministerial Declaration contained a specific mandate in that respect.  The current work built on nine years of experience of applying the DSU.  The DSU had been extensively resorted to in the course of those years with more than 300 cases initiated, i.e. 300 requests for consultations.  Although many of those cases had not required a full assessment through the Panel and Appellate Body in further stages, a great number had undergone that process.  A large body of experience with the implementation of the DSU was therefore available to build upon.  It was notable that a large number of developing countries had been active users of the system, although their participation had been unevenly spread in terms of the number of Members actually resorting to it.  Some large developing countries had been more frequent users than other smaller economies or regions, although that uneven use of the DSU seemed to be evolving.  It was also worth remembering, at the outset, that the nature of the DSU negotiations was somewhat different from others in the DDA in the sense that they specifically addressed an institutional mechanism within the WTO which was available to all Members and which was not per se aimed at further trade liberalization or trade disciplines.  That systemic dimension of the dispute settlement system had been highlighted in the negotiations and was an important feature affecting the substance of the negotiations.
&& The Secretariat went on to say that it would not treat the framework of the negotiations in great detail.  However, Members might note that the initial date for conclusion of the negotiations was May 2003.  That time-frame had been extended by the General Council in July 2003, following the absence of an agreement at the end of the time-frame initially foreseen.  The current time-frame for completion was May 2004.  Two elements formed the basis of the further work since the extension.  The first was a Chairman's text of 28 May 2003 and the other was proposals by Members.  It was also worth remembering that the DSU negotiations were placed outside the single undertaking.  That reflected their systemic dimension.  With regard to the developmental aspects of the negotiations, the Secretariat said that it was difficult to classify the proposals in other clusters than the stages of the dispute settlement procedures, as the proposals put forward by Members, including developing country Members, had been quite diverse.  They covered a vast range of issues and their level of ambition varied.  One key factor highlighted by developing countries at the beginning of the negotiations, and which had remained pertinent in the proposals, was that whatever the outcome of the negotiations was, it should not lead to any reduction in the accessibility or user-friendliness of the dispute settlement procedures to developing countries.  That was reflected in a number of proposals which aimed at ensuring effective developing country participation in the proceedings and that adequate account be taken of development interests in the various stages of the proceedings.  Special and differential treatment (S&D) had been an integral part of the negotiations.  A number of developing country proposals had however not related specifically to S&D, and some of the non-S&D issues might reflect concerns which had a special development dimension but might also reflect general systemic concerns.
&& The Secretariat further said that it would, without being exhaustive, highlight some elements raised in the discussions with respect to the various phases of dispute settlement procedures: the consultations stage, the panel stage, the appellate process, and the implementation stage.  Three main issues relating to the consultations stage had been the subject of negotiations:  the time-frame for consultations, the conditions under which Members who were not parties to the dispute might join the consultation, and the enhancement of the already existing S&D provisions.  The developing country concern with respect to time-frames was that the process should not be shortened so that it would no longer allow effective opportunities for consultations.  Developing countries had suggested sufficient flexibility should be maintained, or at least that the time-frames not be reduced.  There was, on the other hand, the concern that the proceedings should not be too lengthy, as it was important for the complainant in the dispute to get fast relief.  That concern was true for the discussions regarding the consultation phase, but also for the discussions regarding all other time-frames of the proceedings.  It illustrated that it was often an issue of finding a balance between different interests, which might not only depend on the status of the Member within the WTO, but also on the particular status of the Member within the actual dispute.  The conditions for joining consultations was another issue of particular interest to a number of developing countries.  It was developing countries who had been proponents for clarifying the conditions for Members to join consultations.  Joining consultations was a less burdensome opportunity for Members to engage in a dispute than being a party to it.
The need for flexibility with respect to time-frames was an issue that had been raised with respect to panel procedures as well.  Another issue which had been the object of much discussion was the composition of the panels.  The proposals were wide-ranging in that respect, including one to enhance the existing provision in the DSU which foresee that, in a dispute involving a developing country Member, at least one panelists would be a national of a developing country, if the developing country party to the dispute so requested.  The adequate participation of developing country nationals had been an issue in all discussions on the various formulas that had been suggested for the improvement of the panel composition.  The possibility to participate as a third party was another area with respect to panel procedures which had been of particular interest to a number of developing countries.  It was similar to the notion of joining consultations as it was a way of providing access to the proceedings to Members who were not directly parties to the dispute.  That was one of the issues on which the convergence of views had been the greatest, although the issue again would be to find a balance between the interests of the third parties and the interests of the main parties to the dispute.  An area in which, to the contrary, there had hardly been any convergence of views so far, but on which some developing countries had expressed strong opinions, was the question of opening up access to the dispute settlement mechanism.  Such issues were often referred to as "transparency issues" and concerned whether submissions to panels should be made public, whether panel proceedings should be opened to the public, and whether spontaneous submissions by non-members should be accepted.  Diverging views had been expressed by Members already prior to the negotiations and they continued to be expressed, either by proposals to enhance access or by proposals to limit access.  A number of developing countries in particular had expressed the view that enhanced access could prove particularly burdensome for delegations with limited human resources who already struggled to handle the substance of the case.  That was of particular concern for amicus curiae briefs, i.e. unsolicited briefs.  There were other proposals with respect to panel proceedings, some of which came from developing country members or groups, but which did not necessarily relate to S&D treatment.  They related for example to the introduction of provisional measures, accelerated procedures, or increased party‑control by Members over the procedure.
Concerning appellate review, the Secretariat said that, apart from some issues which were common to the panel procedures, issues discussed had been of a more general systemic nature rather than specifically development related.  Particular concerns had been raised as to whether a remand procedure should be introduced in the process (which meant a possibility for the Appellate Body to revert the case back to the panel in case some factual issues had to be clarified) and whether an interim review stage should be introduced in the process (which meant that the parties to the dispute would get an advance indication of the contents of the report).  An interim review stage currently existed at the panel stage but not at the appellate stage.
Implementation was another area which had triggered much discussion and the submission of many proposals.  Some of the proposals were far-reaching, including some submitted by developing countries.  One key aspect was to consider how the remedies available under the DSU could be improved.  That issue had solicited particular interest from developing countries to the extent that developing country Members might find it more difficult to implement any remedies, especially retaliation, in situations of non compliance.  So far, retaliation had only been authorized in a few cases.  Some Members considered the possibility to ensure compliance as a key aspect to be addressed in the negotiations.  A number of detailed proposals had been submitted, ranging from enhancing the procedures for compensation to strengthening retaliation, either by facilitating cross retaliation for developing countries, or by enhancing the effective accessibility of the remedies, up to a proposal which had been described as most radical and consisted in having negotiable remedies.  That showed that there was a broad range of issues, not all in the form of S&D, which aimed at providing Members, including developing countries, with enhanced remedies.  Those issues had led to complex debates regarding what role the remedies should play and where the right balance should lie in determining what the remedies should be.
&& Finally, the Secretariat said that some more horizontal S&D-type proposals had been made.  Those aimed at providing additional support means for developing countries involved in disputes, rather than at the content of the procedures.  They related to either a reinforcement of the TA to be provided by the Secretariat as foreseen in the DSU, or the creation of a specific fund to assist developing countries involved in disputes.  Another possibility mentioned in that respect was to provide for the award of litigation costs for a developing country which prevailed in a dispute.  That last aspect would entail bringing in a new aspect into the WTO dispute settlement system and had given rise to discussions as to its operation.  Several of those proposals were reflected in the Chairman's text of 28 May 2003.
&& The representative of Mexico said that the DSU was an agreement of systemic importance to all Members of the WTO.  It was the only agreement which had repercussions on the functioning of all the agreements it covered, it was a mechanism which aimed to ensure that the obligations of other agreements were observed, and it rebalanced the level of concessions when there was a violation.  The DSU, with its efficiencies and inefficiencies, mainly affected developing and least-developed countries.  Having recourse to the DSU was the only option for a Member which did not have the political or economic capacity to pressure another Member into observing the dispositions of an agreement.  That was why it was so important for development.  He said that his delegation had presented a diagnosis in November 2003 of the problems which affected the DSU mechanism.  One problem diagnosed by his delegation related to the developing and least-developed country access to the dispute settlement mechanism.  His delegation had found that no LDC had been party to any "procedures of special groups", panels or Appellate Body procedures.  Forty-four developing country Members had not been party to any panel or Appellate Body procedure.  Those statistics covered the period since 1995.  What was worse was that the GDP of the weaker Members was more dependent on international trade than that of other Members.  That reflected how important it was for a weak Member to be able to present its case in the WTO.  The second problem diagnosed by his delegation in November 2003 related to compliance.  The average number of days that elapsed from the request for a consultation until the Member in question had to comply with the ruling was 1507 days.  That meant that a developing country Member had to go through a difficult and complicated procedure for more than four years before the dispute settlement process led to a measure to eliminate the violation.  The Member who had to comply might then still not comply.  The complainant could then begin to negotiate compensation, but there had only been two cases when compensation had been granted since 1995.  As compensation was normally not granted, the complainant could request authorization to suspend concessions or other obligations.  He therefore asked how efficient retaliatory measures could be when they came from a developing or least-developed country.  He further asked how such Members could impose compliance when they were the complainant and what they could obtain, even when they had proven that there had been a violation.  It was necessary to reinforce the DSU to settle such issues.  That was the reason why his delegation had put forward a proposal in order to resolve the problem of the de facto waiver consisting of the time which a measure that was in violation of WTO rules could be in force without a rebalancing of the concessions.  That proposal was on the table in the DSU and his delegation hoped that it would be approved as it would benefit all Members.  It was a systemic proposal, but it was especially intended to benefit developing and least-developed countries as it reinforced the only real mechanism that was available for Members to ensure that their rights were respected.  His delegation therefore asked all Members to review that proposal.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation too believed that there were many important issues in the ongoing DSU review on which the development dimension could be enhanced, such as flexibility in time-frames to take into account capacity and resource constraints of developing countries, sufficient flexibility for developing countries to reap the benefits of the dispute settlement mechanism, including through cross-retaliation, retaining the Member-driven character of the dispute settlement mechanism, and addressing the burden of the litigation costs.  The DSU negotiations had been ongoing in various formats for some time.  It was therefore natural that there was a large number of proposals from Members.  However, the underlying conceptual focus of developing country concerns had been uniform and related to the need to preserve and enhance the S&D element in the DSU, keeping in view the broad objective of effective participation and accessiblility for developing country Members to the dispute settlement  proceedings.
&& The representative of Australia said that, as far as his delegation was concerned, the outcome of the DSU negotiations needed to take developing country concerns into account.  The negotiations had not been easy.  All Members had to work towards the new May 2004 deadline and his delegation was prepared to do so.  However, there also had to be a sense of realism of what might be possible in that short time-frame.  He said that his delegation's starting point in the DSU negotiations had been that the DSU was largely functioning well and that there was no need for major changes to the agreement.  If sensible operational improvements were suggested, his delegation could support them.  One such practical suggestion which his delegation had supported was the proposal to strengthen the right of developing country representation on a panel.  It was at the same time clear that there were a range of competing views in the proposals tabled and that there were differences of views between developing countries, just as there were differences of views between developed countries.  Members therefore had a lot of work ahead of them.  It was important to try to bridge some of those differences of views.  His delegation would participate in the ongoing discussion with that objective in mind.
&& The representative of China said that, according to the Secretariat's statistics, some developing countries were frequent users of the dispute settlement mechanism.  That reflected the credibility, merits, and attraction of the dispute settlement mechanism to developing countries.  Conceptual and issue by issue discussions had taken place in the Special Session of the DSB, and a textual discussion would be held in the future.  His delegation was an active participant in the Special Session of the DSB.  With respect to the development dimension of the dispute settlement negotiations, he said that he wished to highlight three points.  The first was that flexibility should be given to developing countries with respect to the time-frames of the proceedings, bearing in mind their financial and human resource constraints.  Second, third party rights should be enhanced to facilitate developing country Members' access.  As the Secretariat had pointed out, his delegation was pleased to note the high convergence of views in that regard.  Third, the implementation-related rules had to be improved to give Members more incentives to comply with DSB rulings, and for a balance to be achieved between developed and developing countries ability to retaliate.  He said that his delegation would be working with other Members to arrive at a fruitful result of the dispute settlement negotiations.
&& The representative of Mexico said that many delegations had mentioned that the DSB was working reasonably well.  His delegation considered that the DSU had two tracks.  The first track was to get an outcome on the validity of a measure, i.e. to examine whether the challenged measure was in violation of WTO rules.  He said that the DSU was working reasonably well with respect to that first track as it produced an outcome with good reports.  However, the second track, relating to the implementation of those reports was where the DSU was not working as desired.  That was a systemic problem that his delegation was concerned about, and which did not only affect small and vulnerable Members but also big and powerful ones.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that the LDC Group had agreed on a set of specific objectives in the dispute settlement negotiations.  The interests of the LDC Group had been highlighted in their submissions.  The issues related to the suggestion that consultations be held in the LDC capitals and enhanced LDC participation in the panels.  Those issues were important for the participation of LDCs in the dispute settlement process, and the LDC Group hoped that other Members would consider them in a favourable manner.  As a piece of information, he said that his delegation for the first time had invoked the dispute settlement mechanism and was consulting with the delegation of India.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that he wished to add his voice to the comments made by the representative of Mexico.  The second track which referred to the implementation of DSB rulings was a concern of special importance to developing countries.  While he said that he did not wish to enter into the details of specific rulings which had not been implemented or which had taken long to be implemented, he said that his delegation's experience was that when it had won a case, it had to wait long for the other party to comply.  Once the ruling was implemented it was presented as if a concession had been given to his Government.  The non-implementation or the delayed implementation of rulings was a problem with systemic implications for the working of the dispute settlement mechanism.  He agreed that the most important concerns regarding the working of the Dispute Settlement Understanding were not with respect to the first track and the rulings of the panels but with the compliance of those rulings, especially for Members with lesser negotiating strength and few bargaining chips, due to the size of their economies, which made retaliation difficult.  The question of what Members in that position could do had to be answered from a developmental perspective.
&& The representative of the United States sought clarification from the Secretariat with respect to the rule that a developing country party to a dispute had the right to have a developing country national serve on the panel, and asked if there ever had been a problem with that particular provision and what the focus of the discussions on that topic had been.  She said that she asked the question as she thought that it was an automatic right and did therefore not understand what the concern with it was.
&& The Secretariat said that the current provision of the DSU which related to that issue foresaw that in a case involving a developing country Member, at the request of the developing country Member concerned, there should be at least one panelists from a developing country member.  The Secretariat was not aware of any difficulties encountered with respect to that provision.  What was at stake in the discussions was a suggestion to make that provision more automatic.  A developing country member currently had to request that that provision be put into action.  The objective of the suggested change was that the appointment of a developing country panelists in cases involving a developing country Member be made more systematic.  There was also a proposal from the LDC Group which suggested that if an LDC Member was party to a dispute, then at least one panelists should be an LDC national.  There was also a proposal to strengthen that paragraph by suggesting that there should be two developing country nationals on the panel when a developing country Member was party to a dispute.  The Chairman's text of May 2003 proposed a "reversal of the presumption", so that a developing country national would be appointed as panelists unless the developing country Member party to the dispute agreed otherwise,  and had also proposed to retain the possibility for an LDC national as panelists to serve on the panel if an LDC Member was party to the dispute.
&& The Chairman asked if the approach of inviting presentations by the Secretariat regarding the developmental aspects of the negotiations was useful, and if so, if Members wished to suggest a negotiation topic to be presented at the next meeting.  He also invited ideas on how the CTD could fulfil the mandate given in paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, which was to identify and debate developmental aspects of the negotiations, in order to help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected in the outcome of the negotiations.  He said that immediate responses could be given at the meeting, but that Members could otherwise provide feedback to him or the Secretariat at a subsequent date.
&& The representative of Cuba asked how the Chairman would proceed if there were several different suggestions for how to take the agenda item relating to paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration forward.  She said that her delegation had a proposal for a topic but that she wished to consult with other delegations to ensure that the topic was of interest to all.  She said that her delegation therefore wished to ask for more time before making a proposal.
&& The Chairman said that he had put two questions to Members with respect to the Committee's future work on the agenda item relating to having the developmental aspects of sustainable development reflected in the negotiations.  First, he had asked if Members wished to receive a presentation of the developmental aspects of another part of the negotiations at the next meeting.  Members were free to consult among themselves before they communicated any such suggestion to him or the Secretariat.  If there were several suggestions, at least one presentation would be made at the next meeting.  Other suggestions would be shared with Members at that time for Members to prioritize for future presentations.  Second, he had asked if Members had any suggestions for other work the CTD could undertake with respect to paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.
&& The Committee took note of the presentation and the statements made.

ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman said that agenda item H, relating to electronic commerce (e-commerce), was another standing item on the Committee's agenda.  However, no specific suggestions for how to build on the previous work done by the Committee had recently been made.  He therefore asked Members how they wished to see the CTD take the issue forward.
&& The representative of the United States said that she did not have substantive suggestions to make on the issue, nor did she have any instructions from her authorities on the issue.  That however did raise the question, which was similar for other standing items, of whether it might be appropriate for the Committee to consider what it wished to do with those items, if the Committee might either advance them or set them aside for a period of time, even if not necessarily permanently.  Items sometimes became standing items in WTO bodies and appeared on agendas regardless of whether Members had something to say with respect to them or not.  That might be the case for some issues, but maybe not for all.  Members might have relevant ideas for how to take the issues forward if asked by the Chairman and if they stimulated discussions among themselves.  She said that she had a recent experience from the Committee of Participants on the Expansion of Trade in Information Technology Products where Members informally had taken a step back and considered what they wished the Committee to do.  The Chairman of that body had then brought the ideas back to a formal meeting of that Committee.  That approach of having an informal brainstorming might assist the CTD as well.  Her delegation was willing to consider work on e-commerce and other items.  However, ideas seemed to be lacking at the moment.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that, like the representative of the United States, he did not have any instructions with respect to the item on e-commerce.  Although he agreed that standing items sometimes became routine exercises without value, he was concerned that e-commerce was not a stand alone item in the CTD.  E-commerce was an item which was steered by a Dedicated Session of the General Council.  The mandate to work on e-commerce had appeared at the last three Ministerial Conferences in different forms and the three sectoral councils under the General Council (i.e. the Council for Trade in Goods, the Council for Trade in Services and the TRIPS Council) were also involved in the WTO Work Programme on e-commerce.  He was therefore concerned with the effect the deletion of the agenda item as a standing agenda item in the CTD could have on the work of the three sectoral councils, and ultimately on the work of the Dedicated Session of the General Council.  That parallel work had to be considered before the CTD ceased its work on the issue.  The idea of involving the CTD had been that the CTD would consider the developmental aspects of e-commerce, and that those aspects were important.  The CTD's input to the Dedicated Session of the General Council would be valuable.  With some triggering questions from the Chairman of the CTD, Members might come with suggestions for further work.  That was also the idea of having the item as a standing item.  If the larger Membership nevertheless thought that it was best to have the item of e-commerce temporarily taken off the CTD Agenda, his delegation would not oppose it.
&& The representative of the United States said that she wished to clarify that she had not suggested that any item would fall off the agenda.  What she had said was that Members should be stimulated to consider what useful work the CTD could do on the items on its agenda.  However, if Members did not have any ideas for such work, some items might be set aside until a time for example, when there was an event in other WTO bodies that triggered action by the CTD.  She said that her intention was not to delete items from the agenda but that useful work should be done if an agenda item was to be kept.  The representative of Pakistan had made some interesting remarks in that respect.  The Committee needed to think more creatively about what it should be doing with respect to the different items.  If the items had been important in the past, Members had to consider why they were currently not important enough for any Member to have any instructions on them for four consecutive meetings.
&& The representative of Pakistan said he had done some research on the developmental aspects of e-commerce and had come across useful documents.  His delegation had, at that point, made an intervention giving its views on the developmental aspects of e-commerce, what the digital divide was, and what his delegation thought could be done.  However, he said that he admitted not having done much more after that.  As the Chairman had asked for ideas he suggested that there should be a presentation on e-commerce with respect to Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  That might stimulate discussions on e-commerce and make Members better aware of the developmental aspects of e-commerce.
&& The representative of Rwanda said that he was of the view that e-commerce should be removed from the agenda, if Members had no substantive contribution to make with respect to it.  It was not useful to have it on the agenda of the CTD to give the impression that progress was being made on developmental aspects of e-commerce while nothing was being done in reality.  He nevertheless assumed that, with the promise by the Chair to advance matters, with recent events such as the World Summit on the Information Society, and with the proposal made by the representative of Pakistan it should be possible for the CTD to contribute to the issue in the near future.  Without committing himself he said that it should be possible for Members to suggest a contribution for the following meeting of the Committee.
&& The representative of Benin said that it might be good for Members to begin by investigating things.  As the CTD was supposed to treat trade and development issues, it should be possible to find topics related to e-commerce on which Members wished to do substantial work in the coming months.  The international economic and commercial environment demanded further work on the issue of the developmental implications of e-commerce.  The World Summit on the Information Society gave the opportunity to seriously consider the matter.  He said that it would be useful to consider the constraints faced by developing countries, and other Members' experiences with e-commerce could be useful for advancing the discussion, even if those were only small steps forward.
&& The Chairman said that some more work could easily be done.  However, he said that he wished to see an objective for any work to be undertaken.  Members had to ask themselves why they were going to do some more work and what the objective with that work was.  He suggested that three things be done.  Similar to the procedure for the previous item, he proposed that Members could make suggestions either to the Chair or to the Secretariat, for how the CTD might deal with e-commerce.  Second, he requested the Secretariat to contact colleagues in the three sectoral councils to see what had happened with the issue of e-commerce in those bodies.  Third, he said that he would meet the Chairpersons of the other WTO bodies and that he would raise the question of e-commerce with them.  Even if answers could not be found then, he would alert the other Chairs that something productive had to be done about e-commerce and that Members had to consider the objective and the time-frame.
&& The representative of Barbados suggested that, in order to complete the record, the Secretariat might also be asked to consider the progress made in the consultations undertaken in Dedicated Sessions of the General Council.
&& The representative of Cuba asked if e-commerce would be considered under the item relating to Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration at the next meeting of the CTD.  Her delegation would have a suggestion for a different topic to be treated under the item relating to Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  She only needed some more time to consult with other delegations before making a suggestion.  If Members were interested in examining questions related to e‑commerce and development in the future, then it should be done under the item relating to e‑commerce.
&& The Chairman said that his understanding of the intervention made by the representative of Pakistan was not that the item of e-commerce be taken off the agenda and dealt with under the item relating to Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  If Members wished to undertake some substantive work on e-commerce, then the item should remain on the agenda.  He said that he had requested Members' ideas for how to deal with the issue of e-commerce.  He had also, as a separate matter, asked for Members' views on what they wished to achieve under the agenda item relating to Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration. 
&& The representative of Pakistan said that he wished to clarify that his delegation had made an improved proposal regarding Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration in order to trigger some thoughts on e-commerce in the CTD.  He said that his delegation would be pleased to receive that presentation subsequent to any presentation made following the suggestion to be made by the representative of Cuba relating to Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.
&& The Chairman said that he had asked for Members' inputs regarding any productive work Members wished to undertake with respect to e-commerce and that he would get back to Members following his consultations with other Chairs.  He suggested that all proposals and information on e‑commerce be brought together at the following meeting.
It was so agreed.

WORK PROGRAMME FOR 2004
&& The Chairman said that the next agenda item related to the Committee's Work Programme for 2004.  A draft CTD Work Programme for 2004 had been made available to Members at the meeting.  He said that the terms of reference of the CTD stated that "The Committee will establish a programme of work which may be reviewed as necessary each year."  The draft Work Programme he proposed was quite simple and its intention was to give Members the possibility to discuss how they wished to see work progress in the CTD in 2004.  He said that the terms of reference of the Committee also stated that the Committee should "keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system and to consider measures and initiatives to assist developing country Members, and in particular the least-developed country Members, in the expansion of their trade and investment opportunities, including support for their measures of trade liberalization."  The Committee had therefore from time to time considered reports on the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  He asked whether that was something the Committee might wish to consider during the course of 2004.  He said that the last such report had been considered in 2002.  If that was an item Members wished to consider he asked what aspects Members were particularly interested in, and whether Members wished to base their discussions on that topic on a background document by the Secretariat.  
&& The representative of Canada said that she recalled that the Committee's discussions in 2002 on the participation of developing countries in world trade had been interesting and had been based on an interesting statistical document.  She said that she was not certain from what angle the Committee should consider the issue, but that she believed that it should be an item on the Committee's agenda in 2004.  She suggested that the CTD Work Programme be left in a draft form until the next meeting, i.e. that the Committee proceeded with it but still allowed for more inputs from Members.  Both the existing working groups on trade, debt and finance and the one on trade and transfer of technology had emanated from the CTD.  The CTD had also given rise to the WTO bodies treating small economies and LDCs.  However, it was only those representatives which participated in the work of all the other development-related WTO bodies who had an overview of developmental issues on the whole.  The CTD might in that sense have lost some of its role of providing an overview of development-related matters.  Members therefore needed to reflect on what additional depth could be added to the CTD Work Programme for it to be deepened and enriched.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that there was one area where more detail might be provided in terms of what the Committee planned to do during the year and the role it intended to play, and that concerned technical cooperation.  At the end of 2003, the Committee had decided to envisage a global overview exercise in the second quarter of 2004 at the back of the informal consultation process the Secretariat had reported on.  Since the Committee had already taken the decision to envisage that type of exercise, it would make sense to flag it in the Work Programme.  There were other issues in the area of technical cooperation and training which were worthwhile mentioning in the Work Programme to assist Members in knowing what would be examined when.  Even if an item on TA and training would be taken up at every meeting of the Committee, the aspect to be discussed would vary.  It would sometimes relate to a report on the activities carried out, an evaluation would at some stage be before Members at which time monitoring would also be discussed, and Members would at some stage hold a more strategic policy-oriented discussion.  He said that his initial reaction to the comment made by the representative of Canada was that it would be interesting for the CTD to consider developing country participation in world trade as part of its 2004 Work Programme.  However, more thought was needed to identify the precise focus Members might find most useful, if there was a willingness to envisage that as part of the Work Programme.
&& The representative of Cuba said that her delegation found the proposals made by the representative of Canada interesting and shared the same interests.  She said that a study on the participation of developing countries in world trade should be considered in the CTD.  Other related questions could be dealt with in the Working Groups on Trade, Debt and Finance and Trade and Transfer of Technology as well as in the CTD.  She said that in 2003, the delegation of Kenya had proposed a meeting specifically devoted to the issue of primary commodities.  As she was not aware of the idea getting discarded in other meetings she asked what the status of that proposal was.
&& The Secretariat said that there had hardly been any discussion of such a meeting since the proposal was made and no decision had been taken to hold such a meeting.  The commodity issue was currently moving in a particular direction but no decision had been taken with respect to the idea of holding a special meeting to discuss the commodity issue.  However, it might be something Members might wish to consider in the future.  The Secretariat also sought clarification on how Members envisaged the suggestions of bringing elements of trade and transfer of technology and trade, debt and finance into the CTD.  Those issues were already dealt with in the designated working groups, although their work had been suspended since the Fifth Ministerial Conference.
&& The Chairman said that he had not understood the suggestion by the representative of Canada to mean that the issues be brought to the CTD.  He had rather interpreted the remarks as a recognition that work on the issue had previously been undertaken in the CTD and that those working groups had spun off from the CTD, reflecting the progress made.  The question of what the CTD should do still remained.
 && The representative of Canada said that, as she had mentioned, her remarks had been preliminary.  When she considered Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration it asked the CTD to consider the negotiations whereas those other working groups were outside of the negotiations in that regard.  However, they were at the same time undertaking work related to development.  Her question related more to how that work could come back in some form of productive holistic discussion.  Members also spent many weeks discussing those matters in UNCTAD at the same time.  Her idea was not to duplicate those discussions in the WTO.  However, matters seemed to be split within the WTO and Members had to consider how to deal with development in the WTO, and especially with respect to the CTD Work Programme.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that, in response to the intervention by the representative of Canada, he feared that keeping the CTD Work Programme in draft form until the following meeting of the Committee would leave Members with only half the year, i.e. two formal meetings, to actually carry out work.  Out of the agenda items listed in the draft Work Programme, five were recurring at every meeting.  The other items were of a more procedural nature such as the election of the CTD Chair and the Chair for the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  Future meetings would thus seem to be repetitions of the current meeting.  In order to assist delegations plan, he suggested that the Committee take a decision with respect to the regularly recurring items but that it be left open to add to the Committee's work if Members wished to add other items or had well thought through ideas in the future.  However, that should not prevent the Committee from adopting its 2004 Work Programme.  The Committee would have to await the May 2004 meeting to adopt its Work Programme.  He said that he was hesitant to bring the work of the Working Groups on Trade, Debt and Finance and Trade and Transfer of Technology to the CTD.  They were independent working groups with specific development-related work programmes and they carried out good work in their specific areas.  There was no value added in bringing their work to the CTD.  There would rather be a risk of duplicating work.  The CTD should therefore let them carry on their work without interfering.
&& The Chairman said that it might be best to leave the Working Groups on Trade, Debt and Finance and Trade and Transfer of Technology to carry out their work.  CTD Members with ideas on that matter might also consult among themselves.
&& The representative of Kenya said that she wished to respond to the representative of Cuba's remarks on the issue of a high-level meeting on commodities.  That was a proposal her delegation had made in 2003.  However, Members had said that they first wished to have more substance to continue the discussion on the commodity issue.  The Secretariat had therefore been asked to compile an inventory on the commodity issue.  Members currently had to consider if the inventory could assist the discussions on the paper submitted by her delegation and others.  That path might be explored before Members came back to consider the holding of a high level meeting.  The proposal for a high‑level meeting on commodities was still on the table, although a decision with respect to it was pending.
&& The representative of India said that he agreed with the representative of Pakistan that the CTD had its terms of reference and had a good template for its agenda which it had been following so far.  That looked flexible and broad enough for Members to be able to add to.  The Committee should therefore agree to follow the same format for the next meeting, although some Members had suggested possible ways for the CTD to get a broad overview of developmental issues.  He said that overlap with the work of other WTO bodies also had to be avoided.  Members should therefore carefully consider the CTD's Work Programme and any action regarding Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration and be given a chance to come back to it.  The Committee could in the meantime continue its work based on following the existing template.
&& The representative of Cuba said that her delegation had not agreed with other Members' views expressed in 2003 that the Committee did not have enough substance to do real work on commodities.  Her delegation had nevertheless had to accept the consensus of the Membership and would therefore consider the inventory.  When considering bringing the work of the Working Groups on Trade, Debt and Finance and Trade and Transfer of Technology into the CTD, her delegation did not have reports in mind.  The CTD agenda was bogged down and her delegation hoped that progress could be made in order for Members to make contributions.  Simply receiving reports was not useful.  WTO Members could read such reports when they were issued by the working groups and did not need to have such reports referred to the CTD.  She said that what her delegation wished to see were substantive debates on those issues in the CTD, rather than a repetition of what other WTO bodies had already done.  There were interesting proposals in other WTO bodies that affected the CTD, such as in the area of services for example.  Her delegation sought substantive debates in the CTD which would integrate all development issues.
&& The representative of Barbados said that, while her delegation fully agreed that scarce human resources should not be spent on duplicating work ongoing in other fora, she was still attracted by the idea of having a holistic debate on WTO-related development issues in the CTD.  That was timely and constituted a useful exercise for Members to engage in.  Some informal consultations and further thought on that issue might be beneficial.  The CTD should be able to have a holistic debate on development issues of a non-negotiating nature without duplicating work of other WTO bodies, and should be able to find good objectives and extract useful lessons.
&& The representative of Canada said that the issue might be resolved if the Committee could agree with the proposal made by the representative of Pakistan that the Work Programme be adopted with a slight caveat at the end of the first paragraph which stated that "the Chairman would hold informal meetings when necessary".  The phrase "and add subjects to the agenda as agreed by Members" could be added there so that, if there was a buy-in to something new that the Membership wished to discuss, the Chairman could bring it forward.
&& The representative of the United States said that she could accept the change suggested by the representative of Canada.  However, the previous discussion had already related to the fact that standing items might not remain standing items forever.  Members might therefore wish to take a somewhat different approach and agree to consider the Work Programme in time for the following meeting, to see if items should be added or possibly temporarily deleted and to keep the same agenda for the next meeting.  If the agenda should be considered from the point of adding items, Members should also consider whether there were reasons to keep items on which there had not been any active substantive discussion for more than a year.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the proposal made by the representative of Canada was acceptable to his delegation.
&& The Chairman said that that did not remove the word "draft" from the document and that he still was looking forward to inputs and recommendations from Members as to the work they wish to undertake.  He suggested that feedback be provided either to himself or to the Secretariat.  Taking the point made by Pakistan into account, that if it was agreed to in May, only two subsequent formal meetings of the Committee remained, he asked Members to provide their inputs by the end of March so that the Committee by May 2004 would have an updated draft 2004 Work Programme before it as well as an agenda for that meeting which took Members wishes into account.  Members' contributions would assist him to both create the agenda Members wished to see for the May meeting but also to suggest a 2004 Work Programme outlining subsequent work requested by Members.  He urged Members to contribute towards a positive May meeting with in-depth discussions, at which decisions could also be taken on how to move forward.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made and agreed to the proposal made by the Chair.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON FOR THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST‑DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that he had been informed that consultations had led to a proposal for H.E. Mr. Ian de Jong, Ambassador of the Netherlands, to become the next Chairman of the Sub‑Committee.  He asked if that was acceptable to Members.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman said that Ambassador de Jong had vast diplomatic experience.  Before taking up his post as Ambassador in Geneva he had been the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Netherlands to the European Union in Brussels, before which he had served as Minister Plenipotentiary at the Netherlands Embassy in Bonn.  He had served in several other capitals including the Hague, Washington, Khartoum, and Beirut and he had actually been stationed with the Permanent Mission of the Netherlands in Geneva from 1977 to 1981.  He had also served as an Executive Director of the Inter-American Investment Cooperation in Washington.  Ambassador de Jong's vast experience would be a valuable asset to the work that he was about to undertake.  Before concluding the item, he reminded Members that the next meeting of the Sub‑Committee was scheduled for Tuesday, 9 March 2004.

OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman said that the representative of the EC had indicated its wish to take the floor under "Other Business".
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation wished to inform Members of the launch of a new database service by the European Communities' Commission called the "Expanding Exports Helpdesk".  It was a database on the Internet which was freely accessible.  However, the intended audience was exporters in developing countries.  The main rationale behind the initiative was that one reason why exporters in developing countries did not take full advantage of market access concessions offered was because of insufficient information about the preferences and the requirements applicable in order to benefit from them.  The new database had been established in response to that perceived need.  It was a service with a user-friendly interface.  The information provided covered import tariffs for the EC, including under preferential regimes such as the GSP, the ACP and free-trade agreements.  It provided information on the customs documents that had to be presented with particular shipments and the requirements that had to be fulfilled.  It provided information on the rules of origin applicable in order to qualify for preferences, and it provided statistical information on the EC market in terms of exports of individual products at the level of EC member States.  There was also a service provided called the "Trade Forum" which was a bulletin board and meeting place for potential buyers and sellers in the EC market.  In addition, the site included a list of links to other relevant sources of information on the EC market, including customs authorities and additional information on the EC's Europa-site as well as trade associations, chambers of commerce, relevant international organizations such as the ITC and the WTO.  The help desk would be developed and improved in several stages.  For example, the intention was to include information on internal taxation of particular products, information on import documentation, and legislation affecting access to the EC market such as in the area of technical barriers to trade and sanitary and phytosanitary requirements.  His delegation was well aware that the tariff levied was not the only requirement on which an exporter might wish to obtain information.  Non-tariff measures and regulations were also an area in which information was needed.  He said that the aim was also to provide information in other EC languages other than English, once the resources permitted.  He said that he admitted that it was a weakness that the database only existed in English, but repeated that the intention was to pursue further improvements and add additional modules and services in due course.  Any feed-back from users of the site regarding improvements would accordingly be welcome and his delegation in Geneva could serve as an intermediary for any delegation wishing to comment.  There was also a contact link on the site itself which brought up an e-mail link to the manager of the database in Brussels, if Members preferred to comment that way.  He said that his delegation felt that there was a genuine need to meet existing information gaps between potential exporters and potential export markets.  His delegation was aware that despite the preferences offered for several years, their use had not been exhausted and one reason that potentially contributed to that was the lack of information on the requirements that had to be fulfilled to utilize the preferences.  It was an effort by his delegation to respond to that need by developing country exporters.  He said that his delegation was ready to advice any other delegation seeking more information about a particular tool or element of the database.
&& The Committee took note of the statement made.

__________


 Contained in document Job(03)/208.
 Internet location:  http://export-help.cec.eu.int 

WT/COMTD/M/48 Page  PAGE 28



	WT/COMTD/M/48 	Page  PAGE 29













