RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/1

15 May 1995

ORGANIZATION

(95-1262)

 

Committee on Trade and Development
First Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 5 APRIL 1995

Chairman: Mr. Haron Siraj (Malaysia)

&& 1. At the first Session of the Committee on Trade and Development on 5 April 1995, the Chairman
proposed that the draft agenda (WTO/AIR/43) be adopted. He said that discussion on the rules of
procedure would take place under item B and the programme of work and institutional arrangements
under item C. He proposed that, in response to requests from delegates, the Committee discuss future
technical cooperation activities of the World Trade Organization (WTO), under agenda item D, Other
business. The representative of India said his delegation would like to discuss the terms of reference
of the Committee on Trade and Development under Other business. The Committee then adopted
the agenda.

Item B Rules of Procedure of the Committee on Trade and Development
&& 2. The Chairman said that paragraph 2 of Article IV of the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing
the World Trade Organization requires the rules of procedure of the Committee on Trade and
Development to be approved by the General Council. He thought that, following the precedent that
had been established by other WTO bodies, the rules of procedure of the Committee on Trade and
Development should follow closely those of the General Council. He described the first two proposed
changes: (a) the Committee on Trade and Development would meet three times a year, with the
possibility of convening extraordinary meetings (Rule 1); and, (b) normal meetings would be convened
with a notice of four weeks (Rule 2). He invited Members to comment on the draft rules of procedure
circulated by the Secretariat. The representative of Morocco inquired whether it would not be better
to specify the months during which the Committee on Trade and Development would meet, as for
example had been done by the Committee on Agriculture. The Chairman said the issue would be dealt
with when addressing the Programme of Work; he was of the view that Members should have the
flexibility of deciding when to meet.

&& 3. The Chairman then went on to other proposed amendments: no proposed agenda would be
circulated other than that contained in the airgram which would be used to convene meetings of the
Committee on Trade and Development (Rule 5); there would be no vice-chairman, following the practice
under GATT 1947; a decision had not yet been taken on whether to establish a Sub-Committee on
Least-Developed Countries (so Rule 12bis was in brackets); and, matters on which a decision could
not be arrived at by consensus at the Committee on Trade and Development would be referred to the
General Council for a decision (Rule 33). The representative of the European Communities suggested
that, for the sake of consistency, the word "session" in the first sentence of the proposed Rule 12bis
should be replaced by "meeting". The Chairman said this comment would be taken into account in
revising the document.

&& 4. The Chairman went on to the proposed amendments to Rules 36 and 36bis; that the Committee
on Trade and Development present a yearly report to the General Council, which would be prepared,
following the last meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development, by the Chairman with the
assistance of the Secretariat. This report would be distributed as a "Spec" document, and comments
invited from Members. If no comments were forthcoming, the Report would be deemed to have been
adopted. The representative of Mexico agreed with the proposed amendment to Rule 36bis. However,
in Rule 36, his delegation wished to maintain the footnotes used in the Rules of Procedure of the General
Council. The representative of the United States said that his delegation agreed with the proposed
amendment to Rule 36bis. He stated that extraordinary meetings could be convened when necessary
to discuss the draft report. The Chairman agreed with the proposal by the representative of the U.S.
and added that he intended to submit the rules of procedure of the Committee on Trade and Development
to the General Council for approval.

Item C Programme of Work and Institutional Arrangements

(i) Observer Status

5. && The Chairman said that in accordance with the Ad Hoc Procedures on Participation of Certain
International Organizations in the Work of the WTO Bodies, the Committee on Trade and Development
had invited to its first meeting all those organizations which had observer status in the comparable
GATT 1947 body. Recalling the decision of the Informal Meeting of Heads of Delegation which had
authorized "each of the subsidiary bodies of the General Council ... to decide on an ad hoc basis at
each meeting which intergovernmental organizations they wished to invite as observers to their next
meeting”, the Chairman said the Committee on Trade and Development should decide which
organizations to invite to the next meeting which was scheduled for June of this year. He proposed
that the organizations which attended the first meeting be invited. The representative of Switzerland
said the ITC should be granted observer status in the Committee on Trade and Development, especially
considering the input it could offer in the technical cooperation activities of the WTO. The Chairman
indicated that the Committee would need to revert to this issue once the General Council completed
its work on the formulation of guidelines for observer status.

(ii) Draft Programme of Work

6. && The Chairman said that Item 6 of the Terms of Reference of the WTO Committee on Trade
and Development required the Committee to establish a programme of work, which might be reviewed
as necessary each year. Drawing the attention of delegations to the draft prepared by the Secretariat
(WT/COM.TD/W/2), he explained that two elements had been added to those already included in the
Terms of Reference: (i) "the review of the impact of the results of the Uruguay Round on developing
country Members, in particular on the least-developed country Members", and (ii) the "examination
of the question of credit and recognition for autonomous trade liberalization measures”.

7. && The representative of Tunisia said that with the creation of the WTO, the Committee on Trade
and Development had to discharge more onerous responsibilities, and hoped that Members of the WTO
would continue to work together to ensure the realisation of the objectives of the Marrakesh Agreement.
Stressing the need to ensure the incorporation of developing countries, especially the least-developed
ones, into the multilateral trading system, he commended the Secretariat for drawing up a harmonious
and well-thought out draft Programme of Work. The Committee on Trade and Development must
ensure, he said, that clauses and other provisions in favour of developing countries enshrined in the
WTO Agreement were implemented; this would not only enhance the credibility of the WTO, but
enable it to fulfil its mandate and ensure that the aims of the founding fathers were respected. Citing
passages from the Marrakesh Agreement on the need for positive measures to assist least-developed
countries and developing countries who are net-food importers, he welcomed the Chairman's suggestion
that the Committee on Trade and Development keep this subject under consideration. He thought the
Committee on Trade and Development should always consider the impact of GATT Part IV and the
Enabling Clause. Speaking for the African group, he underlined the need to implement the measures
in favour of least-developed countries, and contribute to an expansion of their trading opportunities
and their integration into the multilateral trading system. He supported the Chairman's proposal that
a Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries be established; the comparable body under GATT 1947
had done a splendid job. He went on to stress the indispensability of technical assistance, calling for
increased technical cooperation and assistance to developing countries, especially the least-developed
ones. He alluded to the problem of inadequate human and financial resources of the WTO, and reminded
delegates that the Marrakesh Agreement specifically called for increased technical assistance, and the
strengthening of GATT/WTO's capacity to provide technical assistance. For technical assistance to
be effective, he said it is important to be clear about three elements: the objective(s) to be achieved,
the means for achieving such objectives and an assessment of the likely problems. Without such an
approach and orientation, any technical assistance strategy was likely to fail. He welcomed the priority
thathad been given by the WTO to African countries in the field of technical cooperation and assistance.
African Trade Ministers meeting in Tunisia had called for increased technical cooperation and assistance
to their countries to help them discharge their increased obligations under the WTO Agreement. Tunisia,
speaking for the African group, would continue to press, in the Committee on Trade Development,
the Budget Committee and other bodies, for increased financial and human resources for the Secretariat
so it could broaden its technical assistance and cooperation activities to developing countries, especially
the least-developed countries, many of whom belong to the African continent. Concluding, he said
that for Africa to become a fully fledged partner in world trade, it must continue to receive technical
assistance and cooperation.

8. && The Chairman asked the Secretariat why the requirement that a report be made to the General
Council for appropriate action was in brackets in the draft Programme of Work. The Secretariat
responded that the Committee on Trade and Development, as a subsidiary body of the General Council,
was obliged to account to the General Council on its activities; it therefore appeared superfluous to
add that a report should be prepared for the General Council. The representatives of the European
Communities and Argentina agreed with the Secretariat's reasoning. The Chairman said the reporting
requirement would be deleted from the Programme of Work of the Committee on Trade and
Development.

9. && The representative of Poland said that while his delegation had no problem with the draft
Programme of Work, he enquired whether states parties to GATT 1947, who were observers at the
Committee on Trade and Development meetings, signatories to the Marrakesh Agreement and in the
process of becoming Members of the WTO, could be allowed to participate fully in the activities of
the Committee on Trade and Development, including receiving technical assistance. The Chairman
said that it was his understanding that such countries could be provided technical assistance by the
Secretariat.

10. && The representative of the United States supported the draft Programme of Work; it was
ambitious and very well organized. He thought it was necessary to ensure that work carried out under
Items C and D was not duplicated in other international organizations. He called for the circulation
of documents to Members well in advance of the meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development.
The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed that documents would be circulated four weeks in advance
of Committee on Trade and Development meetings.

11. && The representative of Argentina queried whether the draft Programme of Work properly reflected
the input the WTO should make in the work programme of the ITC and other international organizations
dealing with trade issues. He said that, as described in the Informal Note circulated by the Secretariat,
it was his understanding that the future orientation of the technical cooperation activities included the
follow-up of the programme of work of bodies such as the ITC. The representative of Venezuela
supported the query by representative of Argentina. The Chairman said that, in his personal opinion,
the mandate given to the Committee on Trade and Development was broad enough to permit it to engage
in any discussions or negotiations on the subject; the matter could be discussed further, later on in
the proceedings.

12. && The representative of Japan thought the provision of technical assistance to developing countries
was important in facilitating their integration into the multilateral trading system. GATT/WTO was
providing technical assistance to developing countries to assist them to comply with their obligations
under the Marrakesh Agreement. He called for closer collaboration with the ITC and UNCTAD to
ensure that the limited resources earmarked for technical cooperation and assistance were put to good
use.

13. The Chairman proposed a distribution of the individual items in the Programme of Work for
each meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development in 1995. The present meeting would tackle:
(i) organizational matters, (ii) institutional arrangements, and (iii) technical cooperation (i.e. item C
of the Programme of Work). The second meeting would (i) review the impact of the results of the
Uruguay Round on developing country Members, in particular the least-developed country Members,
(ii) consider measures and initiatives to assist in the expansion of trade and investment opportunities
for developing countries, especially the least-developed ones, (iii) address the question of credit and
recognition for autonomous trade liberalization measures, and (iv) consider technical cooperation activities
of the WTO. The third meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development would consider (i) the
participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system, (ii) WTO's technical
cooperation activities as they relate to developing country Members (in consultation with other relevant
WTO bodies), and (iii) the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and
related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, especially the least-developed
ones.

14.&& In the absence of comments, the Programme of Work was adopted. The Chairman urged
Members having any views on the Programme of Work to make written submissions by June. He
drew Members’ attention to the Secretariat document on notification (WT/COM.TD/W/1) and said
they may wish to comment under item D of the agenda - technical cooperation .

(ili) Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries


15. && The Chairman recommended the establishment of a Sub-Committee on Least-Developed
Countries. If a Sub-Committee was established, responsibility for all items on the agenda of the
Committee on Trade and Development concerning least-developed countries would be referred to it.
He suggested that Miss Anne Stoddart of the United Kingdom be appointed Chairperson of the Sub-
Committee. He invited delegations who may have views on the nomination to convey them to him.
The representative of Argentina, on behalf of the Informal Group of Developing Countries, expressed
support for Miss Anne Stoddart. The representative of Bangladesh preferred that a decision on the
Chairmanship of the Sub-Committee be taken at the present meeting. In response to the suggestion
by the representative of Bangladesh the Chairman thought it appropriate to give delegations time to
reflect on his proposal with respect to Miss Stoddart's nomination.

 
16.&&  Drawing attention to the informal note prepared by the Chairman on the draft Terms of Reference
of the Sub-Committee, the representative of Hong Kong suggested the following amendments; in
indent (a) there could be an enumeration of the specific needs of LDC's; in the first line of indent (b)
the appropriate word was “operation”; in indent (b) a reference to Ministerial Declarations and Decisions
could be added, as to refer only to Multilateral Trade Agreements was too restrictive. Thanking the
representative of Hong Kong for his valuable suggestions, the Chairman said that the observations
would be taken up during informal consultations on the terms of reference.

Item D Other Business

17. && The Chairman said that providing guidelines to WTO technical assistance for developing countries
was one of the important items of the terms of reference of the Committee on Trade and Development.
Expressing his appreciation for the informal note distributed by the Secretariat, he said that, after
preliminary discussions at this meeting, discussions would resume at the June meeting.

18. && The representative of Argentina, speaking on behalf of the Informal Group of Developing
Countries, said that developing countries, the main beneficiaries of technical assistance, had reached
a consensus on the question of technical assistance in the WTO. They were presenting the following
points as a contribution to the debate. (1) Developing countries believed that there should be an
increase in the resources of the Secretariat commensurate with the broadening of the responsibilities
of the WTO compared with those of the GATT; the considerably increased membership (once ratification
and accession procedures were completed) meant that requests for technical assistance were increasing
and would increase even more in the future. (2) Developing countries expressed their appreciation
for the technical cooperation and training activities of the Secretariat. (3) Developing countries
unanimously supported the Secretariat proposal for a special action plan for African countries and the
least-developed countries. (4) Developing countries placed importance on technical assistance and
cooperation with respect to notification requirements and changes in legislation required to fulfil
obligations arising from the Marrakesh Agreements. Document WT/COM.TD/W/1_ showed the
complexity of the notification requirements, and what needed to be done; it was clear that a special
programme of assistance would be needed from the Secretariat. (5) They requested the Secretariat
to organize a workshop devoted to questions relating to notification obligations and changes needed
in domestic rules and legislation to comply with the Marrakesh Agreements. This workshop could
also be open to developed countries. (6) Developing countries wanted a detailed discussion on the
technical cooperation activities of the Secretariat at the June meeting, and requested a special agenda
item on the issue.

 
19. && The representative of Venezuela said that, as stated by his delegation many times before,
providing technical cooperation activities should be among the first obligations of the WTO. While
the WTO Secretariat was the most competent source for technical cooperation, Venezuela did not believe
that it could respond to all the needs of developing countries; other organizations - such as UNCTAD
and ITC - had supplementary and complementary activities in this field. The role of these two
organizations was particularly important with respect to seminars to study commitments deriving from
the Uruguay Round. Seminars on specific topics related to the Uruguay Round should continue to
have a special place on the agenda of WTO technical cooperation activities. He went on that cooperation
between the Secretariats of the WTO and other intergovernmental organizations was essential; technical
cooperation activities required adequate planning and flexibility to get the maximum benefit from
resources. As an example, he said that when an official was sent to a country for a seminar, other
countries of the region could benefit from his presence and arrange similar activities. This would have
regional benefits and a spill-over/multiplying effect. Participation of the WTO officials in seminars
organized by other institutions would use minimum resources with maximum results. The proposal
to establish a plan of action for Africa and the least-developed countries recognized that the Secretariat
had a fundamental role to play. He underlined the importance of consultations on technical cooperation
activities even if they were time-consuming and did not form part of the activities themselves.

20. && The representative of Bangladesh fully supported the statement by the representative of Argentina,
on behalf of the Informal Group of Developing Countries. He thought the workshop on notifications
and required changes in legislation should be arranged as soon as possible; he suggested that officials
from capitals, who would ultimately have to do the work, be invited.

21. && The representative of Indonesia, speaking on behalf of ASEAN countries, said a workshop
would greatly assist developing countries with notification requirements arising from the WTO
Agreements and he agreed that officials from capitals be invited to participate. ASEAN countries,
he said, supported the regular training activities held in Geneva and proposed, for cost/benefit reasons,
that the WTO Secretariat send its experts to participate in seminars organized by regional groups.
ASEAN countries thought cooperation in providing technical assistance to developing countries, between
the WTO and other international organizations such as ITC and UNCTAD, should be increased. He
emphasized the importance of avoiding duplication, and of technical cooperation and assistance activities
being cost-effective.


22. && The representative of Switzerland said his country's support for technical cooperation could
be seen from bilateral assistance offered to developing countries and assistance to activities undertaken
by international and intergovernmental organizations. The lack of adequate resources prevented the
consensus that existed on the need to strengthen technical assistance being translated into action. His
delegation agreed, as stated by the representative of Argentina, on behalf of the Informal Group of
Developing Countries, that the responsibilities of the WTO had broadened because of increased
obligations and the increased number of countries wishing to become Members. Switzerland recognized
the quality and competence of the training provided by the Secretariat, an area in which they financed
a number of activities. Technical cooperation undertaken in the WTO should continue to be organized
with cooperation and coordination among Divisions so as to ensure that maximum benefit is derived
from available resources. The need for such coordination would undoubtedly be discussed in other
Committees, particularly when the structure of the Secretariat was discussed by the Committee on Budget,
Finance and Administration. It was essential to have a vision of all the needs; to define priorities
in coordination with intergovernmental organizations which undertook similar activities, such as the
ITC, UNCTAD, the World Bank and the IMF. He thought the Technical Cooperation and Training
Division should revise its paper, placing WTO activities in a global context. In view of the financial
difficulties of many donor countries, synergies between the WTO and other organizations should be
increased so as to yield maximum benefit from available resources.

23. && The representative of Egypt called on the Committee on Trade and Development to contribute
to the discussions in the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration by clearly identifying
technical assistance needs. The representative of Céte d'Ivoire shared the views expressed by the
representative of Argentina, on behalf of the Informal Group of Developing Countries. Her delegation
was concemed that regional seminars very often did not encourage the participation of experts from
sub-regional economic organizations. She suggested that in future they be invited to attend these
seminars; they could also serve to help the Secretariat in training and providing information, and could
help in standardizing regulations in most regions, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, bringing them in
line with the WTO provisions. The Chairman said the Secretariat would take note of her suggestions
and bear them in mind when organizing future activities.

24. && The representative of the United States expressed appreciation for the technical cooperation
activities of the WTO for developing countries, particularly for least-developed countries. He expressed interest in future activities outlined in the Secretariat's paper and asked for further details. Like other
delegations, the U.S. was interested in further cooperation between the WTO and other intergovernmental
organizations including WIPO.

25. && The representative of the European Communities fully supported the technical cooperation
activities of the Secretariat. He said the EC also provided assistance on a bilateral basis. In this regard
the EC was committed to the Marrakesh Declaration and other Decisions. Several steps were necessary
to ensure the wide participation of developing countries in the Uruguay Round Agreements. It was
important to have the right priorities, and ratification of the Agreements along with the finalization
of schedules, was an area where the EC has been providing assistance. Developing country Members
needed to participate actively in the work of the various Committees. The EC was of the view that
there should be a clear identification of the technical assistance needs and the priorities of developing
countries. The statement by the representative of Argentina, on behalf of the Informal Group of
Developing Countries, was interesting and some ideas should be further developed.

26. && The representative of Senegal said his country has received much support in the area of technical
assistance. The national seminar held in October 1994 had facilitated ratification by the Parliament.
He welcomed the note on technical cooperation and stressed the importance of the orientation of technical
cooperation activities in the future and the need for increasing the share devoted to Africa. Technical
assistance in trade matters was also broader and more complex than before, as trade had direct linkages
with many other sectors - e.g. transport, customs services, telecommunications. He said accompanying
measures would need to be taken in all these areas to ensure that efforts went in the right direction
and that the trade efficiency of African countries grew. He then made three proposals. First, the WTO
should extend its activities, and better coordinate them with ITC. This could be an effective and high
performance tool at the service of WTO Members. Second, the Secretariat should catalogue the multiple
needs of countries for technical assistance along with the States and international organizations able
to meet these needs. Third, the Secretariat must be strengthened and given the means for the financing
and staffing required to implement its policies. He noted that while a number of delegations wished
to strengthen the Secretariat, others thought the Secretariat could do better and more without increased
resources. While it was important to agree on the future focus and orientation of technical cooperation
activities, he feared that the WTO would simply manage the present without preparing for the future.
The role of the Committee on Trade and Development was to have a broad view of all the likely
problems. The representative of Switzerland supported the proposal by Senegal that the Secretariat
draw up a catalogue of technical cooperation needs and of the "offers in the market”.

27. && The Chairman noted the comments on technical cooperation and training activities and agreed
to revert to this matter at the next meeting. He encouraged delegations to come to the next meeting
with constructive ideas to improve the technical cooperation programmes. He then asked delegates
whether they agreed to the proposal made by the representative of Argentina that the Secretariat organize
as soon as possible a workshop on notification obligations and on other implementation obligations,
open to both developing and developed countries. Mr. Jestis Seade, Deputy Director-General, said
that such a workshop could be organized within the existing budget. The Chairman said officials from
capitals would also be invited to attend the workshop, at their own expense. The Chairman said the
agreement of the Committee on Trade and Development to this proposal would be transmitted on an
urgent basis to the Secretariat.

28. && The representative of Argentina, speaking on behalf of the Informal Group of Developing
Countries, then spoke on the question of technical cooperation and the ITC. First, the Group
recommended that the Chairman of the General Council forward the informal note on the ITC by the
Secretariat, dated 16 March 1995, to the ITC Secretariat with the following three comments: (i) that
there was agreement on the importance of ITC cooperating with the private sector in developing
countries; (ii) that a central element of ITC technical cooperation activities should continue to be to
an area where the ITC had considerable experience; and (iii) that duplication should be avoided with
respect to other international organizations when implementing such a work plan. Second, the Group
was asking the Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development to undertake consultations,
in the coming weeks, with the main donors of ITC and other interested countries: (i) on providing
effective contributions to the next biennial work programme of the ITC which would be discussed in
the forthcoming Joint Advisory Group; and (ii) on the possibility of creating a permanent working
group to deal specifically with the work programme of the ITC, and possibly the work programme
of other international organizations.

29. && The representative of India requested the Chairman's consultations be held as early as possible;
it was important to signal the importance of the ITC for all WTO Members. The representative of
Switzerland said that as a major donor, Switzerland had taken note of the very concrete and interesting
proposals made by the representative of Argentina. He stated that discussions on the work programme
could not ignore financial realities. He drew attention to the fact that the contribution of the WTO
to ITC accounted for around 17 per cent of the budget of the WTO.

30. && The Chairman clarified that, in light of the ongoing consultations between the Chairman of
the General Council and ITC, the first point raised by the representative of Argentina would be
communicated to the Chairman of the General Council. With respect to the second point made by
the representative of Argentina, he stated that the consultations would be of a very informal nature;
they would be done also in his capacity as Chairman of the Joint Advisory Group, and with the hope
that they would contribute to the work of the Chairman of the General Council. The Committee took
note of the statements made.

31. && The representative of India indicated that his delegation had a proposal to make concerning
the terms of reference of the Committee on Trade and Development. The GATT 1947 Committee
on Trade and Development had a mandate divided in two parts - the terms of reference themselves
and a mandate deriving from a Decision of 1979 to strengthen the role of the Committee. Among
the items included in the latter, there was the "examination of protective action by developed countries
against imports from developing countries." Unfortunately, this important item did not figure in the
terms of reference of the Committee on Trade and Development in the WTO. He stated that India
would like to see this mandate explicitly listed among the terms of reference of the Committee on Trade
and Development. Nobody, he said, could dispute that the Committee on Trade and Development
was the right forum in the WTO to deal with this item. He expected a reaction to this proposal at
the next meeting. He then asked for a confirmation that the Committee on Trade and Development
was empowered on the basis of consensus, to establish or to reconvene Sub-Committees.

32. && The Chairman confirmed that the Committee on Trade and Development had the power to
establish Sub-Committees. He urged delegations to give serious consideration to India's proposal;
he called on India to elaborate its proposal perhaps through a written communication. The representative
of Venezuela indicated his delegation's support to India’s proposal. The Committee took note of the
statements made and agreed to revert to this question at its next meeting.

Next Meeting of the Committee

33. && The Chairman said that the Committee would be convened again in June. The precise date
of the meeting would be determined by the Chairman in consultation with delegations and the Secretariat.
