WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/79
3 September 2010


(10-4558)


Committee on Trade and Development
Seventy-Ninth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 28 JUNE 2010

Chairman:  H. E. Mr. Erwidodo (Indonesia)



 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190226" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC271190226 \H 1
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190227" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC271190227 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc271190228" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc271190228 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc271190229" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc271190229 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190230" C.	Report of the 43rd Session of the Joint Advisory Group on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XLIII)/232)	 PAGEREF _TOC271190230 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190231" D.	Notifications Under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC271190231 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190232" -	gulf cooperation council (GCC) notification of customs union	 PAGEREF _TOC271190232 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190233" E.	Decision on Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC271190233 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190234" -	general council decision of 14 december 2006 (WT/L/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC271190234 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190235" -	transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements - draft proposal by brazil, china, india and the united states (JOB(08)/103/Rev.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC271190235 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190236" F.	Review of Steps Taken to Provide Duty-Free and Quota-Free Market Access to Least-Developed Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC271190236 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190237" G.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC271190237 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc271190238" (i)	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2009 (WT/COMTD/W/173)	 PAGEREF _Toc271190238 \h 9
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc271190239" (ii)	Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2009 (WT/COMTD/W/174)	 PAGEREF _Toc271190239 \h 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC271190240" H.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC271190240 \H 13


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for 79th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3568 issued on 4 June 2010.  He drew Members' attention to agenda item D concerning notifications under the Enabling Clause, and in particular the sub-item relating to the notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union.  He said that he had been consulting with a number of the concerned delegations on this matter and that, while the sub-item appeared on the agenda for the present meeting, he did not intend to open the floor for any substantive discussion.  He said that he would continue his consultations, and that Members would be kept informed. Turning next to agenda item E, he said that the proponents of a Transparency Mechanism (TM) for Preferential Trade Arrangements (PTAs) – Brazil, China, India and the US – had recently circulated, in document JOB(08)/103/Rev.2, a second revision to their draft proposal. Members had been informed by fax that it was this second revision  that was the appropriate one for consideration under agenda item E, and not the previous version of the document – JOB(08)/103/Rev.1 – which appeared on the draft agenda for the 79th Session. 
&& The representative of India said that his delegation intended to make an intervention under agenda item D.
&& The representative of Egypt said that Members had agreed at the 78th Session of the CTD to postpone discussions on the notification of the GCC Customs Union, on the understanding that the Chairman's informal consultations with all concerned delegations would continue.  However, since the 78th Session, his delegation had not been consulted on the matter, nor had it taken part in any informal consultations called by the Chairman.  In light of this, his delegation wished to make an intervention under agenda item D.
&& The Chairman said that he wished to add a matter under "Other Business" concerning the periodic update of the Secretariat paper on the Developmental Aspects of the Doha Round of Negotiations.
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.
It was so agreed.
REPORT OF THE 43RD SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XLIII)/232)
&& The Chairman said that the report of the 43rd session of the Joint Advisory Group (JAG) on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC) was contained in ITC document ITC/AG(XLIII)/232.  He welcomed Ambassador Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago, The Chairman of the 43rd session of the JAG, and Ms. Eva Murray, the Director of the Division for Programme Support at the ITC.  He invited Ambassador Francis to introduce the report. 
&& The Chairman of the JAG said that the JAG had held its 43rd session on 14 and 15 December 2009.  The Group had been convened to discuss the ITC's Annual Report for 2008 and the preliminary Annual Report for 2009, the Consolidated Programme Document for 2010, and the ITC's Strategic Plan for 2010 to 2013.  In his opening remarks, the Director-General of the WTO had welcomed the ITC's follow-up on its commitment to enhance its monitoring and evaluation capacity, as well as its focus on improving export competitiveness.  The Deputy Secretary-General of UNCTAD had emphasized the important role that the ITC had in helping the private sector respond to new market opportunities and develop business capabilities.  The need to mainstream trade into the national development strategies of developing countries, and the importance of inter-agency cooperation on trade issues were also highlighted in the opening session.  In her statement to the Group, the Executive Director of the ITC had indicated that the essential ingredients for market success and maintaining competitiveness were long-term strategic planning, flexibility and agility. There was also a need to embrace innovation, and to establish regional, intra-regional and public‑private partnerships and alliances.  The Executive Director had further indicated that the ITC was in the second year of its Strategic Planning cycle and, having completed the change management process, was now focused on quality, delivery, results and impact.  The results from the ITC's annual client survey showed that satisfaction with the agency's performance had improved from 38 per cent in 2007 and 43 per cent in 2008, to 56 per cent in 2009. 
The JAG Chairman continued by saying that the Group had endorsed the Consolidated Programme Document for 2010 and the Strategic Plan for 2010 to 2013.  Many delegations had stressed the importance of the ITC's work, and in particular the support for small and medium-sized enterprises in developing countries.  Delegations were particularly appreciative of the connection between the ITC's programmes and efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.  In this regard, the ITC's activities in developing the capacity of poor communities to engage in international export trade were highlighted.  Delegations also emphasized the need to mainstream gender concerns and to factor considerations related to climate change into ITC programmes.  The JAG further underlined the importance of the Aid-for-Trade Initiative, in the context of which the ITC focused on the private sector.  Appreciation was expressed for efforts undertaken to improve the performance and effectiveness of trade support institutions in developing countries, as well as for a new initiative to assist LDCs in the WTO accession process. 
He informed the Committee that the JAG had welcomed the introduction of results-based management.  However, some delegations had felt that there was still considerable work to be done to establish clear baselines for measuring performance, prior needs assessment, verifiable indicators and links between outputs and outcome and developmental impacts.  Finally, he mentioned that government representatives had announced voluntary contributions to the ITC.  In this regard, he thanked Canada, China, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Romania, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom.
&& The representative of Canada welcomed the progress made by the ITC in the area of results‑based management.  He indicated that his delegation would continue to support the ITC in its efforts to implement a results-based system, in which outcomes and indicators were well identified so as to allow performance measurement.
&& The representative of Zambia, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed appreciation for the ITC's efforts to enhance the participation of LDCs in international trade.
The Director of the ITC's Division for Programme Support said that the ITC looked forward to continuing to work collaboratively with delegations in the future.
The Committee took note of the report of the 43rd session of the JAG and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL (GCC) NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMS UNION
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation wished to raise a number of matters arising from the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV, which were believed to have substantive systemic implications.  The systemic issue that his delegation believed required consideration did not relate specifically to when a notification of a regional trade agreement (RTA) should be made, or whether an RTA qualified for notification under a specific WTO provision.  Nor did it relate to the rationale justifying the use of two distinct provisions as the legal basis to notify the GCC Agreement.  Rather, the issue related to the legal implications of notifying the GCC Agreement under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV without either notification being revoked or withdrawn.  These legal implications affected how the CTD delineated its responsibilities and fulfilled its terms of reference (TORs) and, more broadly, how the CTD would deal in the future with RTAs between developing country Members that were notified under the Enabling Clause. 
He went on to say that the issue had become more relevant in light of the process that the GCC Agreement had gone through.  In particular, the concerns raised by some Members when the Agreement was notified exclusively under the Enabling Clause had led to another notification under GATT Article XXIV.  This had been done notwithstanding the fact that the former CTD Chairman had indicated at the 69th and 70th Sessions that the GCC Agreement was scheduled to be considered in a dedicated session of the CTD.  Furthermore, his delegation believed that the arrangement through which it had been decided that the Agreement would be referred to the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) for consideration tested a number of procedural and legal understandings relating to the notification of RTAs between developing countries.  He pointed to one of the conclusions drawn by the Secretariat in its 2003 Legal Note on Regional Trade Arrangements under the Enabling Clause – circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/114 – which was that if consultations of an RTA among developing countries to which the Enabling Clause might apply were to be conducted by the CRTA, they should be carried out according to the procedures and TORs provided to the CRTA by the CTD.  Accordingly, clarification was sought as to what TORs the CTD had provided the CRTA with to consider the GCC Agreement. 
He said that Egypt – along with China, India and Pakistan – had requested an update to the Secretariat's Legal Note.  The purpose was to address the legal and procedural systemic implications arising from the dual notification of the GCC Agreement, as well as to provide further clarity on the respective roles of the CTD and the CRTA and to reflect changes in ground realities as they related to the application of the TM for RTAs.  He pointed to paragraph 1 of the CTD's TORs, which stated that the CTD was to serve as the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO.  In light of this, he observed that the CTD should not casually pass on this systemic issue to other WTO bodies, including the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR).  In fact, Egypt was of the view that the NGR should be invited to the proceedings of the CTD under the present agenda item, with a view to assisting in the update of the Legal Note.  Finally, he recalled that paragraph 4 of the CTD's TORs entitled the Committee to consider any questions which may arise with regard to either the application or the use of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and report to the General Council for appropriate action.  He said that this justified the basis upon which his delegation was requesting that the present item be maintained on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting. 
&& The representative of India supported the intervention by Egypt.  He expressed appreciation to the Chairman for his informal consultations on the GCC issue, and supported the intention to continue these consultations with all interested parties.  He said that it was a well-known fact that discussions in the CTD on the important systemic issues relating to the notification and consideration of the GCC Customs Union had eluded consensus.  He hoped that the informal consultations would help the CTD in taking decisions relating to the notification and consideration of the GCC Customs Union and other related matters, such as the updating of the Secretariat's Legal Note.
&& The representative of Pakistan supported the intervention by Egypt and expressed his delegation's interest to participate in any informal consultations on this matter. 
&& The representative of China associated himself with the statements made by Egypt and India.  He said that his delegation had previously raised systemic concerns on the GCC issue, but had not been consulted since the last CTD meeting.  He believed that informal consultations called by the CTD Chairman, and involving all the interested parties, would contribute to a satisfactory and expeditious solution.  His delegation looked forward to participating in these consultations, and to engaging in a fuller discussion on this matter at the next CTD meeting.
&& The representative of the United States expressed disappointment that this matter was being discussed at all in the CTD, since it was the subject of ongoing informal consultations.  The GCC item had been dealt with according to procedures, and the matter had been resolved.  Her delegation felt that what China, Egypt, India and Pakistan were seeking was a systemic discussion on RTAs under the Enabling Clause.  If this was the case, the US was willing to engage in such a discussion, but not under the present agenda item and not until the proponents had further elaborated their concerns.  Until then, the US would not agree to accept a standing agenda item on this matter.  Regarding the request for a revision to the Legal Note, her delegation's position had not changed.  In particular, the US would not accept a decision to allow the Secretariat to formulate an opinion on the legal status of Members' actions, as this would be wholly inappropriate.  The US saw no practical reason for the Legal Note to be revised or updated. 
&& The representative of the European Union said that his delegation was disappointed that the present item remained on the CTD's agenda.  However, the EU was willing to work with others in order to try to find a satisfactory solution.  Noting that the present item remained on the CTD's agenda because of the systemic concerns of some Members, he recalled that at the last meeting of the General Council there had been broad support for a proposal by China, India and Pakistan to review the operation of the TM for RTAs.  He suggested that this might be the appropriate process through which any systemic concerns relating to RTAs could be addressed.
&& The Chairman said that he intended to continue his consultations on this matter with all interested delegations.
The Committee took note of all interventions. 
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS 
-	GENERAL COUNCIL DECISION OF 14 DECEMBER 2006 (WT/L/672)
-	TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS - DRAFT PROPOSAL BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND THE UNITED STATES (JOB(08)/103/REV.2)
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The Council had since extended the deadline to its July 2010 meeting.
He said that, since the last CTD meeting, he had been speaking individually to a number of delegations on the issue of transparency for PTAs.  He had engaged in talks with some of the proponents of the TM for PTAs, as well as with some of the other delegations that had been participating in the small-group informal consultations on this matter.  He had recently called a small‑group informal consultation in order to take stock of where things stood on the discussions regarding the establishment of the TM for PTAs.  At the consultation, the proponents had indicated that they had been working with other delegations in revising their draft text.  They had shared with the group a revised version of their draft proposal, which had subsequently been circulated as document JOB(08)/103/Rev.2.  This was an indication of real progress.  At the present meeting, he said that he would offer the proponents the opportunity to introduce their revision.  In case it became clear that more work was needed, he would hold further informal consultations leading up to the General Council meeting of 29 July 2010.  He was also keeping open the possibility of reconvening the CTD, in case he felt that this issue could be brought to a closure before the General Council meeting.  On the other hand, if discussions had not advanced to the point where the CTD could come to an agreement, he would report to the General Council on all the work that had been undertaken since the Council had last been briefed in December 2009.
&& The representative of Brazil recalled that, when adopting the TM for RTAs in December 2006, the General Council had also invited the CTD to consider transparency for PTAs.  In this regard, Brazil and India had in October 2007 circulated a non-paper in document JOB(07)/142, calling for the establishment of a TM for PTAs.  The US and China had subsequently joined as proponents of the initiative.  He explained that, by setting out procedural requirements, the proposed PTAs TM sought to enhance transparency, and therefore Members' understanding of the many existing PTAs.  Though there were several similarities between the RTAs Mechanism and the proposed PTAs Mechanism, he noted that RTAs and PTAs were substantially different in their nature, their legal basis and their operation.  This implied different notification and reporting obligations.  Even though a number of issues had kept the CTD from agreeing to the draft proposal within the timelines that had been set out, substantial progress had been made.  Members now had greater clarity on the proposed PTAs TM and had also narrowed the gaps in their positions. 
He indicated that the document that had recently been issued was a revised version of  document JOB(08)/103/Rev.1 of 27 November 2009, which had been circulated prior to the 77th Session of the CTD.  The latest revision was the result of several small-group meetings and bilateral consultations.  While the structure of the document remained unaltered, a series of adjustments had been made at the request of certain Members, or as a reaction to many of their comments and suggestions.  Some of the modifications to the text were primarily stylistic, but others addressed specific concerns – both procedural and substantive – that had been raised through the consultation process.  The adjustments sought to increase the clarity and concision of the text.  They also took into account the concerns of developing countries – particularly the beneficiaries of PTAs – by addressing their technical constraints and their request for an adequate level of participation in the notification process.  He added that many changes to the draft proposal were aimed at keeping the burden on the notifying Members to a minimum, without reducing the necessary level of ambition of the Mechanism.  
Among the modifications, he drew the Committee's attention to what was now paragraph 16.  He indicated that the paragraph had been significantly restructured so as to make it more objective and precise.  Additionally, a new footnote to paragraph 3 made a distinction between a new PTA and a renewed PTA.  The purpose of  this footnote was to clarify what changes in a PTA would require a full new notification.  He also pointed to paragraph 7(c), which specified that beneficiary countries would have the opportunity to view the draft factual presentation of a PTA prepared by the Secretariat.  The proponents believed that such a formulation met the needs of the beneficiaries in terms of their participation in the notification process, without imposing an unnecessary burden on the Secretariat or compromising the efficacy of the Mechanism.  Finally, a new paragraph 15 had been inserted, limiting the scope of the Mechanism to issues under the WTO's legal mandate.  The proponents felt that the text had evolved to a point where it was ready to be discussed in an informal, open-ended setting. 
&& The representative of India associated his delegation with the intervention by Brazil.  He shared the Chairman's optimism that the CTD could agree to the draft proposal either at the present meeting or at a separate CTD meeting convened before the July General Council meeting. 
&& The representative of China supported the intervention by Brazil and highlighted the urgent need to conclude the discussions on the establishment of the TM for PTAs.  He noted that significant progress had been made, and expressed his hope that this momentum would lead to a swift conclusion to the CTD's discussions. 
&& The representative of the United States supported the intervention by Brazil.  She expressed her appreciation to the Chairman for his leadership, and to other Members for their constructive engagement.
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation had some comments on the revised draft proposal that would be shared with participants in the next private informal consultation that the Chairman would be calling.
&& The Chairman said that he would continue to work with delegations on this matter over the coming weeks. 
The Committee took note of all interventions.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for least-developed countries (LDCs) had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they had been taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  He recalled that the CTD had to date undertaken four of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision.
&& The representative of China said that, as a developing country faced with numerous developmental challenges, China fully understood the difficulties confronting LDCs in their economic development.  China had, therefore, always done its utmost to expand its bilateral cooperation with LDCs, including through the provision of DFQF market access for LDCs' exports.  In 2001, China had started to provide zero-tariff treatment to products imported from LDCs.  Since then, the scope of beneficiaries and products had been gradually expanding. China currently offered zero-tariff treatment on more than 1,000 tariff lines for products imported from 41 LDCs, which covered most of the LDCs' exports to China.  This treatment, together with many other bilateral initiatives, had made important contributions to the economic and trade cooperation between China and the LDCs.  Data from the WTO showed that, in 2008, China had become the world largest export destination for LDCs, absorbing 23 per cent of their total exports.
He went on to say that, at the UN's high-level meeting on the Millennium Development Goals in 2008, the Chinese Premier had made a commitment to provide zero-tariff treatment for LDCs' products on 95 per cent of tariff lines.  Just a few days prior to the present meeting, the Chinese Government had announced that, from 1 July 2010, China would grant zero-tariff treatment on 4,762 tariff lines for products imported from the 33 LDCs that had completed the exchange of letters for that purpose.  A further eight LDCs would enjoy the same treatment once the exchange of letters was completed.  Members could find the relevant information on the website of the Chinese Ministry of Finance:  HYPERLINK "http://www.mof.gov.cn" www.mof.gov.cn.  China had identified the 4,762 tariff lines together with its LDC partners, targeting the items on which LDCs had demonstrated their actual or potential export capacity.  These tariff lines accounted for 98.2 per cent of all LDCs' exports to China in value terms in 2008.  China intended to continue to expand the scope of such treatment to the LDCs with the aim of achieving the final objective of including 95 per cent of tariff lines under zero-tariff treatment from relevant LDCs.  Given the uneven and fragile economic recovery, China's actions clearly demonstrated its firm determination to maintain an open and fair multilateral trading system, and its good faith in honouring its commitments towards LDCs.
&& The representative of Zambia, on behalf of the LDC Group, thanked those Members that had taken initiatives to provide enhanced market access for products originating from LDCs.  Enhanced market access was a critical element for LDCs in their efforts to integrate into the global economy.  She noted, however, that there was still additional work to be done – by developed countries and by developing countries in a position to do so – to fully and effectively implement the Hong Kong Decision, including with regard to rules of origin.  This was one of the issues on which the LDCs were seeking an early implementation as part of the development outcome of the Doha Development Agenda.  The LDC Group looked forward to Members' positive actions to fully implement the Hong Kong Decision.
&& The representative of India said that his country was the first developing country to have announced a comprehensive scheme under the DFQF mandate to provide zero-duty and preferential market access for all LDCs.  In particular, the Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for LDCs had been announced by the Indian Prime Minister on the occasion of the India-Africa Forum Summit of African Heads of States and Governments and their official representatives in New Delhi in April 2008.  India had taken the utmost care to ensure that the DFTP Scheme would not be a mere token measure, but that it would provide effective and substantial market access to products of export interest to LDCs.  Given India's large market and the demand for products of interest to LDCs, his delegation was confident that the DFTP Scheme would play a key role in ensuring that the share of LDCs in India's imports grew at an accelerated pace.  
He went on to say that the Scheme was comprehensive, simple and non-reciprocal.  It provided preferential market access on tariff lines that comprised 92.5 per cent of the global exports of all LDCs.  Products of immediate interest to LDCs covered under the DFTP Scheme included cotton, cocoa, aluminium ores, copper ores, cashew nuts, cane-sugar, ready-made garments, fish fillets and non-industrial diamonds.  Only 6 per cent of lines were in the exclusion list of the Scheme.  The Scheme was open to all 49 LDCs, including 33 African LDCs.  It was procedurally simple to operate and required individual LDCs to submit a letter of intent and the list of agencies authorized to issue certificates of origin.  India would carry out more outreach activities in order to disseminate the benefits of the Scheme for LDCs, and would make efforts to dovetail the Scheme with other technical assistance (TA) activities provided to LDCs. The Committee would be kept updated.
The Committee took note of all interventions.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2009 (WT/COMTD/W/173)
Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2009 (WT/COMTD/W/174)
The Chairman said that there were two reports for consideration under this agenda item, namely the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training  for 2009 (TA Report) – circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/173 – and the Technical Cooperation Audit Report  for 2009 (Audit Report) – circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/174.  He invited the Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) and the Head of the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit (TCAU) to introduce the TA Report and the Audit Report, respectively.
The Director of the ITTC expressed appreciation to Members for their active engagement with the Secretariat in the preparation of the Biennial Technical Assistance and Training Plan for 2010 and 2011 (TA Plan). This interactive process, which had included bilateral discussions and consultations with regional groupings, had allowed the Secretariat to gain an appreciation of Members' TA priorities and to reflect them in the Plan.  The dialogue with Members would continue through the implementation period of the Plan. 
He said that the Secretariat had been able to take into account almost all of the recommendations on TA that had been made by Members.  The issue of progressive learning was one example.  He recalled that concerns had been expressed about the capacity of some LDCs to access the introductory e-training courses that had been established as a pre-requisite to move to the mid‑level regional courses and the advanced specialized courses.  In response, the Secretariat had introduced greater flexibility in the implementation of progressive learning, including through the development of a CD-ROM. 
Another recommendation from Members related to the need for the WTO to strengthen its collaboration with regional institutions.  In this regard, he said that such collaboration was one of the priorities in the implementation of the TA Plan.  In Africa, collaboration was being strengthened with the African Development Bank, the African Union Commission, the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa and others.  In Asia, the Secretariat collaborated with the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the Asian Development Bank, among others.  As for the Arab region, links were being strengthened with the Islamic Development Bank, the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia and the Arab Monetary Fund.  Finally, in Latin America, efforts were directed to enhancing relations with the Inter-American Development Bank and the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean.  
A third issue that had been raised by Members concerned outreach activities directed to national and regional media, as well as to members of Parliament.  In this regard, he informed the Committee that links with the media were on the increase, and training activities were being implemented for members of Parliament.  Additionally, efforts to enhance relations with universities, including through the WTO Chairs Programme, were being strengthened.  On a fourth point that had been made by Members, concerning the importance of the various internship programmes, he said that he was pleased to announce that financial contributions had allowed the number of interns to double to about 20.  He added that the Secretariat's support for the WTO Reference Centres was being focused on LDCs, in response to the recognition by the membership of the particular needs of these countries.  Finally, in response to Members' recommendation for greater synergy between the WTO and other institutions, including the ITC and UNCTAD, he said that significant progress had been made in the coordination of activities.  Work was close to completion on a new online database which would contain information on all TA activities being carried out in different beneficiary countries.  It was expected that the database would be online on an experimental basis as of 1 July 2010, and would be officially launched in September 2010. 
The Head of the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit (TCAU) said that the Audit Report focused on three topics, namely a follow-up on previous recommendations made by the TCAU, an ex‑post evaluation of the long-term internship programmes, and the effects and impact on Members from the TA received from the WTO over the years.
Regarding the follow-up on previous recommendations, he said that a number of recommendations on the management of TA activities and performance measurement had been implemented.  For example, a new task force bringing together regional desks and divisional TA focal points was promoting cross-fertilization among trainers.  Significant progress had also been observed with regard to both the volume and the quality of Back-to-Office-Reports on TA activities.  Furthermore, consultations with regional groupings had been organized to prepare the TA Plan for 2010 and 2011.  Some changes had also been made in the operation of the regional desks. 
He said that the TCAU had formulated a number of activity-specific recommendations concerning WTO Reference Centres, e-training, Trade Facilitation Needs Assessments and regional trade policy courses (RTPCs).  The new strategy for Reference Centres adopted as part of the TA Plan responded to the main recommendations that had been formulated by the TCAU in 2007.  Progress on e-training continued but there were still a number of issues to settle, including the need to fill the gaps in the thematic coverage of the courses.  In the area of trade facilitation, he noted that one-week follow-up regional seminars were being organized to demonstrate how the proposals currently under negotiation had been implemented in certain parts of the world.  He added that many of the TCAU's recommendations on RTPCs had started to be implemented in 2009, which had led to significant improvements in the management of the course programme.  Reporting was now systematic, and the programme and preparatory workshops had been refocused.  However, some past recommendations by the TCAU needed to be reinforced.  Notably, the TCAU had noted that there was continued pressure to organize too many activities, many of which were relatively short in duration but targeted to a relatively large number of participants.  
On the ex-post evaluation of long-term internship programmes, he said that the programmes were fulfilling their main capacity-building objectives and operated to the satisfaction of beneficiary countries.  The TCAU had suggested several managerial adjustments, which would help eligible beneficiary countries gain access to the programmes.
He went on to say that the TCAU had in 2009 started to measure the effects and impact on Members from the TA received from the WTO over the years.  Field visits were used as an opportunity to interview officials in charge of WTO matters, on the basis of a standard list of questions.  He explained that the TCAU had tried to measure the impact on the officials who had participated in the activities, on the teams to which they belonged and for the country as a whole.  Overall, on the basis of the limited evidence gathered thus far, it appeared that governments were highly satisfied with the assistance received from WTO, especially through the three-month trade policy courses.  The most visible outcome of the TA activities had been an increased involvement of beneficiaries in WTO negotiations.  Improvements in governments' capabilities to deal with WTO issues had also been noted.  The evidence was less clear on the question of whether there was better compliance with Members' WTO obligations.  
He said that the TCAU was issuing a limited number of new recommendations.  One recommendation related to the need to define – for each of the three layers of progressive learning – the curriculum on each subject and potential equivalences to help beneficiaries plan and organize the training of their officials on a longer-term basis.  In addition, in view of the increased importance ascribed to e-training by the progressive learning strategy, the e-training platform needed to be upgraded and human resources dedicated to this area needed be strengthened.  In conclusion, he said that the TCAU's overall assessment was that progress was being made.  However, results remained fragile and further improvements were still needed.
&& The representative of Kenya indicated that his delegation had taken note of the various TA activities and the initiatives that had been put in place.  He expressed appreciation for the progress made in e-learning, and highlighted the need for more TA activities, including those designed to enhance trade negotiations skills.  He also appreciated the importance that was being given to the various internship programmes. 
&& The representative of China said that, as a beneficiary of technical assistance, China had enjoyed the high quality of the WTO's various activities and the good cooperation with the Secretariat.  His delegation appreciated the interactive dialogue on TA issues between the Secretariat and Members – as well as amongst Members.  The new philosophy of progressive learning and the enhancement of e-learning were also appreciated.  He noted the financial difficulties that had been mentioned on page 41 of the TA Report, and encouraged Members to provide timely and adequate contributions for the WTO's TA activities.  He also indicated that, for the second time, China had in 2009 donated US$200,000 to the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF).  His delegation hoped that this contribution would help alleviate some of the current financial difficulties. 
&& The representative of Canada welcomed the reporting on the WTO's TA activities.  However, in order to make the link between the activities and their impact on the ground, he said that his delegation would also welcome future reporting on outcomes.  This could be achieved, for example, through follow-up activities and evaluations planned a few years in advance.  From a donor perspective, his delegation was of the view that an evaluation of the impact of activities was essential.  He suggested that outcomes be identified early on in the planning stage, in particular in the context of a logical framework.
&& The representative of Zambia, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that the support provided by the Secretariat had enhanced LDCs' understanding of the rules governing the multilateral trading system.  The LDC Group was pleased to note the increased emphasis and priority placed on LDCs in the WTO's TA activities, as reflected on pages 6 and 7 of the TA Report.  The Group was of the view that the support for Reference Centres, the introduction of e-learning and the increased participation of candidates from LDCs in the internship programmes had added new and effective dimensions to capacity building in the LDCs. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had a comment on the table in Annex 2 on pages 46 and 47 of the TA Report.  In particular, it was recommended that a reference be included in the heading of the column labelled "Status", in order to explain the source the Secretariat had used to determine the assigned status for each of the countries listed.  She said that it would be useful if the Secretariat could explain why the countries were broken down beyond LDCs and developing countries in the "Status" column.
&& The representative of the European Union welcomed the efforts by the Secretariat to improve the effectiveness of the TA activities and to implement a number of previous recommendations that had been made by the TCAU.  She noted, however, that some of the recommendations had not been fully implemented.  For example, there was still room for improvement in the area of needs assessment.  Furthermore, while her delegation welcomed the efforts being made to begin evaluating the impact of the assistance provided, she noted that this was still a small-scale endeavour based on a limited set of interviews.  She went on the say that her delegation had two questions for the Secretariat.  First, in relation to the RTPCs, she asked whether more details could be provided on the new segments of the programme which concerned the regional perspective.  The second question concerned the financial status of the TA Plan, which was mentioned in section VIII of the TA Report.  She said that the EU and its member States represented about 70 per cent of the contributions that had been made in the last four years, and that some of these donors had moved from annual to biannual contributions, precisely in order to alleviate the types of cash flow concerns that were pointed to in the TA Report.  However, it seemed that there had been no indications in the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration that there was a problem with the cash flow dimension.  The Secretariat was asked to clarify this issue.
&& The representative of Burkina Faso highlighted the importance of the internship programmes for small countries like his own, as well as the support being provided for WTO Reference Centres.
&& The representative of Viet Nam expressed particular appreciation for the e-learning programme and the regional activities.  She also noted that there many Geneva-based activities that were of interest to delegates in the Geneva-based missions.  In this regard, she inquired on the possibility of Geneva-based delegates participating as observers in certain training courses.
 && The representative of Honduras said that her delegation was appreciative of the various TA activities being implemented by the WTO.  She also expressed her delegation's appreciation for the  Reference Centre which had been established in Honduras. 
On the issue of the impact of TA activities, the Director of the ITTC said that this was important not only for donors, but also for beneficiaries and for the Secretariat.  He pointed to the creation of the TCAU as a significant improvement in this regard, and further indicated that an external audit had recently taken place.  Nevertheless, he recognized that there was much that remained to be done to fully respond to the concerns that had been raised in this area.  The Secretariat was aware of the importance of improving the impact of the WTO's TA activities, and would continue working with Members to find innovative and effective solutions.
On the financial situation, he thanked Members for having maintained the same level of commitments despite their budget constraints.  He saw this as evidence of their confidence in the Secretariat and in their commitment to provide trade-related assistance to developing countries, and in particular the LDCs.  As for the timing of the contributions, he expressed appreciation for the decision taken by some Members to move from annual to biannual contributions.  He noted, however, that this was not yet an approach that had been adopted by all donors, hence some delays could still be expected.  The Secretariat had tried to respond to these delays by putting more emphasis on national activities in the first quarter, since resources were available for these activities as of January.  While the financial situation was improving – in particular though the biannual contributions and a better planning of the activities – he nevertheless expressed the hope that more donors would adopt a biannual approach to contributions.
With regard to the RTPCs, he said that important improvements had been observed.  In particular, while participation by regional experts had been a feature of the courses for some time, the Secretariat had tried to develop a new content for the programme.  The first three weeks of the courses would now deal with questions relating to trade policy in a given region – not only through theoretical discussions, but also through reflections on best practices and case studies.  This would help understand the impact of trade policies on development from a regional perspective.  On the Geneva‑based training activities, he said that some representatives from Geneva-based missions had already attended as participants, and were generally welcome to do so.  He also clarified that in the table in Annex 2 of the TA Report, the "Status" of the countries was based on the categorization used by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).  On the usefulness of the internship programmes, he gave the example of interns from Burkina Faso and Niger who had successfully contributed to the work of their respective missions.  He added that, in addition to these examples, the substantive studies that the TCAU had done gave a more exhaustive view of the scope and importance of the programmes.
The Head of the TCAU agreed with the need to identify outcomes, effects and impacts of TA activities, in spite of the inherent limitations that existed in determining exact causal links between the actions and the observed results.  He indicated that he was particularly hopeful that tools could be developed to assess the medium-term impact of the WTO's activities.
The Committee took note of the reports and of all interventions.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the last CTD meeting, his predecessor had brought to Members' attention the fact that the Secretariat paper on the Developmental Aspects of the Doha Round of Negotiations had not been updated since May 2007.  Since Members had in the past recognized the value of this document, it had been suggested that the Secretariat paper be updated to reflect developments in the negotiations. One Member had indicated that it would need some time to consider the Chairman's proposal.  That Member had subsequently informed the Secretariat, after the meeting, that it had no objection to the proposed updating of the paper.  The Chairman said that he had then sent a fax to all Members on 16 April 2010, informing them of his intention to request the Secretariat to update the paper, if no indication to the contrary were received in a one-week period.  Since no communications had been received from any Member on this matter, he said that the Secretariat had begun work to update the paper, which would appear on the agenda of the next CTD meeting.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
 As the Chairman indicated at the beginning of the meeting, the appropriate document for consideration under this item was JOB(08)/103/Rev.2, and not the Rev.1 version which appeared on the draft agenda.

WT/COMTD/M/79 Page  PAGE 12



	WT/COMTD/M/79 	Page  PAGE 13



 

 

 

 



