WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/37
22 May 2002

(02-2842)


Committee on Trade and Development
Thirty-Seventh Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 22 JANUARY 2002

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Nathan Irumba (Uganda)

Subjects discussed:

 TOC \O "1-5" A.	ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA	 PAGEREF _TOC2411853 \H 1
B.	OBSERVERS	 PAGEREF _TOC2411854 \H 2
(i)	Request for attendance for ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc2411855 \h 2
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc2411856 \h 2
C.	TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING	 PAGEREF _TOC2411857 \H 2
(i)	Coordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan 2002 (WT/COMTD/W/95)	 PAGEREF _Toc2411858 \h 2
(ii)	Training Institute	 PAGEREF _Toc2411859 \h 23
D.	OTHER BUSINESS	 PAGEREF _TOC2411860 \H 26


&& The Chairman welcomed delegations to the 37th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) which was to focus entirely on technical cooperation and training. 

A.	ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA
&& The Chairman indicated that the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in airgram WTO/AIR/1696/Rev.1 of 16 January 2002.  He stated that, the CTD normally elected its Chairperson at the end of the first meeting of the year; however, the Chairman of the General Council was still in the process of holding consultations on the slate of officers for the different WTO bodies and he would report on the situation at an appropriate time at a meeting of the General Council.  The Chairman of the CTD therefore suggested that the Committee elect its chairperson for 2002 at its next regular session scheduled for 14 February 2002, as the Chairmanship of the CTD could not be decided independently of the overall election of officers.  He further proposed to place the election of a new chairperson as the first substantial item on the Agenda of that meeting in order to allow the incoming chairperson to chair the main part of the second meeting of the year as was the practice.  
The agenda was adopted as amended.
Before going to the next agenda item, the Chairman noted that Mr. Peter Tulloch had retired, and therefore took the opportunity to indicate how appreciative he was of his contribution to the Organisation, and that he had personally benefitted from his advice, objectivity and the trust he had won from all sections of the Membership and he wished him well in his endeavours.  The Chairman said that he hoped that those views reflected the views of the Committee. 

B.	OBSERVERS
Request for attendance for ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD it had been agreed to invite the following intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the Organisation of African Unity (OAU);  the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the South Pacific Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).  He proposed that those organisations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD. 
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman stated that at the last meeting, the Committee had had before it a number of outstanding requests for observer status from the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and from the Common Fund for Commodities.  He recalled that, pending the outcome of the General Council process, such observer status would be on an ad hoc basis.  Unless there had been any recent change of position of delegations, he proposed to revert to those requests at the next formal meeting of the Committee 
It was so agreed.

C.	TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING 
Coordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan 2002 (WT/COMTD/W/95)
&& The Chairman noted that the agenda item had two sub-items.  The first related to the Coordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan, and the second to the Future Activities of the Training Institute.  He suggested that they be addressed separately in order to keep the discussion focussed, although they were clearly linked as they both related to the assistance the WTO provided to developing countries. 
&& Deputy Director-General Mr. Paul‑Henri Ravier introduced the Secretariat-wide Plan for Technical Assistance in 2002.  He requested Members' comments and guidance as the implementation of the Plan proceeded with the delivery of the activities.  The activities contained in the Plan were operational activities based on mandates already established by Ministers, Decisions taken by the Membership in various Committees and Councils, and demands by the Membership.  The Doha Ministerial Declaration confirmed that technical cooperation and capacity-building were core elements of the development dimension of the multilateral trading system.  Ministers had established an extensive mandate and had undertaken a firm set of commitments on technical cooperation and capacity building to enable beneficiary countries to implement WTO rules and obligations, and prepare them for effective participation in the work of the WTO, including for future negotiations and an extensive Work Programme, as well as enable them to draw on the benefits of the multilateral trading system.  Document WT/COMTD/W/95 outlined the Coordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan for 2002 and contained the activities the WTO Secretariat could deliver within its area of competence, resources, and what was possible within an 11-month period.  The Plan had been subjected to the fullest possible internal coordination by the WTO Secretariat Technical Assistance Management Committee (TAMC) which had been established last year.  It was also based on information available to the Secretariat, under the time constraints post-Doha given the fact that implementation was to begin that month.  The activities in the Plan were based on inputs from five sources, namely:  (i) mandates on technical cooperation and capacity building in the Doha Ministerial Declaration as contained in paragraphs 16, 21, 24, 26, 27, 33, 38-40, 42 and 43;  (ii) the New Strategy for WTO Technical Cooperation for Capacity-building, Growth and Integration – which was noted by the October 2002 CTD Meeting and endorsed by Ministers in paragraph 38 of the Doha Declaration;  (iii) requests from the Membership and countries in accession to the WTO Secretariat.  Such inputs into the Plan took into account the fact that WTO Technical Assistance remained demand driven;  (iv) the stand-alone decisions on technical cooperation taken by Members such as in paragraph 14 of the Negotiating Guidelines for the Services Negotiations, the Decision on Technical Assistance by the Customs Valuation Committee, and others;  and (v) coordinated inputs from operational divisions and the Technical Cooperation Division, which emerged from meetings of the TAMC.
He went on to emphasise that with respect to the budgetary and financial aspects of the Plan, the cost had not yet been fully assessed.  In principle however, the cost should not exceed the 15 million CHF which had been agreed to in the Committee on Budget and Finance.  That figure depended on parameters such as the sensitive issue of cost‑sharing with other organisations with which the WTO Secretariat cooperated and the number of participants to be invited from each Ministry.  Once the financing of the programme had finally been determined, a statement would be made by the Secretariat.  He drew the CTD's attention to the fact that the Plan was only one of four levels of action that the WTO Secretariat would pursue in the implementation of the technical cooperation and capacity building objectives in 2002.  The other levels of action, which would be pursued interdependently were:  (i) effective coordinated delivery of technical assistance with well‑defined inter-agency groups/multilateral agencies.  That would focus on areas such as the Singapore Issues, and areas where synergies would be required with other multilateral institutions;  (ii) the Integrated Framework (IF) for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to the Least-Developed Countries (LDCs).  Action at that level would be based on the re-vamped Integrated Framework as a mechanism for mainstreaming trade priority areas of action into the development plans and strategies for poverty reduction of the LDCs;  and (iii) effective coordinated delivery of technical assistance by the WTO and bilateral donors through  interaction with the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the OECD.
He then indicated that the Plan was divided into six sections, as they appeared in document WT/COMTD/W/90/Add.1.  In view of the importance attached in the Ministerial Declaration to the Singapore issues, Annex I was dedicated to these issues.  That Annex explained the overarching strategy underpinning the Singapore issues, and showed how technical assistance would be delivered in those areas, including in coordination with other competent agencies.  Annex II was dedicated to trade and environment, in light of the negotiations agreed by Members.  Paragraph 5 of the Introduction highlighted the areas of action covered in light of the Doha mandates, namely:  (i) mainstreaming and Integrated Framework;  (ii) implementation issues and concerns;  (iii) enhancing negotiating capacity;  (iv) trade-policy capacity-building;  (v) accessions;  (vi) non‑residents;  (vii) WTO reference centres and information technology support;  and (viii) modernization and expansion of technical assistance tools.  He appealed to Members to limit  ad hoc requests throughout the year.  He noted that some planned activities would be cancelled or postponed, while others would be ad hoc.  He said that the CTD would recall the difficulties involved in ensuring an appropriate balance in the management of technical assistance, when the ratio between the planned activities and the ad hoc activities was unbalanced.  In the 1980s and 1990s the ad hoc activities had represented a higher proportion than the planned activities, with the result that they had become difficult to organise.  Since the number of planned activities in 2002 (422 in total) significantly exceeded the levels for previous years, the Secretariat would attach priority to planned activities, and would seek the cooperation and understanding of Members to ensure adherence to the Annual Plan.  He clarified that ad hoc requests and activities that arose or were requested by Members throughout the year 2002 would be considered for the 2003 Plan, except when the most exceptional of circumstances would justify financing and integrating them into the 2002 activities.  In concluding he urged the Members to be foresighted, and think of the next 3-4 years.  In order to get the maximum benefit from the scarce financial and human resources, it was important to follow the plan agreed to at the beginning of the year.  A flood of ad hoc activities would take up too much time and resources and would upset the balance of activities planned. 
&& The representative of Canada thanked the Secretariat for the immense amount of work devoted to the preparation of the documents that the CTD had before it and indicated that her delegation understood how complex the process was when five separate sets of activities had to be brought together to create the Plan.  Her delegation recommended that the Plan be more closely identified with the activities linked to the Doha commitments.  That linkage could be made, although it might not be easy since activities related to several different commitments.  However, that was important from a strategic perspective, and would allow the Committees to relate to the Plan, analyse the Plan and understand the Plan as it related to their areas of expertise.  
&& The representative of Switzerland indicated that his delegation would do its best to assist the Technical Cooperation Division in its difficult task.  The WTO was not meant to be a development organisation, but there was a need for the WTO to provide technical assistance and build capacity in developing countries.  He further reported that in a joint meeting of the OECD (DAC) and the Inter‑Agency Working Group of the IF the previous week, the Chairman of the OECD Trade Committee had emphasised that capacity-building efforts in the WTO were of paramount importance for the further development of the multilateral trading system.  Trade-related technical assistance had to take place in the WTO.  The OECD Trade Committee, chaired by Switzerland, wished to convey to the CTD that it would follow those activities with interest and would be as supportive as possible.  To be effective and efficient, the fullest possible transparency regarding the delivery of technical assistance was necessary.  The report on capacity building that the Director-General would prepare for the General Council at the end of the year and for the next Ministerial Conference should not only present the activities at the multilateral level, but also those at the bilateral level.  A compendium should also be prepared in collaboration with the relevant international organisations and donor countries on all trade-related technical assistance.  With respect to Annex I of the 2002 Plan, he indicated that a focussed and enhanced technical assistance plan in the field of trade and investment, was to be discussed, and UNCTAD should be invited to participate in that process.  He indicated that he had been informed that UNCTAD had already made a first draft of a post-Doha technical assistance proposal in the area of investment.  He asked whether the WTO investment activities proposed in the 2002 Plan were coordinated with UNCTAD as his delegation would not wish to see similar activities conducted in parallel in both organisations.  On the issue of transparency, he enquired whether there were country-specific lists which summarised the trade-related technical assistance activities delivered in the past.  Such detailed lists by activity would be useful and he asked the Secretariat to prepare such lists in the future, in collaboration with other organisations.  His delegation agreed with the Deputy Director-General's comment that ad hoc requests should only be met in exceptional circumstances.  For full transparency with respect to ad hoc requests, he proposed that the Secretariat list the countries making such requests together with the subject area of their requests.  He did not believe that the point had been reached where stand-alone technical activities were being turned into long-term sustainable and effective capacity-building.  What was needed was to put in place a process for comprehensive trade-related capacity-building and move away from individual activities.  He noted that the technical assistance strategy contained some elements that might assist, such as the coordinating committees at the country-level, or interlocking trade policy reviews with the design of country-specific capacity building.  Those were future pursuits.  The evaluation of the activities should also be part of transparency and effectiveness.  
&& The representative of the Uruguay said that he had appreciated the initiative by the Secretariat to meet with regional groups to present the Plan for 2002.  GRULAC was one of the groups that had benefitted from direct contact with the Secretariat.  That contact had allowed them to get advance knowledge of the document and send it to their capitals in a timely manner.  He hoped that that practice would continue in the future.  His delegation thanked the Secretariat for including a national seminar on services in Uruguay, in the list of activities for the current year.  He noted the position of the Secretariat to avoid ad hoc technical assistance requests.  The 422 activities already planned for 2002 clearly showed that there was a significant planning for 2002.  However, he reserved his delegation's right to make new technical assistance requests as necessary, bearing in mind the large agenda which arose from the fourth Ministerial Conference.  There would be a national seminar on competition policy in Uruguay in the first half of the year 2002, in conjunction with other organisations.  Bearing in mind what was stated in Annex I of the Plan with respect to capacity building and technical assistance in relation to the Singapore issues, he requested the support of the WTO Secretariat in planning that seminar.
&& The representative of Malaysia understood the work on the Plan to be a complex exercise involving the coordination and cooperation between multilateral agencies considering requests from Members as well as giving the appropriate focus to LDCs.  There was a broad mix in the delivery of technical assistance between the regions and he welcomed the fact that there were a number of regional workshops which would include the participation of Members which may otherwise not be included because of a lack of priority or because of a lack of funds.  In this context, he noted that there were a number of venues that were used more frequently than others, possibly because the coordinating agencies were based in those countries.  However, whenever possible, regional seminars and workshops should be hosted in other locations.  A better spread of venues should be encouraged, so as to provide opportunities to additional Members to enhance their participation in the seminars.  He further noted that the funding of the programmes was still pending, and would welcome pledges from donors to the Global Trust Fund so that those activities would be fully funded.
&& The representative of India agreed with the statement of the Chairman with respect to Mr. Tulloch who had been the "Development Pillar" of the Institution.  It was unfortunate that he had left just after Doha.  He stated his deep appreciation for Mr. Tulloch's valuable contribution.  He went on to say that after Doha, many delegations had announced that the "Doha Development Agenda" had been launched.  However, soon after returning from Doha delegations had discovered that the WTO Secretariat's Development Division had been liquidated, although its work had not gone away.  It had been distributed between three WTO Secretariat Divisions.  Despite that reorganisation, the Plan had been put together in a short time.  His delegation had argued strongly in favour of two Geneva Weeks in the Budget Committee, and that had been included in the Plan.  However, to the best of his knowledge, only one Geneva Week had been approved in the Budget Committee.  He therefore wished to know if only one of the Weeks would be funded by the regular budget and how the other would be financed. Irrespective of the number of Geneva Weeks actually held, a way had to be found to keep the non-resident delegations constantly informed of progress in the various negotiations launched in Doha.  His second point had to do with the meaning of capacity-building.  He was of the view that capacity-building went beyond the holding of seminars.  He acknowledged that seminars and regional workshops were valuable inputs into capacity-building, but noted that capacity-building extended far beyond those.  The capacities of developing countries varied vastly and the programmes designed should cater to the specific needs of each beneficiary country.  Developing countries did not have infinite capacity to absorb technical assistance.  Their capacity had to be built up slowly, and would involve the building up of capacities from scratch on certain issues.  The pace of expansion of WTO activities, on specific subjects on which developing countries did not have adequate experience, should be so planned to allow all developing countries to effectively participate in the negotiations.  He recommended the consideration of the delivery of technical assistance through institutions in other countries, particularly developed countries which had knowledge and expertise in development‑related issues and had specialised in topics such as international trade and economic relations, as that might be a cost-effective way of delivering technical assistance.  The training of trainers would have a multiplier effect since the trainers trained from developing countries would go back and train a significant number of persons in their own countries.  
He went on to note that the Plan referred specifically to, and seemed to focus on the "Singapore issues".  He was surprised to find reference to those in paragraph 5(iii) and the second sentence in Annex I of the document, as his delegation was not aware that negotiations on "Singapore Issues" had been agreed.  He was of the view that that was to be discussed at the Fifth Ministerial Conference and to be decided on by explicit concensus.  Similarly, with respect to mainstreaming and the IF in paragraph 5(i), there was a reference to paragraph 38 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration and his delegation preferred that the language used in the Plan be the same as that in the Declaration.  It would otherwise give a misleading impression that something had been agreed to in Doha which had not been agreed to.  The Doha Ministerial Declaration implied technical assistance in other areas, such as rules.  He specifically referred to paragraphs 34, 35, 28 and 29.  There was also an implied reference in paragraph 6 of the Declaration on Public Health which had to be taken into account, so that activities in those areas would be organised.  In the final section of the Plan there was a provision for video-conferencing, which was useful.  However, since the video-conferencing facilities were used by many Divisions, they should not be financed through the technical assistance budget, but be part of the regular budget.  In Annex V of the Plan which summarised the number of activities planned for the year 2002, there was a column containing the number of activities planned for LDCs, which made impressive reading until the footnote was read.  The footnote specified that LDC activities were "Activities held in an LDC or, in the case of regional activities, those activities to which at least an LDC is invited."  If in a group of 30 participants, one participant represented an LDC, it could not be classified as an event for LDCs.  He proposed that for group activities, only those where at least 50 per cent of the participants represented LDCs, should be identified as LDC activities, and that the figures be adjusted accordingly.  He went on to say that it still was unclear where the required 15 million CHF was to come from.  He hoped for an early decision on a Pledging Conference to held in early 2002.  He said that he did not understand the Deputy Director‑General's comment about cost-sharing with other organisations, since the activities being planned were within the WTO, and the cost should therefore be borne within the WTO.  One of the previous speakers had mentioned that the WTO was not a development organisation, but it was not clear what that statement meant.  If what was meant, was that the WTO could not assist in establishing infrastructure facilities, such as ports and roads, he could agree, but if the technical cooperation listed in the Plan was classified in that other context, he could not agree.  In the pre-Doha phase, all delegations would recollect that when developing countries had made the point that they lacked expertise in the areas of investment and competition policy, they had been told not to worry as technical assistance and capacity building would be provided.  If, after that, developing countries were told that the WTO was not a development organisation, it made his delegation wonder what the meaning of the earlier statement was.  The technical cooperation and capacity-building activities listed in the Plan were relevant to the WTO's core-business and that assistance had to continue to be provided to developing countries and LDCs.
&& The representative of Djibouti noted that there was something new in the Plan, not previously seen in WTO documentation, specifically the names of the Secretariat staff who would be dealing with each activity.  However, no telephone number were given.  That information would assist delegations when they wished contact the officer responsible for a particular seminar.  The aim of the technical assistance paragraphs of the Ministerial Declaration was to provide a means to developing countries and LDCs to prepare themselves to enter fully into the multilateral trading system.  The 15 million CHF was therefore needed to ensure the implementation of the technical cooperation activities and to train people to comply with the obligations.  The IF had developed well.  However, he was not aware of the results of the three pilot countries.  His government was willing to host a round table and to have an expert to prepare the round table. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegations' remarks, while suggesting improvements, should not to be taken as if his delegation did not fully appreciate the difficulties involved in the work completed.  It was in his delegation's self interest to get the Plan right, as the Doha Agreement was so focused on technical assistance and capacity building, that the success or failure of the whole exercise to a large extent would be measured by what was reflected in, for example, paragraph 41 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, from which it was clear that there had to be a stocktaking of the adequacy of the measures undertaken.  The main improvement his delegation suggested was to make it clear how the Plan fitted into the new framework under which the WTO was working.  The Doha Ministerial Declaration and the Technical Cooperation Strategy had been mentioned in the introduction to the Plan.  The Strategy Document was also reflected, in some elements, in certain relevant paragraphs, especially paragraphs 38-41 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  Unfortunately, the Plan still looked somewhat like the lists which had been circulated in 2001 although the imperative was to respond to paragraphs 38-41, and be able to show how the development and technical assistance challenges would be responded to by the work of the WTO Secretariat and by bilateral and multilateral donors.  It might therefore not be enough to report that a regional seminar had been conducted as outlined in the first part of the Plan if it could not be tied into specific obligations to provide technical assistance.  Before a seminar was decided upon, it had to be considered whether it fitted into the development strategy of the recipient, as was clearly indicated in paragraph 38 of the Declaration, how it fitted into the Doha obligations and how it fitted with the main focus of the Technical Cooperation Strategy.  Those considerations should have been the point of departure for the Plan, with more information as to how those objectives were to be met by the particular measures put forward.  His delegation was aware that that was not an easy task as everything could not be classified from the start.  However, the political value and visibility of the responsiveness of the Organisation lay in further working out those points.  Some efforts had been made in that respect and he would be more positive and concrete with respect to these points.  The Annexes on Investment and Environment of the Plan were based on subjects and the type of commitments taken in the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  His delegation shared the view of the representative of Switzerland, that it was not clear what was WTO's work would be and questioned whether the WTO could organise the type of seminars outlined in the Plan.  It was also not clear what UNCTAD's role would be.  He asked if UNCTAD would organize seminars in which the WTO would participate, or whether the WTO would organise seminars in which UNCTAD would participate.  His delegation also focussed on another main theme – cooperation and coordination with other multilateral organisations.  The Deputy Director-General had pointed out that that was another level of the discussion, but the document discussed some of those issues as for example in the Annexes mentioned earlier and with respect to the IF.  The more complementarity there could be, the better off everyone would be.  He urged the Secretariat to try to expand the Plan a little in the direction of theme-oriented programmes, such as in the areas of investment and environment, for which the proposals were embryonic.  In the area of the environment, for instance, a lot more had to be done to remove some of the concerns in the area and he urged the Secretariat to take up those themes.
He continued by saying that it was unclear how the costing process would operate.  His delegation was not of the view that the Plan would cost more that 15 million CHF.  He asked how priorities would be set if more costs were incurred through cooperation, since co-financing would not always be easy.  Some programmes would hopefully be allocated to other international organisations who had more expertise, and more resources for the "Singapore Issues", for example.  More clarity was needed in that area.  In addition, delegations had to be informed about how much the WTO Secretariat could really deliver with its own resources.  That would make the Plan a more credible document and would help it respond to the challenges which the CTD faced.  His delegation was looking forward to receiving an interim report to the General Council in December 2002.  He was certain that the Organisation and the donors would be put to the test and asked what had been done.  He therefore asked how it could be ensured that the words in the Ministerial Declaration had been turned into something tangible for developing countries.  In order to be in the best possible position to give such a response, the Plan should be revised and rearranged along the lines suggested.
&& The representative of Paraguay agreed with the Plan and was grateful for the inclusion of three technical cooperation programmes which had been requested by his Government.  He believed that the technical assistance provided by the WTO was a complement to the national training effort to meet the needs of multilateral trade at this time of globalisation.  WTO technical cooperation was not a substitute for national efforts, but complemented them.  Even if the Plan was not perfect, it contained aspects of the Doha decisions and requests from delegations.  There had been progress in formulating the Plan and doors had been opened with other international institutions which dealt with similar matters.  His delegation therefore supported the Plan.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation strongly supported the WTO's technical assistance agenda, and took a realistic approach to what Members agreed to at the Doha Ministerial Conference and the sentiments they all shared going into Doha concerning technical assistance and the integration of developing country Members into the multilateral trading system.  Her Government had recently announced that it would submit 1 million US dollars to the new Global Trust Fund in an effort to begin the process to meet the objective that had been agreed to.  With respect to the Secretariat Note she said that she had understood the Deputy Director-General to say that the CTD was being asked to adopt the "Note by the Secretariat".  She therefore sought a procedural clarification as to what was to be done.  She asked whether the intention was for the CTD to adopt the Secretariat Note or whether something more specific was to be adopted.  She also stressed the need for coordination with other national and international organisations that provided technical assistance, as well as with other WTO bodies and Committees engaged in technical assistance activities.  She was of the view that a number of the programmes and initiatives outlined did target specific agreement areas.  Coordination was a priority in order to streamline and expedite the delivery of technical assistance.  In the area of standards for example, as indicated in the Note, there were a number of international organisations that participated in seminars, and the same international organisations were working closely with the various standard-related Committees of the WTO.  It was therefore important that there be tight coordination with the work of the other Committees.  In order for the strategy to be effective, there had to be a focus on monitoring, auditing and evaluating the implementation of the technical assistance provided.  She hoped that all of the projects that had been identified, including the specific seminars, focused on specific needs requested by the beneficiary countries.  That comment also referred to the Work Plan for the "Singapore Issues" and she took note of the comments made by && The representative of India with respect to the first paragraph on page 41.  For any technical assistance issues linked to the Doha Declaration it had to be clear how the technical assistance was articulated in the Declaration.  Her delegation expected that the projects in the Plan were linked to the various initiatives in the Doha Declaration.  Her delegation sought more time to go through the Plan, which was one of four levels of technical assistance action.  It would be kept in mind that the Plan described an evolving process and that as needs were identified and issues arose, it would be possible to accommodate those.  She urged that there be coordination with other organisations that provided technical assistance and that bilateral donors would be actively involved.
&& The Chairman indicated that he would outline the course of action to be taken at the end of the discussion. 
&& The representative of Japan said that the Introduction of the Plan stated that the Secretariat intended to link the capacity-building activities to the Doha commitments.  However it was not clear to his delegation whether the activities proposed effectively reflected the intentions expressed in the Introduction.  That was probably due to the complex nature of the comprehensive list of activities.  His delegation hoped that the Secretariat was to make activities designed to create conducive environments to the implementation of Doha commitments by responding to the specific needs of specific countries.  His second point referred to the Annex I of the Plan, which indicated that the Secretariat was going to plan activities in the sectors of investment and competition policy, based on the input of meetings to be held by the WTO.  He hoped that, through this process, the WTO would coordinate closely with other donors and organisations, such as UNCTAD, in order to avoid unnecessary duplication, since the limited resources available had to respond to all the requested activities.  He said that his final point was similar to that expressed by the representative of the European Communities with respect to the costing and priority issues.  
&& The representative of Australia welcomed the Secretariat efforts to implement the technical assistance mandate of the Doha Development Agenda as quickly as possible.  She noted that the recent agreement to establish the Global Trust Fund put extra emphasis on the CTD's coordination of technical assistance and capacity building activities and looked forward to that proceeding.  She said that her delegation appreciated the clarity of the Plan, in particular the eight policy frameworks under which the Plan was divided, and further elaborated in paragraph 5.  With respect to paragraphs 6-10 of the Introduction, on the five additional points which were underlined by the Secretariat, she agreed with the determination to limit ad hoc technical assistance activities to the greatest extent possible.  However, if some legitimate and urgent requests for technical assistance did arise unexpectedly, then some flexibility in implementing the Plan would be required.  Nevertheless, previous experience had shown that meeting ad hoc requests diminished the Secretariat's ability to provide long-term targeted technical assistance.  With a new mandate and heavy focus on developmental issues, the achievement of long-tem goals were a vital aspect of the Organisation's work and her delegation endorsed the comments made under paragraph 6.
&& The representative of Senegal noted that many activities concerning his country were retained in the Plan, based on the requests made, which in turn had been based on a needs-assessment.  However, that there were perhaps some adjustments to be made concerning the priority given to the activities.  Some of the requests would be retained and others would not, in terms of their priority.  Those might be handed into the Secretariat.  He sought clarification from the Secretariat as to whether the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme for Selected Least-Developed and other African Countries (JITAP) was to be completed at the end of 2002.  Many developing countries had insisted that it be maintained and extended.  There were currently eight countries involved, and he wished to know what would happen since there had been many references to Senegal under the JITAP Programmes, and to other countries as well.  He enquired whether the Programme would be maintained, since initially there had been references of a "second generation JITAP".  He therefore wished to know the exact future content of the Programme.  His second point related to Information Technologies and the WTO Reference Centres.  WTO technical assistance had to assist Geneva-based delegations maintain contact with their capitals.  He did not know whether that could be done under the SITA as indicated on page 36 of the Plan.  It was clear that it was important to install reference centers in capitals, but it would always be difficult for developing country delegations to carry out their tasks as long as a functioning link was not established between the Geneva missions and their capitals.  The missions obviously used classical means of communication.  However, it would be useful if they could use modern information technology tools to become more effective.  He therefore requested more information on the SITA.  He further recalled that a presentation of how a small Geneva-based developing country mission could use modern information technology tools had been made by the Ambassador of Panama.  The Ambassador had demonstrated extremely interesting methods of work.  That type of sharing of experiences should be increased as it enabled developing countries to learn from other delegation's experiences with coordination and contacts with capitals.  There was currently a limit of 15 million CHF for WTO technical assistance and the Director-General had said that the financial programme would be further elaborated.  His delegation hoped that the WTO would be able to get the necessary resources to finance its activities, especially so as some delegations were of the view that the 15 million CHF was not sufficient.
&& The representative of Madagascar asked the Secretariat to make a greater effort to get translations out more rapidly, since her delegation only had received the French translation that morning.  However, her delegation hoped that that would not be a problem for much longer since the Director-General had indicated that additional funds of 850,000 CHF had been earmarked for the translation services, in addition to the 1.5 million CHF allocated last year, as had been requested for a long time by non-English speaking delegations.  She expressed the hope that the programmes which had been established would not prevent her delegation from making further requests for technical assistance in the course of the year, as needs arose. 
&& The representative of Bolivia expressed gratitude for the inclusion of the technical assistance activities in the Plan as requested by her Government.  She indicated that her Government was willing to host the following activities (1) the regional seminar on technical barriers to trade for Latin America, for which no venue had been decided, (2) the regional workshop on trade negotiations for Andean countries, and (3) the regional seminar on the dispute settlement understanding for Latin America.  She hoped that the Secretariat would consider holding at least one of those activities in Bolivia.  Finally, she requested that her country be included, as an associate member of Mercosur, in the financial services seminar to be held with Mercosur.  
&& The representative of Norway said that his Government attached importance to the developmental aspects of the WTO agenda post-Doha.  Firstly, there was a need to avoid ad hoc requests, as they were not the best way to accommodate the needs of Members.  Secondly, the Plan lacked an elaboration of how coordination with other organisations would be carried out, and requested the Secretariat to briefly comment on that aspect.  Thirdly, the Secretariat had indicated an interest in presenting an IF-process for non-LDCs, similar to the current IF programme.  Such a process had to be demand-driven and there had to be a close dialogue between donors and recipients.  He noted that in Section I of the Plan, 158 regional seminars and multilateral conferences were planned.  Given the high number of activities, he wished to know whether they were based on evaluations of previous seminars and conferences.  He noted that there was a wide geographical spread and indicated that if there was a need to trim the number of activities, LDCs should be given priority.  There were less activities planned with respect to trade-related capacity building in Section II.  As to Section III of the Plan, on technical assistance related to the WTO Agreements, which normally would be the core business of the WTO, he recognised that there was a wide geographical spread in terms of beneficiary countries and queried the inclusion of some of the more well-off developing countries.  He further asked whether self-payment for those countries had been considered and whether visits by Committee Chairs to countries seeking accession would be covered by the Fund.  His final question was whether the activities related to the thirteen countries, which were also included in the IF Programme, would be funded by the IF fund or the Global Trust Fund.  
&& The representative of Lesotho said that his delegation found the Plan adequate for what it considered as a priority.  He supported the view that there was a need to highlight the assistance or work being undertaken at the bilateral level to avoid overlaps.  Cooperation between the donors and the recipient states was therefore important.  With respect to ad hoc requests, his delegation noted the comments of previous speakers on the need to limit them.  However, for most countries, in particular developing countries and LDCs, the process of analysing the outcome and the implications of the Doha Work Programme was ongoing, and there was therefore a need to provide alternate allowances for countries to supplement the requests that they had originally submitted to the Secretariat to reflect their improved understanding of the implications of the Doha Conference.  The Secretariat should be given the flexibility to assist countries when they submitted such requests, while recognising that this should not be the regular route.  With respect to the need for improved coordination with other organisations such as UNCTAD, he indicated that his delegation had been in contact with UNCTAD to discuss how to implement the Doha Work Programme.  The UNCTAD Secretariat had made suggestions on how to address some of the issues.  The work that had already been started had to be taken into account when considering the Programmes that were now being embarked on in the WTO.  His final point related to the coordination with regional economic bodies.  When regional seminars were undertaken there should be maximum coordination with those bodies to ensure that coverage and priorities identified by the region were reflected in the Work Programme.  He proposed that, at the end of the meeting, the CTD take note of the report to enable its implementation.
&& The representative of the Philippines said that the activities in the Plan were part of the process of development, and the WTO technical assistance experience was not longer than that of other Geneva-based institutions.  Nevertheless, the tables gave a good view of the broad scope of the activities, objectives and coverage of WTO technical assistance, without indicating the quality of the outcome.  That was something that had to be developed.  He hoped that those who had serious interests in technical assistance would focus and pay more attention to the capacity, and later to the consolidation and quality-control of the 442 activities.  He said that he had a side comment regarding the statement that the WTO was not a development organisation.  He would no longer object to that type of statement, because, as he had understood from the respresentative of India, the development perceptions of most of the delegations were for "hard" infrastructure including roads, bridges and irrigation.  The technical assistance the WTO could provide was in terms of "soft" infrastructure such as the human capital and the institutions that would allow developing countries to achieve the objectives of their development.  That was the objective of the CTD.  With respect to the tables, his delegation believed that the Secretariat had done a good job as far as the balance of activities, objectives and regional distribution were concerned.  His delegation was satisfied with the planned activities by regions, as indicated on page 47.  However, in the individual presentations there were indications of various activities for which dates were to be confirmed, which he knew meant that the activities were either not funded, or not definite.  He therefore still had a problem with respect to the prioritising being made on the basis of the budgetary resources available.  He hoped that the case of the LDCs, as stated by the representative of India, would be taken into consideration, and indicated that a number of consultations also had to be undertaken with the prospective recipients, to allow the WTO to respond to their legitimate objectives with the technical assistance provided.  For example, his delegation did not see SMC–issues as concrete activities since there were to be consultations on the kind of technical assistance that would be needed during the first month of 2002.  He enquired whether it was being undertaken by the WTO or whether it was being done within the context of UNCTAD's work.  He noted that there had been regional discussions with UNCTAD, and that UNCTAD had plans for a broad approach to the requirements of the Doha Development Agenda in the areas of investment, competition policy, and trade facilitation.  The objectives of UNCTAD were broad, as was its membership.  UNCTAD therefore had to conform to the desires and objectives of its membership. With respect to the fourth sentence of the first paragraph on page 41, it was implied that the "Singapore Issues" had already been agreed to in negotiations, and that the focus of the work therefore was on  addressing the negotiating elements.  In his view it was far broader than that.  The issue had been addressed by some delegations in the Informal Group of Developing Countries, and the Secretariat had responded that it would look at it.  He stressed that since it was an evolving process, each activity should be analysed in terms of its outcome, and be incorporated into a cross-sectoral analysis from the perspective of the Membership with a view to seeing if there was need for more training tools, more outreaches to regions and institutions and more training and capacity building.  If the analysis was done in the regions, by the Members, rather than from the perspective of persons based in Geneva, the training courses could be improved.  A new set of programmes would be developed in 2003, and there should then be close consultations with the prospective beneficiaries of the training courses, in order to ensure that it would be useful to them with respect to their WTO obligations.  The matrix should also be viewed in the context of technical assistance from other Geneva-based institutions, banking and international financial institutions, which hoped to achieve similar objectives, so that the IF principle, which was a good one, could be achieved as far as the type and quality of the WTO's technical assistance programmes was concerned. 
&& The representative of Guinea said that the number of activities planned for 2002 was an indication of the extent to which technical assistance was important to developing countries, especially LDCs, including Guinea.  Her delegation had already forwarded its comments, with amendments, to the Technical Cooperation Division.  She indicated that her Government wished to participate in the detailed technical assistance programme during 2002.  As stated by the representative of Malaysia, her delegation also wished the countries selected to host the seminars to be more varied, to allow for more diversified participation in the seminars.  Given the burden of work post‑Doha, her delegation wished to approach the Secretariat about the seminar to be organised in Guinea, in coordination with the Technical Cooperation Division.  With respect to cooperation with other organisations such as FAO and UNCTAD, her delegation had contacted them with a view to establishing a work-programme on post-Doha affairs in connection with their mandates.  Her delegation invited the CTD to endorse the Plan, and invited all partners to finance the 15 million CHF needed for technical cooperation, in order to make progress in the short time available.
&& The representative of China said that he wished to take this first official opportunity, as a new Member, to express his delegation's thanks to the Secretariat for the technical assistance provided to China during the whole process of China's negotiations on its resumption of Contracting Party status, as well as in the few years of negotiations with the WTO on accession.  His delegation believed that that technical assistance had been useful, not only for the projects offered to China over the years, but also the training courses which had been offered by the Secretariat to Chinese officials.  For instance, many Chinese officials in charge of WTO affairs, except the speaker, had been trained by the Secretariat, particularly through the Trade Policy Courses.  That was the case for the Director-General for the Department of International Relations, who had taken care of China's accessions negotiations over the past 15 years;  the Director‑General for the current Department of WTO Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (MOFTEC);  and the Director‑General for the newly established Fair Trade Bureau, which also dealt with WTO Affairs in MOFTEC.  The seminars, workshops and advisory studies provided by the Technical Cooperation Division, which was currently headed by Mr. Osakwe, had also offered help to his delegation in its familiarisation with the rules of the WTO, and the strengthening of the negotiating capacity of his Government, mainly in its accession process.  His delegation therefore believed that technical cooperation was important, not only to other developing countries, but also to China as a new developing Member. 
He went on to say that in paragraph 6 of the Plan, the Secretariat refered to a number of elements which his delegation considered important.  The first point related to coordination.  Coordination related to at least three levels.  The first level of coordination, was coordination within the requesting members, for both national and regional projects.  Requestors needed to have good internal coordination for their requests for technical cooperation from the Secretariat.  His Government had coordinated internally in making requests to the Secretariat.  Since China was such a large country with a population of 1.3 billion people, and more than 30 provinces and independent cities under the direct leadership of the central government, it would be difficult if everyone made individual requests to the Secretariat for technical assistance.  It would be difficult not only for the Secretariat, but also for the Chinese Government.  His delegation therefore believed that the coordination within the requesting parties was important to make full use of available human and financial resources, both of the Secretariat and of the requesting Members.  The second area of coordination was the internal coordination of the Secretariat.  He noticed that in Annex III of the Plan, the Secretariat had given a list of contact persons in different Divisions.  He found that useful, but it did not mean that every Member should be encouraged to directly contact those officers for their technical cooperation projects, since, whenever an individual request was made directly to a particular person, that person responsible for a specific area of business in that Division, would sometimes respond directly to the requestor.  That would confuse the situation and sabotage the coordination efforts of the Secretariat and the requesting Member.  The final area of coordination related to the coordination between the WTO Secretariat and other international agencies.  His delegation had found some references to the importance of coordination of that type in the Plan.  It was stated that the WTO Secretariat was ready to strengthen that sort of coordination, not only to avoid duplication but also to promote mutual complementarity, and he encouraged the Secretariat to continue those efforts.  In paragraph 6, the Secretariat also referred to the flexibility of the Plan and flexibility with respect to implementation.  Flexibility was also important, given inter alia, the emergence of new Members, the applications for accessions, and the launch of the new Round.  Rapid implementation of the Plan was therefore important.  Finally, the Secretariat had rightly drawn the attention of Members to the fact that they should request as few ad hoc technical cooperation projects as possible, as that would sabotage the whole Plan if not properly managed.  Ad hoc requests could not be avoided, but they should be kept to a minimum.  He indicated that China wished to keep ad hoc requests to a minimum, although he could not guarantee that his country would never make such a request. 
&& The Chairman, on behalf of the Members, welcomed China to the first CTD meeting for the year. 
&& The representative of Zambia said that the Plan, for his country as an LDC, lacked visibility of the wishes expressed by Ministers at Doha.  Document WT/COMTD/W/90 stated that "Although all developing countries are entitled to WTO technical assistance, Members however, have asked for priority to be accorded to the Least-Developed Countries, African countries, non-residents, and modest and capacity-constrained Missions."  That wish did not seem to have been reflected in the Plan, and he therefore asked for a section be included in the Plan, focusing on the special needs of LDCs, as had been identified in the Uruguay Round, at the Fourth Ministerial Conference, and in the document referred to.  He thanked the representative of Norway for highlighting that point.  He then sought clarification with respect to paragraph 2(iii), which dealt with the IF.  What was referred to as the re-vamped IF was actually the pilot-IF which currently only concerned three countries.  He enquired whether that meant that only those three countries would be considered as priority-countries.  If that was not the case, he enquired how the Secretariat intended to operate in order for all other LDCs to be included.  In the same paragraph, he was also concerned by what appeared to be a condition of mainstreaming trade, as an imposition of a conditionality for technical assistance.  His delegation had always argued that the IF should address other trade-related technical assistance needs and should not highlight mainstreaming, as the condition to be met.  Finally, the lack of focus and visibility on LDCs was also evident in the distribution of programmes.  For instance, the LDCs had not received a sufficient number of programmes in Section III on national technical assistance programmes.
&& The representative of Burundi said that he was pleased to see that the concerns of his Government had been taken into consideration.  He also thanked the donors that had announced contributions, and urged others to do so rapidly, since the success of the Plan and LDCs depended on their assistance.  He also noted the apprehensions of the Secretariat, with respect to being overwhelmed by ad hoc activities, and therefore suggested that regional programmes should be complemented by national programmes.  With respect to the multiplicity of activities foreseen, he agreed with the need to coordinate with other organisations such as UNCTAD.  Despite the multiplicity of activities, the needs of LDCs were still not met.  He enquired whether the confirmation of certain activities would be made by the Secretariat, the beneficiary countries, or during consultations.  
&& The representative of Belize said that with respect to enhancing negotiating capacity, paragraph 5(iii) of the document spoke to the "Singapore Issues", and trade and the environment.  His delegation was of the view that that reference seemed to suggest that that Plan treated those issues at a higher level than the other issues.  That was true when taken within the context of paragraph 38 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, which called for "technical assistance and capacity-building to support efforts for national plans for economic development and strategies for poverty reduction".  That should not be the case, since the reality was that many developing countries still suffered from negotiating capacity-deficits in other areas of trade of particular export-interest to them.  With respect to the nomenclature of the different activities within the Plan, he asked what the difference was between symposiums, seminars and workshops.  He enquired whether they had different levels of importance and/or programme-content.  If that was the case, he further enquired what the differences were in the benefits that would be derived to participants in the respective programmes.  Paragraph 10 of the Plan called for the Secretariat and the Members to work together to ensure that technical assistance is delivered within a coherent policy framework.  However, it made no suggestions with respect to how assessments of the benefits of the technical assistance and capacity-building efforts would be made.  His delegation was of the view that this was critical for measuring the effectiveness of the programmes and determine what the future work plans should be.  In closing, he joined the representative of India in expressing concern with respect to the comment that the WTO was not a development institution.  His delegation did not suggest that it was a developing institution, but for many developing countries development assumed a trade-led approach.  Given the resource and capacity-constraints of those countries, the importance of trade as a vehicle for development imbued the WTO with a certain dimension, if not personality, of development, and that could not be denied.  To do so would undermine the so called "Development Round".  
&& The representative of Uganda, speaking on behalf of the LDCs said that the importance of technical assistance to LDC could not be over-emphasised.  He therefore asked for LDC issues to be given more visibility and not be mixed with those of other developing countries.  That  should not be done at the expense of other developing countries, but given their position as LDCs and their well known capacity constraints, LDCs should be given more visibility.  He indicated that the LDCs were willing to work with the Secretariat in the preparation of the final document, to ensure greater visibility and more LDC-focussed programmes.  
&& The representative of Ghana said that he sought a clarification with respect to the national technical assistance programmes listed for Ghana on page 23 - in the Topics column, "WTO Agreements".  He recalled that his delegation had made some requests for technical assistance in the past, which might have included WTO Agreements.  He asked if what was contained in the Plan was based on that request.  He further noted that the Plan was targeted toward effectiveness in the upcoming negotiations, and his delegation did not need knowledge of WTO Agreements in general for that purpose.  What was needed was specific technical assistance based on his Government's specific needs.  He therefore enquired whether the Plan was finalised or whether it could be modified, as his delegation needed to identify the type of assistance it needed. 
&& The representative of Morocco said that his delegation was of the view that the implementation of the Programme of Action in the area of technical assistance and capacity building augured well, given the greatly improved financial conditions and the different activities programmed. He believed that ad hoc requests should be permitted to allow some flexibility for developing countries, although they should be limited  in number.  With respect to Annex II, which dealt with the "Singapore Issues", Morocco had already, at a regional level, organised activities in those areas;  specifically, the Euro-Mediterranean Conference on Competition Law, and a regional seminar on government procurement.  Those had allowed for a better understanding of these complex issues.  He indicated that his government would be willing to host a regional workshop on any of these issues, in which African countries and developing countries generally, still had a lot of work to do.  His Government also renewed its offer to host a third study-cycle for Moroccan and African students on WTO-issues.  One of the benefits from that type of activity was that it assisted the WTO in its overall training in the public and private sectors.  With respect to the activities for 2002, his government was happy to host the two regional seminars which were being organised in Morocco on dispute settlement and trade policy in order to better understand the WTO Agreements, and assured the Secretariat that everything would be done by the organisers to have successful events.  
&& The representative of Kenya said that technical assistance and capacity building were core elements of WTO's work, and indicated that it would be a mistake if the efforts already undertaken were not recognized.  Success would depend on the level and quality of technical assistance provided to developing countries.  He welcomed the planned activities, but wished to see some of the activities address the specific request to enhance his Government's negotiating capacity and skills on subjects, especially those specified in the Doha Declaration.  His delegation was of the view that room should be made for counties to identify some of its more pressing needs.  His delegation had already submitted its specific requirements to the Secretariat, and was willing to discuss it, to see where it would fit in the current planned activities.  He requested a similar clarification with respect to JITAP as the representative of Ghana had requested.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that his delegation was of the view that it was a step towards the implementation of the Doha mandate on technical assistance to build capacity of WTO Members and prepare them for the challenges ahead.  He appreciated the three activities earmarked for Nigeria and the regional African activities under the Plan.  However, there was a need for better coordination with other agencies providing technical assistance, to prevent duplication. 
&& The representative of Costa Rica said that her Government was interested in being involved in initiatives in Annex I or other parts of the Plan, in the areas of trade facilitation, investment, competition policy and transparency in government procurement.  Her government offered to host a regional workshop on trade negotiations and the integrated database for Central America.  Together with the delegation of Uruguay, her delegation reserved its right to make ad hoc requests in the future, if ad hoc  needs made it necessary. 
&& The representative of Indonesia said that his delegation supported the view of the delegation of Madagascar, that the WTO should permit Members to submit requests on issues and sectors which were not yet included in the Plan.  With respect to Section III of the Plan on national technical assistance programmes, he requested the inclusion of his country in the 2002 Plan.  His Government required technical missions under the WTO technical assistance programmes which aimed at a better understanding of the implications of the services negotiations, as well as issues initiated at Singapore, which were particular to the economic development of the country.
&& The representative of Jamaica recalled that at the Doha Ministerial Conference, Ministers had emphasised the critical importance of technical assistance and capacity building in facilitating the participation of developing and LDCs in the WTO Work Programme, including the broad based negotiations launched at Doha.  To that end, eleven operative paragraphs of the Doha Declaration reflected the commitment to the provision of technical assistance.  She drew attention to paragraph 38 of the Declaration, which stated that in the provision of technical assistance "priority shall also be accorded to small, vulnerable, and transition economies, as well as to Members and Observers without representation in Geneva."  While her delegation recognised and applauded the efforts of the Secretariat in attempting to respond to the overwhelming demand for technical assistance from Members, her delegation was concerned with the way in which small economies were dealt with in the Plan.  It was not clear how far the needs and concerns of those countries were being addressed, and an examination of the Plan suggested that work needed to be done to fulfill the mandate as identified in paragraph 38.  For example, the Caribbean region included many small island developing countries, most of whom were non-resident members of the WTO.  Those countries in particular, needed a range of technical assistance activities to be kept abreast of the work conducted in the WTO;  to facilitate their participation in the WTO negotiations and to enhance their supply-side capabilities.  However, most of the technical assistance activities, in which Jamaica would be involved, would be in the form of regional seminars and workshops, with minimum attention being paid to technical assistance at the national level.  While the regional dimension of the WTO strategy was an important component, she indicated that the new strategy should recognise, as far as possible, the technical assistance requirements of individual countries within regions.  While her government was fully committed to regional cooperation, and recognised the place of regional activities in the delivery of technical assistance, she drew attention to the fact that there were certain limitations to regional seminars.  For example, participation was usually limited to one or two officials from each country, which therefore placed a limit on the participation of the public sector and, in particular, the private sector.  It was not easy to obtain the required level of private sector participation, since it was usually difficult for private sector participants to fund their own participation.
She went on to say that her delegation also wished to know how far the three-year plans which had previously been submitted by Members, had been taken into account in the preparation of the 2002 Plan.  She noted that the TAMC had been established to ensure the coordination and coherence of technical assistance activities within the Secretariat and between the WTO and other organisations.  However, it was unclear how the TAMC prepared the Plan and the factors that had determined which activities were chosen.  She suggested that, for the sake of transparency, the Secretariat give its rationale for the choice of activities in the Plan.  She further indicated that it would be useful if the Secretariat indicated how the activities would be audited, to ensure that quality technical assistance was delivered and that the objectives of the technical cooperation strategy were being met.  With respect to the coordinated delivery of technical assistance, she pointed out that in the new Plan, the Secretariat had underscored the need to improve its approach in the delivery of technical assistance by ensuring the effective, coordinated delivery of technical assistance in conjunction with inter-agency groups, bilateral donors and international organisations.  That was a positive step, as technical cooperation with those bodies, particularly international organisations such as the World Bank, and the infra structural type technical assistance offered by those organisations would assist in addressing issues related to supply-side constraints faced by a number of LDCs and developing countries, including her own.  With respect to the "Singapore Issues", she noted that Annex I did not clearly indicate how technical assistance in those areas would be approached.  The Doha Declaration, with respect to the "Singapore Issues", had pointed out that a decision to launch negotiations on the modalities of the negotiations would be taken by explicit consensus by Members, at the Fifth Ministerial Conference.  The emphasis placed on those issues within the Plan, should not be done in a manner that would appear to pre-judge the launching of the negotiations in those areas.  She emphasised the need for secure and stable funding for the range of technical assistance activities planned for 2002 and beyond.  The Work Programme launched at Doha was a challenging one, and as the Programme evolved and Members became more aware of their technical assistance needs either in relation to the negotiations or the programmes in the standing Councils and Committees, the demand for technical assistance and capacity building would increase.  It was therefore imperative that adequate and stable funding be secured.  Finally, she said that the Secretariat had indicated that it intended to adhere to the 2002 Plan, but that there would be some flexibility in its implementation, as Members would still be able to submit requests for additional technical assistance throughout the year.  In response to the Secretariat's request that Members kept ad hoc requests to a minimum, her delegation still hoped that the Secretariat would look favourably upon such requests from Members.  
&& The representative of St. Lucia indicated that her intervention would be from the perspective of non-residents.  Thirty per cent of the WTO Membership were non-resident Members.  The circumstances of the non-residents therefore required some sensitivity by the other Members for the challenges they faced.  She thanked the delegation of India for indicating that the WTO needed to keep non-residents informed.  She was under the impression that the WTO had approved two Geneva Weeks in the General Council and in the Committee on Budget and Administration, but that had to be clarified.  With respect to capacity building, many of the previous interventions had focused on the need for targeted technical assistance in line with Members' development strategies.  Part of the problem, as stated in many of the interventions, was to focus on the specific requests from Members, which almost locked them into a vicious circle of ignorance.  A certain level of understanding of the WTO Agreements was required to make a specific request for technical assistance.  For instance, St. Lucia was the only member of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) featured in the Plan for any technical missions.  She noted that the assistance was to be delivered through regional seminars, workshops, conferences and briefings, and her delegation sought a clarification similar to that of the representative of Belize on the differences between those.  In addition, the assistance was at the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) or broader hemispheric level.  She thanked the Secretariat for holding two of the CARICOM seminars in St. Lucia, as it gave her Government the opportunity to have more persons present.  However, the absence of more targeted technical assistance was disappointing.  It might be said that the Governments also bore responsibility for the absence of any activity specifically targeted towards the sub‑region as they had not been proactive enough.  She was in the process of finding out what requests had been made by the OECS countries, and at what level – whether regional, sub-regional or national.  There were reasons why all six OECS Members, and other CARICOM Members, were non-resident.  As small-island states with populations between 40,000 and 150,000 persons, the OECS countries had over-burdened administrations and often an insufficient understanding of the Uruguay Round obligations to appreciate their deficiencies, in order to make timely technical assistance requests.  She therefore hoped that, as stated by the delegations of Madagascar, Lesotho and Jamaica, among others, the door remained opened for ad hoc technical assistance requests, and asked the Secretariat to be creative in the design and delivery of programmed assistance, and to use every occasion to reach out to non-residents.  Her delegation's experience with respect to meeting the subsidy notification had shown the absence of knowledge and the lack of understanding of what had been undertaken during the Uruguay Round.  It would be even more so for the new round of negotiations, as many small delegations would not be present to participate.  
&& The representative of Bulgaria said that with respect to the organisation of the seminars, he proposed that all basic documents and presentations from each seminar, symposium and round-table, whether at the regional or national level, for Geneva-based Missions or non-resident Members, be made available to all Members.  An additional link on the WTO web page could be developed, where all those documents could be posted.  That would allow all countries to have access to the documents, and it would facilitate him advising experts from his capital to source those materials.  It was pointed out that UNCTAD was doing something similar with respect to the outcome of its Expert Meetings, and they might be able to explain how that was organised.  That would also reduce rivalry within the WTO with respect to technical assistance, as it would not matter whether a session was held for LDCs or a specific region, as all Members would have access to the basic documents and presentations in written format.   
&& The representative of Mexico said that the issue of technical assistance was important to his delegation.  He believed that technical assistance should be linked to the Doha Development Agenda, which in turn should be linked to all the activities of the WTO and its different Agreements.  Technical assistance within the WTO should take into consideration the greater creation of supply in developing countries.  He said that he was happy to see that his country was included in the 2002 Plan with the workshop on safeguards.  He had also taken note of the comments made, that the Plan would be applied throughout the year, although it might be adjusted in the future, as the Programme evolved and as changes were introduced according to the needs of the WTO Members.
&& The Chairman thanked delegations for all the comments and indicated that the debate had been interesting.
&& Deputy Director‑General Mr. Ravier said that three categories of issues merited attention.  The first category was the procedural issues, and it was up to delegations to decide whether they wished to simply take note of the Plan or to do something more formal.  He personally thought that the idea of the document, which could be improved, was that it be taken note of.  The second category of issues meriting attention was the link between the Plan and the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  Many delegations had mentioned that it was necessary to clarify the link between the capacity building efforts mentioned in the Plan and the Doha Development Agenda.  That proposal merited consideration and it would be possible to make that link without any major change to the Plan in its current form.  The Plan would have to be structured somewhat differently in order to show what related directly to the Doha Development Agenda and what came from the regular WTO work on technical assistance.  Even if the Doha Ministerial Declaration was the politically most visible document, WTO technical assistance activities also covered sectors which were not mentioned in the Declaration.  The third category related to specific comments on different aspects of the Plan and he would give the floor to the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division to respond to those.
&& Mr. Osakwe said that he had found all comments encouraging as they showed that the Membership supported what the Secretariat did in attempting to reconcile many divergent elements.  He expressed particular appreciation to the delegations of Uruguay, Switzerland and others who had mentioned that they had appreciated the private consultations held by the Secretariat with respect to the Plan.  At those consultations the Secretariat had attempted to explain to each group how their priorities had been taken into account and where they had differences of view with other stakeholders with particular interests.  He was pleased to hear that several delegations had appreciated such consultations and encouraged the Secretariat to continue with them.  The Plan contained operational activities.  However, the discussion had focussed both on a technical cooperation strategy and on the operational activities in the Plan.  It was a good occasion to comment on the broader Strategy which had to be revisited in light of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  Nevertheless, it had to be clear that, in spite of the interlinkages, there was a distinction between the Strategy and the Plan, which contained the operational activities based on mandates and decisions already taken by Members.  Four types of comments had been made.  First, Members had made general comments and given advice.  Those would be taken into account.  Second, Members had made comments regarding the presentational format of the Plan.  Some of those comments had been contradictory and the Secretariat would have to seek more guidance from Members regarding the format.  Nevertheless, he was confident that it could be improved.  A third category was comments made at the macro-level such as those regarding coordination, regional groups, and a database.  He would mention the intentions of the Secretariat in those respects.  Last, there had been a number of comments on the micro level which the Secretariat should take into account.
He said he wished to begin with the first category relating to general comments and advice.  Members would recall that the CTD had established a consensus in 1996 that WTO technical assistance would be demand-driven.  That had been stated in the guidelines which had gone to the Ministerial Conference in Singapore and which had been forwarded from the CTD by the then Chairperson Ambassador Benjelloun-Touimi.  It was currently realized that the Secretariat could do better.  The demand-driven approach had led to a long list of needs often exceeding the capacity of the Secretariat to deliver.  It was therefore evident that that consensus had to be modified.  The number of ad-hoc demands were growing, but they had to be reduced.  Even though it was stated in the Plan, and some Members seemed to agree, that ad-hoc requests should be limited, there had still been many other Members reserving their right to come back with ad-hoc requests.  That was an unsustainable situation.  The Secretariat had aimed to strike the right balance, but it was for the Members to re‑establish the indispensable new consensus to reconcile the growing number of individual country requests with the thematic and mandate-based orientation of technical cooperation that Members had said that they wanted.  With respect to the presentational format he said that the current Plan contained a table of contents on the front page and an Annex at the end which gave the number of planned activities per region.  It seemed that Members wished the Secretariat to include a new category which would present the technical cooperation mandates from the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  It was possible to present the information in that way and the Secretariat would do so in the form of an Annex in a subsequent revision of the document.  There were eleven paragraphs in the Doha Ministerial Declaration which contained operative technical cooperation mandates.  Those paragraphs would be described and the 428 activities would then be classified accordingly.  One delegation had expressed concern that the activities in the Plan seemed to be a simple listing.  However, the Plan was based on the Strategy and activities had to be categorized somehow:  they could be listed by region, areas of agreed negotiations, areas of work programmes or areas of mandates.
He further said that several delegations had asked for clarification on the issue of coordination.  All parties involved in technical cooperation had to improve coordination.  The Plan was not a Technical Cooperation Division document.  The Director-General and Deputy Director‑General had ensured that the Plan was composed of activities jointly designed with all operational divisions within the Secretariat.  Cooperation within the WTO Secretariat had been ensured through the Technical Cooperation Management Committee (TAMC).  Coordination with other agencies was approached at two levels.  One level was through the Integrated Framework which focussed specifically on the LDCs.  There had been voices for the Integrated Framework concept to be extended to non-LDCs.  That did not mean extending the Integrated Framework proper to other countries, but to apply the same coordinated approach to other developing countries that so wished.  The WTO Secretariat was decided on that course of action, but WTO Members would have to press for the same change in the other agencies involved.  This could encourage the agencies to establish another form of coordination mechanism.  The WTO Secretariat aimed to improve coordination with donors, as one part of the coordination problem lay with the donors.  There had been the first ever joint meeting of the six core agencies of the Integrated Framework and the OECD Development Assistance Committee in Paris the previous week.  Coordination had been paramount.  The point had then been made that trade and development ministers had to work more closely together and had to send out clear, consistent and coherent messages.  At another level, coordination also had to be improved with the beneficiaries.  The WTO Secretariat did not only receive requests for technical cooperation from the permanent missions in Geneva, a flurry of requests was also received from capitals.  He had urged developing country missions, in bilateral discussions, to coordinate at their level as well so that the WTO Secretariat did not receive contradictory lists of requests from the same developing country Member.  A specific question related to how the WTO Secretariat coordinated with UNCTAD with regard to the mandate of the trade and investment work programme.  Mr. Richard Eglin, Director of the WTO Trade and Finance Division, had been in touch with the UNCTAD Secretariat.  The WTO Secretariat would hardly organize any regional seminar on trade and investment under the Doha Mandate on investment.  Rather, it would work within the framework of the regional seminars to be organized by UNCTAD.  Annex I showed that the WTO Secretariat would convene a meeting of agencies on each of the Singapore issues to decide how to coordinate.  Another example was that the WTO Secretariat would organize a meeting on trade and competition with the other agencies to discuss coordination already the coming Friday.
He went on to say that evaluation and monitoring was an area of priority where the WTO Secretariat had to improve although some improvements had already been made.  The Technical Cooperation Division had originally been monitoring itself.  A separate audit within the Secretariat had subsequently been established under Mr. Paul Rolian who worked together with a consultant.  The Technical Cooperation Division believed that an external audit should, periodically, be used.  Currently, there were two forms for evaluation for every technical cooperation activity.  One form was given to the beneficiary host country authority which it had to send back directly to the WTO Secretariat (to the technical cooperation audit) without the person delivering the technical cooperation seeing it.  Mr. Rolian's reports then went to senior management as well as to the Technical Cooperation Management Committee.  A report on monitoring and evaluation would also go to the CTD in order for Members to better appreciate the evolution of the quality of the technical cooperation delivered.
With respect to costing he said that the formula applied by the WTO Secretariat (Administration and General Services Division) was the standard cost formula which required criteria such as the venue, the number of participants, a comparison of grey-market tickets with regular costs of passengers.  This formula could not be applied too far in advance as all the parameters would then not be fixed.  That was one of the reasons why the WTO Secretariat could not give a fixed costing of each activity to be carried out in the year 2002 already in January.  Nevertheless, every activity would be individually costed.  There had also been a question as to whether there had been any contributions to the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund.  The Trust Fund had been established and the delegation of the United States had pledged a contribution of USD 1 million the previous day.  He believed that contributions would grow, based on indications he had received at the meeting with the OECD-DAC.  He said that there seemed to be unanimity with respect to the establishment of a database on trade-related technical assistance which would show the assistance delivered, not only by the WTO Secretariat, but by major providers of trade-related technical assistance.  The Technical Cooperation Division had established the position of a Web-site manager but needed more assistance.  The delegation of the United States had indicated that they would assist the WTO Secretariat in that regard.  The delegation of the United States to the OECD-DAC had, at the Paris meeting, presented a recently established database by USAID and USTR on trade-related technical assistance provided by the United States.  That database could provide an operating model for a larger database.  The WTO Secretariat had therefore asked the United States delegation if it could send its consultant to the WTO Technical Cooperation Management Committee and if the WTO Secretariat could then build on that model.  It was important to quickly put up that database as it would provide valuable information for beneficiary countries on what was available as well as what was being done.  The database would also help show what technical assistance could be provided in the short term (the coming year) and what could be done later, as well as provide a picture of what the WTO Secretariat was doing and what was done by other agencies and bilateral donors.
He continued by addressing the micro issues.  There was an omission in the Plan of an NGO symposium.  On page 15 there was an activity related to a symposium involving NGOs on trade and environment.  However, there would be another NGO symposium on a broader topic which would be included in the revision of the Plan.  A couple of questions had been raised with respect to the "Geneva Week" activity.  Two "Geneva Weeks" were planned for April and October 2002 and they could be found on page 14.  The Secretariat was guided by the wish of Members that meetings of the Sub-Committee and the Committee of Trade and Development should be scheduled during those weeks in order to allow representatives from headquarters to participate.  Several questions with respect to the JITAP had been raised.  The JITAP was designed to terminate in June 2002.  The terminal evaluation would begin in February 2002.  Approximately 30 applications had been received from individual African countries to have the benefits of the JITAP extended to them.  The major providers of the JITAP funds had insisted that the JITAP be reconciled with the Integrated Framework in order not to have too many trust-funds operating indiscriminately and to build synergies.  It was therefore necessary to wait for the terminal evaluation before any decision on an extension could be taken.  The review of the Integrated Framework, initially scheduled for February 2002, would be held in the form of a seminar in April, after the meeting of trade and development ministers.  He said he wished to draw these facts to the attention of delegations as he, at this stage, could not give any more precise answers to the questions.  A concrete proposal should be before the CTD before the end of June 2002.  Several delegations had mentioned that they wished the WTO Secretariat to distribute the venues for its regional seminars to more countries.  It was a question that the Secretariat was looking into.  Decisions on the venue was made jointly by the WTO and the regional economic commissions, the regional development banks or the headquarters of the regional institution that the WTO Secretariat was dealing with.  There were frequently political and social factors which had to be taken into account in choosing the location.  The language with respect to "agreed negotiations" in Annex 1 would be clarified as requested by the representative of India.  Regarding mainstreaming he said that the language of paragraph 38 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration was clear.  However, Members had differing views on how it should be done, through the multilateral intervention of the agencies or through the multilateral agencies providing assistance to countries.  There could be a compromise in unanimity in the CTD in that WTO technical assistance should be delivered within a coherent policy framework, not as a conditionality.  That policy framework could either be the country Plan or their sovereign determined Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers.  For every region there would be a regional seminar on mainstreaming.  There had been a question on the distinction between seminars, conferences and capacity building.  The WTO Secretariat was using the literal English language usage.  The Secretariat would produce a revision which would seek to accommodate the views and priorities expressed by Members.
&& Deputy Director‑General Mr. Ouedraogo said that in his capacity as Deputy Director‑General in charge of the CTD he wished to make one comment and the observations.  The Plan represented a large effort to rationalize the WTO technical cooperation activities and contribute rigour and discipline to their implementation.  That should assure the donors and give a new boost to technical assistance.  He said that the first observation he wished to make related to the fact that he had recently returned from New York where he had participated in the proceedings of the Preparatory Committee for the International Conference on Financing for Development.  At the opening of those proceedings, the Secretary‑General of the United Nations had said that "what was essential in every programming exercise was to make decisions that could be implemented".  WTO technical cooperation was important for developing countries, and it was therefore important that the financing of it was assured.  Donors present in the CTD had proposed changes to the Plan and he hoped that, with those changes incorporated, financing would be forthcoming.  The second observation related to the development dimension of the WTO.  It was clear that the WTO contributed to development.  That was, in fact, the reason why the outcome of the Doha Ministerial Meeting was called the Doha Development Agenda.  That was also one of the reasons why the Secretary-General of the Untied Nations had called on the WTO to be one of the major institutional stakeholders of the International Conference on Financing for Development to be held in Monterrey, Mexico in March.  The WTO did not finance development in the sense that it did not finance such things as infrastructure in developing countries.  It was through its technical assistance programme that the WTO contributed.
His third comment related to the JITAP.  The JITAP would be evaluated.  There had been 27 demands from LDCs and other African countries to benefit from the JITAP programme as it had led to concrete results.  He said that he hoped that donors would keep that in mind.  There was a complementarity between the JITAP and the Integrated Framework.  He said that one example was a sub-regional workshop that he himself had attended in west Africa.  The participating countries of that workshop had positive impressions of JITAP.  There was no contradiction.  Both the JITAP and the Integrated Framework aimed at building capacity in developing countries.  Developing countries represented over 80 per cent of the WTO Membership and capacity building was one means of assisting those countries to participate more actively in world trade.  
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had understood that the Committee would "take note" of the Plan.  Her delegation supported the overall initiative of the Plan and was actively engaged on a number of levels, including through a contribution to the new Global Trust Fund as had been announced by her the Minister of Trade.  She would have made a number of statements with respect to possible improvements to the Plan that her delegation wished other delegations to be aware of.  However, as the Plan would be revised, her delegation would shortly circulate a non‑paper containing suggestions for improvements.  One such change would be the reference in Section VI concerning tools for development.  Her government was a supporter of the increased use of information technology, especially in technical assistance.  However, her delegation had concerns regarding the information technology element and wished to review it further.  She said that she hoped that the Secretariat would take her delegations comments into account in the revised draft Plan. There was a need to gear particular programmes towards a particular result.  Her delegation had noted the comments made by a number of delegations including St Lucia and Zambia regarding the necessity to balance the attention given to different regions in particular need of technical assistance.
&& The representative of Zambia said that his delegation would also be submitting a paper containing specific comments on the Plan and he said that he hoped that the Secretariat would take those into account in the revised Plan.  The Doha Ministerial Declaration had made specific reference to the LDCs.  He wondered why some non-LDCs would receive as many as eight missions compared to only one mission to many LDCs when the WTO Technical Cooperation Strategy stated that although technical cooperation was for all developing countries, Members had asked that LDCs be given priority.  There was thus no consistency between the Strategy and the Plan.  In addition, the Integrated Framework Pilot Scheme focussed on three countries.  He asked what would happen to the LDCs which were not included in the Pilot Scheme as it was stated in the Plan that the Pilot countries would be used as a basis.  On the macro-level it was important that there was a specific section or unit in the WTO Secretariat which dealt with LDCs.  A unit had been established after the Seattle Ministerial Conference but it had recently disappeared.  There should be a particular focus on LDCs both in the Plan and in the WTO Secretariat.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation was satisfied with the explanations given regarding the next steps.  However, the revision had to be made before the holding of the Pledging Conference, as the basis for that Conference would be the Plan.  He indicated that there would be some additional funding forthcoming.  Regarding the suggestion to use the model of one donor country in the presentation of technical assistance, a clear definition of activities had to be found in order for different things not to be mixed.  Only one model had been quoted but other models were available.  The OECD for example was working on one.  The forthcoming meeting of the Committee in February should contain a discussion on what happened to the WTO Technical Assistance Strategy and the concepts of demand-drivenness and ownership.  A certain demand was defined through the Doha Ministerial Declaration which could help reconcile the idea of a strategy and operational activities.  They were not completely separate and there was already a link.  His delegation had noted the point that the delegation of India had a different view of what had been done in paragraph 20 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration regarding agreed negotiations in the Annex on Investment and Singapore issues.  However, his delegation did not want the issue to go the other way in the sense that other delegations would ask for the insertion of the language "to be" agreed negotiations.  The best way out was to leave that discussion to the General Council and the Trade Negotiations Committee and only to refer to the paragraphs where there was full agreement that technical assistance should take place, such as paragraph 21 with respect to investment.  There was no need for that issue to hold up the work on technical assistance in the CTD.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation was satisfied with the responses given by the Secretariat to the comments made by delegations and wished to await the revision of the Plan which his delegation hoped would be discussed at the next meeting of the Committee.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that, as mentioned by Deputy Director-General Mr. Ouedraogo, it was impossible to implement any technical assistance project without adequate financing.  It was therefore key to the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system that the technical cooperation activities of the WTO Secretariat were fully funded.  There was no use in planning activities which could not be financed.  His delegation was of the view that it was important that an LDC unit be established within the Secretariat.  He asked why the WTO did not use the example of WIPO and UNCTAD, which had centralized all issues relating to the LDCs in one place.
&& The representative of Ghana said that he had observed that some countries benefitted from as many as eight different technical assistance activities while others would only benefit from one.  He urged the Secretariat to take that into account and establish some kind of balance. 
&& The Chairman said that technical assistance to some extent was demand-driven.  However, for the Committee to continue its business he suggested that the Committee ask the Secretariat to take the points made into account in a revision of the Plan, that the Committee take note of the document and the statements made.
The Committee so agreed.
Training Institute
&& Deputy Director-General Mr. Ravier said that the relevant document had been issued under document symbol WT/COMTD/W/89/Rev.1.  Members would recall that they had already been informed at the meeting of the Committee in October last year of the activities the Training Institute envisaged for the year 2002.  The work programme of the Training Institute had been revised in order to take the decisions taken at the Doha Ministerial Conference and in Geneva, with the adoption of the 2002 budget, into account.  Document WT/COMTD/W/89/Rev.1 complemented and specified the information provided to delegations last year.  The activities of the Training Institute complemented those contained in the Technical Assistance Plan.  That was also the reason why the documents were examined in parallel.  He said that he was of the view that future discussions on WTO technical assistance should always be linked to a discussion on training as the two were inter-related.  Members had, in the course of the discussion of the WTO budget, approved a doubling of the activities of the Training Institute.  The doubling concerned essentially the three-month Trade Policy Courses.  That increase would substantially increase the courses available to Members and especially to developing country Members.  Even if it had not been foreseen that the doubling of the three-month courses would be fully operational before 2003 (for practical reasons), the training activities would increase during 2002 with visible results already during the second semester of 2002.  Members had also decided, in the course of the December 2001 budget discussion, to regularly finance training activities which previously depended exclusively on extra-budgetary resources.  That was particularly the case for the Short Trade-Policy Courses for LDCs which, during the last few years, had become a more or less regular training feature.  Two of the new mandates given to the Training Institute at its creation in June 2001 were to be concretised during the first part of 2002, i.e. training of trainers and distance learning.  First, training of trainers would be undertaken to increase the quality of the training given by Secretariat experts when they were asked to participate in training or technical cooperation activities.  The second phase of the programme, which would start in the second half of the year 2002, was intended for developing country trainers.  The first part would be financed through already existing voluntary extra-budgetary resources.  The financing of the second part had still not been ensured but was currently being costed.  He hoped that this responded to one of the questions raised in the earlier discussion on technical cooperation.  The Training Institute was also supervising the preparatory work for the launching of a pilot project on distance learning through a training course on line for about 65 participants in developing countries.  The pilot project, which was scheduled for mid 2002, would permit modifications to be made before the launching of a more ambitious distance‑learning programme on which the Training Institute was currently working.  A third sphere of activities concerned the relations with universities, in particular those in developing countries.  That activity had recently not received much attention as it had not yet received the necessary financing to give it the desired content.  However, he hoped that that situation would improve.
He went on to say that coherence and complementarity between the activities of the Training Institute and the technical cooperation programmes were one of the priorities of the Secretariat.  The role of the Technical Assistance Management Committee, which he chaired, was to ensure the implementation of that priority.  He also mentioned the future role of the Joint Consultative Board on WTO-related Training which encompassed representatives of UNCTAD, ITC, World Bank, universities and WTO Members through the Chairpersons of the WTO Committees directly concerned by development matters.  One of the objectives of that Board was to ameliorate the cooperation between the organizations in the area of training.  The Board had held its first meeting in November 2001.  The Training Institute was already cooperating closely with a number of agencies which were active in the area of training.
&& The representative of India said that he was pleased to note that the activities of the Training Institute were being diversified with the introduction of a pilot project to offer distance-learning on line.  In fact, in one of his delegation's earlier interactions with the Training Institute, such a course had been suggested.  His delegation was therefore grateful to the WTO Secretariat for the introduction of that new activity.  He hoped that this would assist interested people in developing countries to benefit from an increased understanding of the WTO Agreements without having to come to Geneva.  On the last page of the document, there seemed to be a mistake as the twenty-first and twenty-second Trade Policy Courses had both been given the same dates.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that it was his delegation's belief that the training activities were important to spread the knowledge of the WTO into wider circles.  His delegation wished to make two points in that respect.  First, the planned on-line activities were important and his delegation encouraged the Training Institute to consider what other Geneva‑based agencies had done in that respect.  He knew that WIPO and other agencies had done some good work which the WTO might learn from.  The second was that his delegation encouraged the Training Institute to seek as much cooperation as possible with institutions which did already train people.  From the experience of the European Communities he knew that there were numerous such institutions within the Communities which would be ready to cooperate.  There were also more and more possible counterparts in developing countries which would be effective partners in delivering joint training activities.
&& The representative of Australia said that her delegation welcomed the new initiatives in the document, especially those activities which would have long-term benefits such as the training‑of‑trainers programme and those which made best use of the resources available such as the distance-learning courses.  Her delegation was interested in learning about the selection process for participants, and the plans for evaluating new aspects of the Training Institute's work as outlined in the document.
&& The representative of Senegal said that, when looking through the document, he found it surprising that he had not seen any course in the French language.  He asked the Secretariat to enlighten delegations as to why.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that he wished to know if it would be possible to equalize the number of courses in the three official WTO languages in order for French- and Spanish-speaking Members to benefit as much as the English-speaking Members from the system.
&& The representative of Zambia said that his delegation had not heard any reference to funding.  Budget estimates were given jointly with funding in the document, which he assumed referred to the actual resources available, in relation to the budget.  He asked whether the figures stated the real anticipated costs and available funds, and whether the current resources would meet the expected costs.
&& The Director of the Training Institute said that he would begin by the last question.  The Training Institute currently had enough resources to carry out its activities with the exception, which was mentioned in the table of the document, of the second phase of the training-of-trainers programme.  Otherwise, the financial resources seemed to be sufficient to cover the activities mentioned in the document.  However, in order to increase the activities of the Training Institute in the future, increased resources would have to be made available.  The mandate received in June 2001 had begun to be implemented.  Most of the second part of last year had been devoted to preparation for the activities which were new to the Training Institute as well and to prepare the ground for pilot projects and other activities which could be implemented.  There was therefore always a need for additional funding, but for projects yet to be defined.  There was another activity which lacked funding relating to contacts with academia in developing countries.  The Training Institute would, in the weeks to come, work on defining certain projects and contact donors.  With respect to courses in French he said that he wished to draw the delegations' attention to footnote 11 on page 8.  The Training Institute found itself in a difficult situation as it could not begin to double the courses straight away.  First, there was a need for an additional training room for a new set of students.  He hoped that this room would be ready by the end of August 2002 and it would then be possible to give two courses in parallel which would begin the cycle of double courses.  The doubling would only be finalized in 2003 when the first 6 courses would have been held and it was in the beginning of 2003 that the course in French would be held.  For every cycle, there would be four courses in English, one each in French and Spanish, which corresponded quite closely to the demand for fellowships in each language.  The dates were not wrong, as the plan was to hold two parallel courses.  The aim was to carry out joint activities of the two groups as often as possible since the new room would allow for that.  In the initial phase of preparations for the pilot schemes, the Training Institute had contacted all possible other agencies with experience in the field and had benefitted from extensive advice and collaboration.  The same had applied to the phase of bidding for the providers of such services where the Training Institute had benefitted from several demonstrations of different programmes which had enabled them to better select the service provider.  
He further said that concerning the selection process for the courses, all the beneficiary countries were aware of the criteria as they were published each time an invitation was sent.  Those criteria were public and concerned age, education, language skills in the language of the course, work experience in the area of trade policy and, a criterion on which the Training Institute insisted strongly, whether the candidates would, upon completion of the course, return to their respective Ministries and actually work with WTO‑related issues.  The selection was carried out at two levels;  at the level of the Training Institute and at the Senior Management level of the WTO Secretariat.  There were also a number of other criteria.  For example, the aim was to have some regional distribution in order for the participants in each group to benefit from each others' experiences.  Female representation was another consideration.  There were no specific percentages but when there were many applicants, women were well represented.  Since 1997 there was a mandate to give LDCs special attention.  That priority was always taken into account, although it was difficult to achieve in the Spanish‑speaking courses as there were not many Spanish-speaking LDC applicants.  However, there was a tendency for a greater and greater regional representation in all courses.  Countries which previously only made requests to attend French-speaking courses had made requests for courses held in English and Spanish, and vice-versa, so there seemed to be a certain mobility.
He contributed by saying that there was a system of evaluation that had been described in the document WT/COMTD/W/86/Add.1 which had been provided to the CTD in the year 2001.  A system for evaluation existed since many years, but it had been updated for the longer Trade Policy Courses.  The evaluation method had lately been adapted to other activities of the Institute.  For each activity there was thus a quite elaborated evaluation mechanism regarding aspects such as the degree of knowledge transferred, as experienced by the participants, and the efficiency of the experts making the presentations.  All aspects were included in the evaluation.  The Training Institute was also in the process of studying how the evaluation method could be adapted to suit some of the new activities as they would be different, such as the distance learning courses or the training of trainers.  Another area of monitoring that the Training Institute would be interested in, but which it could not undertake for reasons of sovereignty of WTO Members over their internal affairs, was to look at what happened to the students trained once they returned to their countries.  However, there were indirect methods to verify what had happened.  For example, a fact that was readily verifiable was that an increasing number of Geneva-based delegates from developing countries were former participants of the Trade Policy Course.  More than eighty former Trade Policy Course participants were currently in Geneva and among those a number of ambassadors.  Through contacts with capitals it was also known that a number of former Trade Policy Course participants worked as trade-policy experts in capitals.  That was an indirect way of measuring the impact of the courses.  However, he hoped for future methods of analysis and evaluation in capitals with the help of the governments, which would permit to measure the exact impact of the courses.
&& The Committee took note of the documents and the statements made.

D.	OTHER BUSINESS 
No matters were raised under Other Business.
__________




WT/COMTD/M/37 Page  PAGE 26



	WT/COMTD/M/37 	Page  PAGE 25













