 
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 16 MARCH 2016
Chairman: H.E. Mr. Juan Esteban Aguirre Martínez (Paraguay)
 TOC \O "1-3" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780624" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC451780624 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780625" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC451780625 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780626" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc451780626 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780627" (ii)	Request for observer status by the Intergovernmental Standing Committee on Shipping (ISCOS)	 PAGEREF _Toc451780627 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780628" (iii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc451780628 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780629" C.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC451780629 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780630" -	Update on the External Evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance – statement by Norway on behalf of the Steering Committee of the Evaluation	 PAGEREF _Toc451780630 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780631" D.	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC451780631 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780632" -	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO – proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)	 PAGEREF _Toc451780632 \h 4
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780633" -	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate – proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc451780633 \h 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780634" E.	electronic commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC451780634 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780635" -	Ministerial Decision of 19 December 2015 (WT/MIN(15)/42 – WT/L/977) – Statement by the Chairman	 PAGEREF _Toc451780635 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780636" F.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC451780636 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780637" -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc451780637 \h 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780638" -	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc451780638 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780639" -	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc451780639 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780640" - 	Latin American Integration Association – Report to the WTO on instruments concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, for the period 1 January 2014 – 31 December 2014 (WT/COMTD/88)	 PAGEREF _Toc451780640 \h 8
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780641" -	Generalized System of Preferences – Notification by Japan (WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.16)	 PAGEREF _Toc451780641 \h 9
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc451780642" -	Generalized System of Preferences – Notification by the United States (WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.9)	 PAGEREF _Toc451780642 \h 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780643" G.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC451780643 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780644" H.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC451780644 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780645" I.	election of the chairperson of the sub-committee on least developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC451780645 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780646" J.	election of the chairperson of the committee on trade and development	 PAGEREF _TOC451780646 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC451780647" K.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC451780647 \H 12


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The draft agenda as contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/6 of 4 March 2016 was adopted.
OBSERVERS
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD), Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Request for observer status by the Intergovernmental Standing Committee on Shipping (ISCOS)
&& The Chairman said that ISCOS was an intergovernmental organization established in 1967 by the Governments of Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania and Zambia. He recalled that he had informed Members at the 97th Session that ISCOS' request for observer status in the CTD would appear on the agenda for the present meeting. It was his understanding that the organization had also made a request for observer status in the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA). He proceeded to outline elements of ISCOS' work on the basis of the information provided in the request letter from the organization and noted, inter alia, in this regard that ISCOS was working with regional governments, the private sector, development partners and other stakeholders to coordinate regional initiatives aimed at reducing the cost of doing business. 
&& The Committee agreed to grant ISCOS observer status, after which the Chairman requested the Secretariat to circulate an updated list of intergovernmental organizations with observer status in the CTD.
(iii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record. He indicated that if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING 
-	Update on the External Evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance – statement by Norway on behalf of the Steering Committee of the Evaluation
&& The Chairman recalled that the delegation of Norway had provided information at the 97th Session on the external evaluation of the WTO's trade-related technical assistance. The information had been provided on behalf of the Steering Committee of the evaluation. He understood that Norway wished to update Members on the status of the evaluation. 
&& The representative of Norway informed Members that the Steering Committee of the evaluation - in cooperation with the WTO Secretariat - had finalized the selection process for the consulting firm that would undertake the evaluation, and that Saana Consulting had submitted the winning bid. She pointed to previous evaluations undertaken by Saana Consulting, including of the International Trade Centre, and indicated the Steering Committee's satisfaction with the choice of firm. She also informed Members that the evaluation team would be led by Mr. Bernard Wood, who had over 40 years of international development cooperation experience in policy, evaluation, aid effectiveness, organizational change and international trade for development. She went on to provide specific examples of Mr. Wood's experience and highlighted that he had led the team providing advisory support to the Board of the Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF) for the design of EIF Phase 2. In closing, she indicated that the CTD would continue to be kept informed of progress in the evaluation. 
&& The Committee took note of the update provided by Norway.
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT – WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. He recalled that, at the 97th Session, the Committee had agreed to the proposal from Ecuador contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1, which had been submitted in the context of the CTD's mandate from MC8. The proposal was for the Secretariat to periodically update its paper on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. He informed the Committee in this regard that he had asked the Secretariat to work on an update to the document, which would be ready later in the year. Turning to the two proposals for work under the MC8 mandate that were to be considered at the present meeting, he observed that the submissions containing these proposals had been appearing on the CTD’s agenda for quite some time, and that it was therefore important for progress to be made. He recalled that he had encouraged the proponents of these proposals to initiate informal discussions with other delegations, as he believed that this was important to move the process forward. Although there had been no progress to report on this matter at a small‑group informal consultation held on 3 March 2016, he expressed his hope that some progress could be reported at the present meeting.
-	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO – proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)
&& The Chairman said that the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 had the aim for the CTD to report on development-related work taking place in the WTO. He recalled that there were originally two proposals which broadly had this aim, and that the proponents of the two proposals had decided to work together. Document WT/COMTD/W/208 was the outcome of this collaboration.
&& The representative of India said that there was not much progress on this matter. Recalling the mandate from MC8, he said that the CTD was a special body in the WTO. It was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of development-related work, and therefore had an overarching mandate. His delegation believed that it was appropriate for the CTD to report regularly on the development-related work that was taking place in other WTO bodies and provide the necessary recommendations to the General Council on achieving better coordination within the WTO on development issues. He requested that the submission remain on the CTD's agenda for the next meeting. 
&& The representative of China expressed support for the intervention by India.
&& The Chairman noted the request to keep the submission on the CTD's agenda. He expressed his concern with the lack of progress on the proposal and emphasized the need for consultations to take place between the proponents and other Members. 
&& The Committee took note of the interventions.
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate – proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
&& The Chairman said that, while there were three proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192, the first two proposals had already been addressed by the Committee. The first proposal, which was for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, had been agreed to by the Committee at its 87th Session. The updated Secretariat paper was circulated in June 2013 and had appeared on the CTD's agenda for a number of meetings. As for the second proposal, which was for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO, this idea was now being dealt with in the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 which had been addressed under the previous sub-item. The remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to regional trade agreements (RTAs) to submit their notification and information requirements jointly.
&& The representative of India said that the parties to RTAs had several requirements to fulfil under the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. In order to help ensure a timely consideration of RTAs and the smooth operation of the Transparency Mechanism, it was important for the parties to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. He requested that the submission remain on the CTD's agenda for the next meeting.
&& The representative of China expressed support for the intervention by India.
&& The Chairman noted the request for the submission to remain on the CTD's agenda. He expressed his concern with the lack of progress on this proposal as well, and once again emphasized the need for consultations to take place between the proponents and other Members. 
&& The representative of the United States indicated her delegation's satisfaction that the CTD had agreed at its 97th Session to the proposal by Ecuador contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1. With regard to the remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192, she observed that Members were no closer to achieving consensus than when the proposals were first addressed in the CTD. The proponents had acknowledged that they had not received positive reactions from Members, and her delegation was not aware of any outreach efforts by the proponents to address the concerns that had been raised, including by the United States (US). Given that there did not seem to be any prospect to reach consensus, she questioned the utility of maintaining the submissions on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of the European Union expressed her delegation's frustration with the situation with respect to the two remaining proposals. She noted that the European Union (EU) had made efforts to explain its substantive concerns on the two proposals in formal meetings and in informal consultations, but there had been no engagement by the proponents. She also recalled that, in the context of the CTD's discussion on the MC8 mandate, there had been instances of proposals being withdrawn when it was evident that progress was not being made. She hoped to see some movement on this matter in the near future.
&& The Chairman explained that the practice in the CTD was for an item to remain on the agenda if any Member so requested. He expressed his hope that some progress could be made soon on a way forward with respect to the remaining proposals. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
-	Ministerial Decision of 19 December 2015 (WT/MIN(15)/42 – WT/L/977) – Statement by the Chairman
&& The Chairman said that a Ministerial Decision concerning the WTO's Work Programme on E‑Commerce was taken on 19 December 2015, at the Tenth Ministerial Conference (MC10). The Decision - which was contained in document WT/MIN(15)/42 - WT/L/977 – called, inter alia, for a continuation of the work under the Work Programme on E-Commerce, based on the existing mandate and guidelines, and on the basis of proposals submitted by Members in the relevant WTO bodies. He recalled that the CTD was one of the four subsidiary bodies of the General Council that was mandated to implement the WTO's Work Programme on E-Commerce. The most recent contribution of the CTD to the Work Programme was the Workshop on "E-Commerce, Development and Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises", which was held on 8 and 9 April 2013. He referred Members to the report on the workshop – contained in document WT/COMTD/W/198 – and on this basis, proceeded to highlight elements of the discussion that had taken place at the workshop. He then encouraged Members wishing to suggest ways to take forward the e-commerce work in the CTD to consider submitting written proposals. He also informed the Committee that, as indicated in the Decision taken at MC10, the General Council's next review of the Work Programme on E‑Commerce would be held in July 2016.
&& The representative of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) indicated that he wished to take the opportunity to update Members on UNCTAD's work on e-commerce. He emphasized the importance of e-commerce as a driver of economic growth, inclusive trade and job creation in developing countries, but noted that a more concerted approach was needed in order to assist countries to build e-commerce economies. Against this background, UNCTAD had taken the initiative to explore the feasibility of launching an Aid for eTrade initiative. This was envisioned as a demand-driven mechanism for development partners and international organizations - in partnership with the private sector - to make actions more coherent, pool capabilities and resources, and avoid duplication. He proceeded to outline elements of the initiative, and noted that it would seek synergies with existing initiatives and mechanisms, including Aid for Trade and the EIF. Constructive preliminary discussions had been held with selected donors, beneficiary countries, international organizations and business representatives, and a draft Call for Action – which would be open for comments from all stakeholders – was soon to be circulated. An open consultations meeting would also be held during UNCTAD's E-Commerce Week, scheduled for 18-22 April 2016. He went on to highlight elements of the programme for E‑Commerce Week, and explained that the event provided an opportunity for discussions on recent developments and policy issues related to e-commerce. 
&& The representative of China acknowledged the importance of the Aid for eTrade initiative. He also emphasized the importance of e-commerce to the Chinese economy, and in this regard noted that most of the Chinese companies involved in cross-border e-commerce were small and medium‑sized enterprises (SMEs), which provided employment for about 2.5 million people. He informed the Committee that efforts to help farmers make better use of e-commerce were an important element of China's poverty alleviation activities, but additionally noted that China - like most developing countries – faced difficulties with weak e-commerce infrastructures and incomplete regulatory frameworks. He believed that a global solution was required to deal with the problems and challenges associated with e-commerce. Noting that useful discussions on e‑commerce had taken place at the WTO, he expressed China's willingness to continue to work with Members. He shared his delegation's view that discussions in the CTD needed to focus on the needs of developing Members and the specific difficulties faced by SMEs.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs. He noted that, as had been agreed at the CTD's 6th Dedicated Session on RTAs, the updates on RTAs provided at each CTD meeting by the Chairperson would henceforth also be shared with the Committee in the form of a room document, as was done in the CRTA.
He went on to inform the Committee that there had been one new notification of an RTA under the Enabling Clause since his last report to the CTD in November 2015. In particular, the Arab Mediterranean Free Trade Agreement (Agadir Agreement) between Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia was notified on 22 February 2016 in document WT/COMTD/N/48. The parties had been requested to provide the necessary data to the Secretariat for the preparation of the factual presentation by 15 July 2016. Turning to the Agreement between Singapore and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), which was notified in 2015, he said that data had been submitted by Singapore. However, the Secretariat was still waiting to receive data from the GCC parties, which had been requested by 23 November 2015. In the case of the Mauritius-Pakistan Agreement - also notified in 2015 - data had been received from the parties, but the Secretariat was seeking some additional clarification before processing the data.
He next turned to other factual presentations which had yet to be completed. With regard to the Agreement between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and India, he said that comments had been received from India on the draft factual presentation that was sent to the parties, but the Secretariat was still waiting for comments from ASEAN, which had been requested by 10 January 2014. The Secretariat was also still waiting to receive comments from the parties on the draft factual presentation relating to the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the East African Community, which had been requested by 16 June 2014. For a number of other RTAs – namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, India and Bhutan, and Cuba and El Salvador - the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties. He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible. He went on to say that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the CRTA, a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the Agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete. 
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update.
-	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The representative of India indicated that his intervention related to the first three sub-items under the present agenda item, since the three RTAs referenced in these sub-items had been "dually notified" under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. He noted that the systemic concerns that were raised by China, Egypt and India over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV were pertinent even now, but they remained unaddressed. Some Members had expressed the view that the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 were outside the scope of the CTD, and needed to be discussed in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR). The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification.
Pointing to the terms of reference of the CTD contained in document WT/L/46, he noted that the CTD was designated to serve as a focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO and its relationship to development-related activities in other multilateral agencies. He added that the Committee could consult with other WTO bodies in addressing the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175. This was in keeping with paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference which entrusted the Committee to review periodically, in consultation as appropriate with the relevant bodies of the WTO, the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and in particular least developed country (LDC) Members, and report to the General Council for appropriate action. In concluding, he indicated that the first three sub-items under the present agenda item needed to remain on the CTD's agenda until the systemic and specific concerns arising from "dually notified" RTAs were addressed. He also requested the Chairman to hold consultations in this regard.
&& The representative of the United States regretted that the Committee was once again discussing this issue, which her delegation considered long resolved. She recalled that the US, as well as some other Members, had indicated on many occasions that the GCC Customs Union issue was not an issue of dual notification. Her delegation continued to have concerns with the present sub-item being listed on the CTD's agenda. The sub-item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. Noting that the issue took away time, resources and attention from other pressing matters, she expressed her hope that the Committee could move forward constructively, recognizing that the GCC Customs Union was not an issue of dual notification, but rather something to be addressed in the CRTA under the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. She urged the GCC countries to provide the Secretariat with their comments on the draft factual presentation, so that Members could benefit from transparency on the GCC Customs Union.
&& The representative of China observed that the systemic concerns raised by some Members remained. He indicated that his delegation was willing to work with Members to find a solution. He also requested that the present sub-item remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of the European Union recalled that her delegation had on several occasions explained its position on this matter. She observed in particular that the present sub‑item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made. In addition, she made a distinction between the issues surrounding the GCC Customs Union on the one hand, and the issues surrounding the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement on the other. With regard to the latter two agreements, she expressed disappointment that the parties had still not been able to agree on a way forward. She indicated that her delegation was willing to consider a pragmatic solution, but emphasized that the NGR was the right forum for a discussion on systemic issues.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods) 
&& The Chairman said that the second sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement. The third sub-item concerned the notification of the India-Korea Agreement.
&& The representative of Korea said that the position of his delegation remained unchanged, as all of Korea's RTAs had been notified in accordance with the relevant provisions of the WTO. He nevertheless indicated his delegation's willingness to engage with Members in order to find a solution.
&& The representative of the United States said that her intervention related to both the second and third sub-items under the present agenda item. She said that her delegation continued to have concerns with these sub-items being listed on the CTD's agenda. The sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. With respect to the systemic issue of dual notifications, she indicated that this was directly linked to the functioning of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, and went beyond the mandate of the CTD. Finally, she expressed disappointment that the transparency requirements for the two RTAs in question had not been fulfilled.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
- 	Latin American Integration Association – Report to the WTO on instruments concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, for the period 1 January 2014 – 31 December 2014 (WT/COMTD/88)
&& The Chairman said that the report by the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA), circulated in document WT/COMTD/88, appeared on the CTD's agenda at the request of the delegation of Uruguay. He invited Uruguay to introduce the report. 
&& The representative of Uruguay, on behalf of the LAIA parties, said that the report was being submitted pursuant to the obligation of WTO Members to notify instruments concluded under the Enabling Clause, and in accordance with the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. The report was without prejudice to individual notifications submitted by Members, and was further to the reports previously submitted. She recalled that the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo had been notified to the GATT in 1982 in document L/5342. Turning to the content of the report, she said that the first section analyzed trends in intraregional trade in 2014. The second section described the instruments that were concluded and registered under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo during the period considered, or that were concluded in preceding years but registered with the LAIA General Secretariat in 2014. She noted that the report included 12 additional protocols to economic complementarity agreements and one additional protocol to a trade promotion agreement.
&& The representative of the United States asked for clarification as to why the report was listed under an agenda item dealing with notifications. He also indicated his delegation's confusion with the language in the first paragraph of the Introduction to the report on page 2, and in particular asked whether the individual LAIA countries could explain what was meant by "pursuant to the obligation of WTO Members to notify" and "without prejudice to individual notifications submitted by Members". With respect to agreements between LAIA countries, he stressed that WTO notification obligations were on individual Members. Under the terms of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, it was not possible for the LAIA to notify RTAs for individual Members. In this light, he urged the LAIA countries to notify their agreements, whether they were undertaken regionally or bilaterally. He added that, if the LAIA countries were seeking some kind of regional format for notifications that would be acceptable to WTO Members, the US would welcome such a discussion and would engage constructively to find a solution. In order to ensure regional consistency and promote efficiency - while ensuring that individual Members remained responsible for their notification obligations - a solution could be as simple as deconstructing the LAIA report into agreement-by-agreement notifications that would be submitted by the parties to those agreements.
&& The representative of the European Union believed that there was a need for further clarification on the status of the report. In particular, if the LAIA countries considered the report to be a notification, then the report could potentially be used as the basis for the preparation of factual presentations by the Secretariat. However, if the LAIA countries did not consider the report to be a notification, then they would need to comply individually with their notification obligations. She emphasized that it was the responsibility of individual Members to fulfil their notification obligations and to submit the data required for the preparation of the factual presentations. She indicated the EU's willingness to participate in further discussions on the matter.  
&& The representative of Uruguay said that the LAIA parties would need to discuss the points raised by the EU and the US before being able to provide a response.
&& The Committee took note of the report and of the interventions.
-	Generalized System of Preferences – Notification by Japan (WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.16)
&& The Chairman recalled that the notification by Japan concerning its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme, contained in document WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.16, had been introduced at the 97th Session.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, thanked Japan for the notification. He indicated that the Group would study the notification carefully and would provide any comments that it might have.
&& The Committee took note of the notification and of the interventions.
-	Generalized System of Preferences – Notification by the United States (WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.9)
&& The Chairman said that the notification by the US concerning its GSP scheme was contained in document WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.9. He invited the US to introduce the notification.
&& The representative of the United States said that 2016 marked the 40th anniversary of the US' GSP programme, which was launched in 1976. Since its inception, the GSP programme had provided duty-free access for over half-a-trillion US dollars in eligible products from developing countries. The programme had also helped to foster the further integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system. The GSP was at the centre of the US' efforts to promote the economic development of developing countries through trade, and was complemented by substantial trade capacity-building assistance by the US to help developing countries advance economic reforms, and to increase and diversify their trade. The programme currently provided duty‑free treatment for up to 5,000 products from 122 designated beneficiary countries and territories, including 43 LDCs.
She went on to say that the notification under consideration provided specific information on changes to country and product eligibility resulting from the last three GSP annual reviews. Among the changes in the programme, she highlighted that the US had added 12 upland cotton products to GSP eligibility for least developed beneficiary countries. This had been done in response to requests from these countries, including several cotton-producing countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. The US had also removed from GSP eligibility several products from specific countries after imports of these products exceeded statutory competitive need limitations. In addition, several countries were graduated from the GSP programme after having become high-income countries, as designated by the World Bank. One country was suspended from GSP benefits, following a multi‑year review which found that it was not affording its workers internationally recognized worker rights.  Although authorization of the GSP programme had lapsed from mid-2013 to mid-2015, legislation had been enacted in June 2015 to authorize the programme through 31 December 2017. Benefits under the programme had been made retroactive through the entire period of the lapse, thereby enabling importers to seek refunds of duties paid during the lapse. The legislation that renewed the GSP programme also authorized the US President, for the first time, to consider the addition of certain travel goods for eligibility under the GSP. The potential addition of these products was currently the subject of a public review that was expected to conclude in June 2016.
In closing, she said that, while the US recognized the successes of GSP programme – which covered over US$17.4 billion in imports in 2015 – it was also committed to continue working to improve the effectiveness of efforts to integrate developing countries more fully into the global trading system. Towards that end, the US continued to work with GSP beneficiary countries to identify ways for them to improve their utilization of the programme in order to increase their exports and bolster economic development. Regular meetings with beneficiary government officials were organized, and videoconferences and teleconferences were held with trade associations and businesses in beneficiary countries. Seminars for exporters, government officials and others were also held. The US planned to continue such outreach activities and was open to working with any beneficiary countries that wanted to increase their usage of the GSP programme.  
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, thanked the US for the notification. He indicated that the Group would study the notification carefully and would provide any comments that it might have. 
&& The Committee took note of the notification and of the interventions.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on PTAs. He observed that, while two PTAs had been considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions, an additional five PTAs notified since the establishment of the Transparency Mechanism – PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation, Chinese Taipei and Thailand - had not been considered. This was because the Secretariat had not received the full set of data required for the preparation of the factual presentations. He urged the notifying Members to provide the data as soon as possible. He also informed the Committee that India had circulated a communication in November 2015 - contained in document WT/COMTD/N/38/Add.1 - which provided updated information on its PTA. 
&& The representative of the European Union suggested that the updates on PTAs provided by the Chairperson at CTD meetings could henceforth also be shared with the Committee in the form of a room document.
It was so agreed.
&& The Committee took note of the interventions. 
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman recalled that an item concerning duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, emphasized the importance of moving forward on the DFQF issue. He believed that the active engagement of Members was needed for this purpose, and input from the Secretariat would also be useful. He also called on Members to notify their DFQF schemes to the WTO.
&& The representative of Bangladesh expressed support for the intervention by Benin and highlighted the importance of DFQF market access to LDCs, including with respect to the development impact. He recalled the discussions that had taken place in 2015 on the parameters of a proposed Secretariat study on DFQF implementation, and looked forward to resuming work on this matter with the active engagement of Members.  
&& The Chairman noted that there had not been convergence on the parameters of the Secretariat study on DFQF implementation when the matter was discussed in 2015. He also took note of the intervention by Benin and proposed that the Secretariat present a brief update at the next CTD meeting on the status of the DFQF market access provided by Members. 
It was so agreed.
&& The representative of Lesotho said that Members needed to agree on the parameters of the Secretariat study and give priority to the DFQF issue in a manner that ensured a development outcome.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that the Group would submit a proposal on the parameters of the Secretariat study. He hoped that this would allow progress to be made on the issue.  
&& The representative of the United States indicated that her delegation remained willing to engage on the DFQF issue, and looked forward to receiving a proposal from the LDC Group on the parameters of the Secretariat study. She hoped that a consensus could be reached among Members in this regard. She noted that a report from the Secretariat needed to be balanced and fact-based, and could not include any subjective assessments or suggestions of any particular policy directions. 
&& The representative of Haiti expressed support for the interventions by Benin and Lesotho. He indicated his delegation's interest to participate in the process of defining the parameters of the Secretariat study.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that his delegation was also interested in taking part in the process to define the parameters of the Secretariat study.
&& The Chairman indicated that a written proposal from the LDC Group on the parameters of the Secretariat study would help to move the process forward. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that, on the basis of consultations, he wished to put forward the name of Ambassador Roderick van Schreven of the Netherlands to serve for another year as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador van Schreven as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs for 2016. 
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
&& The Chairman said that at the General Council meeting of 24 February 2016, the names of the Chairpersons for 2016 had been announced. He was pleased to inform the Committee that Ambassador Christopher Onyanga Aparr of Uganda had been chosen as the new Chairman of the CTD. He invited the Committee to formally elect Ambassador Aparr. 
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Aparr as the Chairman of the CTD for 2016.
The incoming Chairman assured Members of his intention to continue to give a high profile to the work of the Committee. He also noted that there were a number of unresolved issues on the CTD's agenda, and called on Members to collaborate in order to find solutions.
Several delegations took the floor to express appreciation for the work of the outgoing Chairman, as well as to welcome the election of the new Chairman and the re-election of the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs. Interventions in this regard were made by the representatives of Benin on behalf of the LDC Group, Bangladesh, China, Haiti, India, Japan, Kenya, Lesotho, Nepal, Chinese Taipei and Uganda.
&& The representative of Japan additionally drew Members' attention to the Sixth Tokyo International Conference on African Development, which would be held on 27 and 28 August 2016 in Nairobi. He indicated Japan's commitment to development and to the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system. 
&& The Committee took note of the interventions.
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business". 
The meeting was adjourned.
__________

 The updated list was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/22/Rev.8.
 The discussion under the second and third sub-items is presented together in this Note, as the interventions made by delegations applied to both sub-items.









WT/COMTD/M/97

-  PAGE 1 -


WT/COMTD/M/98

-  PAGE 12 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/98


25 May 2016
(16-2828)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/ NUMPAGES  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 12
Committee on Trade and Development
Ninety-Eighth Session
 






