WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/59
20 November 2006


(06-5579)


Committee on Trade and Development
Fifty-Ninth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 4 OCTOBER 2006

Chairman:  Mr. Faizel Ismail (South Africa) 

 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827094" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC150827094 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827095" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC150827095 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc150827096" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc150827096 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc150827097" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc150827097 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827098" C.	Notifications Under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC150827098 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827099" -	Communication from the European Communities on the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC150827099 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827100" -	Communication from the United States on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, the Protocol to Amend the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China, and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC150827100 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827101" -	Communication from Japan on the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN And the People's Republic of China and the Agreement on Trade in Goods of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Between ASEAN and the People's Republic of China (WT/COMTD/51/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC150827101 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827102" -	Communication from Brazil on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD//57/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC150827102 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827103" -	Communication from China on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC150827103 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827104" -	Communication from India on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT//COMTD/57/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC150827104 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827105" -	Communication from Pakistan on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC150827105 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827106" -	Communication from the European Communities – Responses to Questions Submitted by Brazil, China, India and Pakistan on the Revised Generalized System of Preferences Scheme of the European Communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC150827106 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827107" D.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC150827107 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827108" E.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in Order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC150827108 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827109" F.	Review of Steps Taken to Provide Duty-Free and Quota-Free Market Access to Least-Developed Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC150827109 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827110" G.	Electronic Commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC150827110 \H 18
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827111" H.	Election of the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC150827111 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC150827112" I.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC150827112 \H 19


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 59th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/2885/Rev.1 issued on 29 September 2006.  He explained that a separate meeting of the CTD to discuss technical cooperation issues – including the Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance and the Technical Assistance and Training Plan for 2007 – was scheduled for 3 November 2006.  
&& The Committee adopted the agenda.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman said that he wanted to bring to the attention of the Committee a request that had been received from the International Coffee Organization (ICO).  In particular, the ICO had asked whether it could attend the CTD's future discussions under the commodities agenda item.  He recalled that the ICO had made a very interesting presentation at the 57th Session under the agenda item relating to commodities, and said that the commodities discussion in the CTD was clearly of interest to the ICO.  He inquired whether it was acceptable to Members to consider inviting the ICO on a meeting-by-meeting basis to attend the commodities discussion at future meetings of the CTD. 
&& The representative of the United States said that in principle she had no objection.  However, she wondered if the Committee should think further on the issue, in particular on possible implications for other institutions that might have similar interests.  She also pointed out that the commodities discussion at every CTD meeting might not necessarily be of interest to the ICO.   
&& The representative of Egypt said that the positions of Members on the issue of requests for observer status and ad hoc observer status were well known and on the record.  However, his understanding was that the Chairman was asking whether the ICO could attend the commodities discussion as an invitee.  He believed that this was something the CTD could consider on a meeting‑by-meeting basis. 
&& The Chairman said that he had noted the comments made by the US representative, and was willing to consult informally if necessary on the issues she had raised.  However, as a general principle, he inquired whether the CTD was willing to consider inviting the ICO to the commodities discussion on a meeting-by-meeting basis.
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	&& Communication from THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES ON THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.2)
-	&& Communication from THE UNITED STATES ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, THE PROTOCOL TO AMEND THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.3)
-	&& Communication from JAPAN ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman said that communications from the EC, the US and Japan raising questions on the notifications made by ASEAN and China in 2005 had been circulated as documents WT/COMTD/51/Add.2, Add.3 and Add.4 respectively.  He recalled that he had informed the Committee at its last meeting that the responses from ASEAN and China had been submitted bilaterally to each of the three Members that had raised questions.  A number of delegations had then indicated that they wished to see all the responses, and were of the view that the responses should be circulated as a CTD document.  It had been agreed that he would consult with the concerned delegations, and would report back to the CTD at the present meeting.  However, while he had held two informal consultations since the last formal CTD meeting, he informed the Committee that he had nothing concrete to report as yet.  He, nevertheless, believed that progress was being made, and suggested that he continue to consult with the concerned delegations with a view to reporting to the CTD at its last meeting of 2006 at the end of November. 
It was so agreed. 
-	&& Communication from BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD//57/ADD.1)
-	&& Communication from CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
-	&& Communication from INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT//COMTD/57/ADD.3)
-	&& Communication from PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
-	&& Communication from THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised GSP scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD on 11 May 2006.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4 respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  He said that some delegations had indicated at the last meeting of the CTD that they were still studying the EC's responses, and it was therefore agreed that the item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Brazil said that the questions that had been raised by his delegation on the EC's revised GSP scheme were to a large extent motivated by concerns over a lack of transparency.  He said that Brazil's first question related to the possibility of the EC providing figures in value and quantity of imports covered by the EC's GSP scheme.  The second question concerned the issue of how the EC expected developing countries to verify whether they met the statistical requirements set by EC Council Regulation No. 980/2005.  The third question addressed the graduation of a number of products exported by Brazil.  He explained that the written responses by the EC to the first two questions indicated that data could be provided on a bilateral basis, while the EC in its response to the third question had provided Brazil's share of EC GSP imports for a number of products.  He went on to say that his delegation had attempted to obtain from the EC in Brussels further information relating to the questions that had been raised, for example by requesting data on the EC's imports from Brazil under the GSP.  Unfortunately, the requests made by his delegation had not been acknowledged or answered by the EC.  He said that this was a major source of concern for his delegation, and therefore requested that the item concerning the EC's revised GSP scheme remain on the CTD's agenda.      
&& The representative of India said that, like Brazil, his delegation's concerns with the EC's revised GSP scheme, and in particular the special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance ("GSP-plus"), emanated from the lack of transparency in its formulation and implementation.  While India thanked the EC for the responses, he said that his delegation felt that the responses from the EC were inadequate and did not treat the main points raised in the questions by India.  He said that he wished to elaborate a little on why his delegation felt that the EC’s responses were inadequate.  The EC's response to the first question from India did not spell out the "development, financial or trade needs" of developing countries that the EC was seeking to address in the GSP-plus, but only enumerated the conditions to be fulfilled by developing countries to become eligible for GSP-plus.  Similarly, the EC's response to India's second question did not clarify the unique "development, financial or trade needs" of those countries qualifying for the special incentive arrangement.  The answer again only spelled out the criteria to be met by a country seeking GSP-plus benefits, and not the special or unique needs of those countries which the EC was seeking to address through the GSP plus scheme.  Moving to India's fourth question, he said that the EC had not clarified how the criteria chosen helped in identifying the "development, financial or trade needs" of the countries selected.  He explained that his delegation also wanted to know how the international conventions referred to by the EC in their response – international conventions on human and labour rights, environmental protection and good governance – were linked to the development needs of developing countries. 
He said that his delegation had a follow-up query to the EC’s response to India's fifth question.  In particular, his delegation wanted to know whether any information was available in the public domain regarding the selection process for GSP-plus, for instance the details of the countries who applied for it.  His delegation also wanted the EC to elaborate on its response to India's seventh question regarding the criteria used as the basis for determining the vulnerability of a country, in particular the requirement that the percentage of GSP-covered imports from a country under consideration be less than 1 per cent of total EC imports under GSP.  He said that his delegation looked forward to the EC's responses, and that these might be of use in discussions in other WTO Committees.  He added that his delegation supported Brazil in requesting that the item concerning the EC's revised GSP scheme remain on the CTD's agenda, since his delegation was yet to receive satisfactory responses to the questions it had raised.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that her delegation had made some preliminary comments on the EC's responses at the last CTD meeting, and that she wished to reiterate some of those points.  She drew the attention of the Committee to the third question that had been raised by Pakistan, which concerned the GSP-plus arrangement.  She said that Article 9, paragraph 3(b) of EC Council Regulation No. 980/2005 defined a "vulnerable country" as one whose GSP-covered imports to the  EC represented less than 1 per cent in value of the EC's total GSP-covered imports.  Pakistan's concern was that many countries whose income was much higher than that of Pakistan stood eligible for GSP-plus by virtue of meeting the less than 1 per cent criterion, while Pakistan, a low-income country, was effectively screened out on account of having 1.1 per cent in value of GSP-covered imports to the EC.  She said that her delegation had asked whether the criteria were objective, but that the answer provided by the EC did not address the concern of her delegation that a country like Pakistan was being marginalized and denied preferential access in spite of a much lower level of income than other countries.  She said that the criteria did not match the declared objectives of the scheme, and that the less than 1 per cent criterion was prejudicial to low-income countries such as Pakistan.
She continued by saying that another question submitted by Pakistan touched on the issue of whether those countries that were unable to ratify 14 of the specified 16 conventions in Annex III, Part A of EC Council Regulation No. 980/2005 and put them into effective implementation by 31 October 2005 were rendered ineligible for the entire duration of the scheme. In that context, Pakistan had commented that this was tantamount to a closed list, and that, by giving unrealistic deadlines, went against the EC's desire to assist countries in achieving good governance and sustainable development.  She said that the replies given by the EC on this point were unsatisfactory, and also indicated that the EC had not answered Pakistan's question on why a seventh convention on the protection of the rights of migrant workers and members of their families had not been included in Annex III, Part A for ratification and effective implementation.  She added that the replies offered by the EC were just a repetition of general information that was already available, which led her delegation to conclude that the scheme had been designed in a manner to include some Members and exclude others by using non-objective criteria, and by giving unrealistic deadlines for the ratification of only some UN conventions.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that he was not in a position at the present meeting to respond to the points raised by the previous speakers.  He said that his delegation had sought to show maximum transparency on the content and rationale of the EC's revised GSP scheme.  Written responses to the questions that had been raised on the scheme had also been distributed to all Members.  He said that his delegation was willing to enter into further discussion on the scheme and to respond to any follow-up questions that Members might have, either as part of the discussion in the CTD or on a bilateral basis.  In this regard, he encouraged Members to approach his delegation for further discussion and to communicate their concerns.    
&& The Chairman said he had noted that the EC was willing to provide further information on its revised GSP scheme, and indicated that he was also available should delegations wish him to arrange informal consultations on the issue.  He proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions, and that the item concerning the EC's revised GSP scheme remain on the CTD's agenda.    
It was so agreed.  
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that, based on the discussion that took place under this agenda item at the last meeting of the CTD, an invitation to make a presentation to the Committee had been extended to the International Cocoa Organization (ICCO).  He was pleased to inform the Committee that the ICCO had accepted the invitation and that a representative of the organization was in attendance at the meeting.  He introduced Dr. Jan Vingerhoets, Executive Director of the ICCO. 
&& The representative of the ICCO said that while some of the features of cocoa were similar to those of other commodities, the cocoa economy also had some unique characteristics.  He identified five main characteristics of the world cocoa economy, which were:  a high volatility of cocoa bean prices in the international markets, implying wide fluctuations in the prices received by farmers;  a declining trend in the real prices for cocoa beans over time (the prices which farmers received for cocoa had declined substantially over the past 25 years);  a high geographic concentration in the production and export of cocoa, with West Africa being the main region of origin;  the fact that the bulk of cocoa (95 per cent) was produced by smallholder cocoa farmers;  and the fact that while cocoa beans were important as an ingredient in chocolate, they were relatively unimportant in the value of chocolate.
He said that prices of cocoa beans had fluctuated sharply and increasingly over time.  The daily volatility in prices, as measured by the standard deviation, had recently reached a level of 2 per cent.  To put the price volatility for cocoa in perspective, he compared the fluctuations in cocoa prices to the  fluctuations in coffee prices.  He observed that the price volatility for coffee used to be higher than for cocoa ten years ago, but more recent figures indicated that prices were equally volatile for both commodities.  With regard to the declining trend in prices for cocoa beans, he said that this could be illustrated by the trend in real prices between 1980 and 2005.  He observed that during the first half of that period, prices declined from over 3,000 Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) per tonne to 1,000 SDRs, while during the second half of the period the trend in the movement of prices appeared to have been more sideways than downward.  In the period 1998-1999, prices declined to an all-time low of 750 SDRs per tonne.  He explained that the ICCO econometric model of the world cocoa economy indicated that in a "normal" year, prices for cocoa beans declined in real terms.  The model predicted that prices would decline by about 2.5 per cent in the first year and at a slower rate in subsequent years, down to less than 1 per cent in the ninth year.  Prices in real terms were projected to decline by over 15 per cent during a period of ten years, and would only increase during a year in which the stocks of cocoa beans in the world declined.  The ICCO model, therefore, indicated that cocoa bean prices would only increase in years when production was much lower than consumption, that is, when the shock of a substantial deficit in supply caused prices to increase.  Paradoxically, therefore, a bad year in production – a year with bad weather – was good for the farmers.
On the concentration of cocoa production, he noted that world production of cocoa beans had reached a level of 3.5 million tonnes, and was growing at a trend rate of between 2 and 2.5 per cent per annum.  Production of cocoa was highly concentrated in West Africa.  The two largest producers – Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana – accounted for about two-thirds of world exports from origin countries.  In addition, the share of the five largest exporting countries – Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Indonesia, Nigeria and Cameroon – accounted for more than 90 per cent of world exports.  He continued by saying that a unique characteristic of the cocoa sector was that cocoa was almost exclusively produced by smallholder farmers.  He explained that a typical cocoa farmer in West Africa owned between 2 and 3 hectares of land, and that cocoa was the only or main source of cash income.  For the rest, the farming families grow food for their own consumption.  He added that cocoa was the only agricultural commodity he knew of where the position of smallholder farmers was so dominant.  The ICCO estimated that there were more than 3 million cocoa farmers in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
&& The ICCO representative said that cocoa was, on the one hand, of overriding importance for the production of chocolate.  Chocolate was defined by cocoa, and it was not possible to produce chocolate without cocoa beans.  However, he noted that the value of cocoa beans was relatively unimportant in the value of chocolate and therefore in the price the consumer paid for chocolate. In particular, the cost of cocoa beans accounted for less than 10 per cent of the price paid by the consumer for most chocolate products.  The remaining 90 per cent consisted of trade, processing, profit and manufacturing margins, costs of other ingredients, transport and  advertising costs, and value-added taxes in the consuming countries.
He explained that the five characteristics of the world cocoa economy easily defined the positions of the different stakeholders, which he distinguished broadly as the consumers, the traders and manufacturers, and the farmers.  He noted that chocolate consumers were generally satisfied, as they got what they wanted and what they were willing to pay for – albeit sometimes with a time lag – for example dark chocolate of high quality, organic chocolate or "origin" chocolate.  There was a strong tendency towards diversification in the chocolate market, resulting in more value per unit weight while also making the chocolate market more alive and interesting.  He pointed out that the traders and manufacturers – at least the efficient ones – were also relatively satisfied, since over the past one hundred years the chocolate industry had constantly expanded.  He continued by saying that the story was completely different for the farmers.  Farmers had to work hard on hot and humid cocoa farms, and the productivity of land and labour was low.  Farming practices were also basically unchanged from one hundred years ago. The farmer and his family had to harvest and open 25,000 pods for one tonne of fermented and dried cocoa beans, which was an enormous and very labour-intensive job.  With a decent price and a relatively low tax, the farmer would be lucky if one tonne of dry beans brought in a net income of US$ 1,000.
On the issue of low land productivity in cocoa farming, he said that the introduction of hybrid varieties of cocoa beans had made some difference in recent decades.  As a result, yields had been increasing over the last 25 years.  However, the yield increases were to a very large extent due to higher yields in Malaysia and Indonesia, to a smaller extent in Côte d’Ivoire and – very recently – in Ghana.  In many cases, yields on cocoa farms amounted to between 500 and 700 kg of dry beans per hectare, while the yields on cocoa farms in Malaysia were between 1,200 and 1,500 kg per hectare.  Yields in Malaysia were, therefore, more than double the world average.  Despite low productivity and the tendency for prices to decline, however, he noted that there was a constant threat of overproduction of cocoa, with supply growing faster than demand.  He explained that increased grindings of cocoa beans triggered a strong increase in production, and that when grindings of cocoa beans showed a healthy increase over three to five years, production reacted by increasing with a jump, resulting in oversupply and increases in stocks.
He remarked that cocoa farmers were willing to accept declining real prices and were prepared to continue to increase cocoa production, despite lower prices.  Apparently, there were no – or only limited – alternatives  for the cocoa farmers.  He said that he was sure that many cocoa farmers were poorer today than 25 years ago.  Furthermore, with good agricultural land becoming scarcer in many countries, many cocoa farmers were most probably worse off than in the early 1990s, when cocoa prices had already fallen dramatically from the much higher levels in the early eighties. He took as an example the income of a "well-to-do" cocoa farmer in West Africa.  The farmer grew three hectares of cocoa, yielding 650 kg per hectare, and the family had to handle 50,000 cocoa pods.  If the farmer was lucky, this would bring a net income of US$ 2,000, which, for an average family of six or seven, amounted to some US$300 dollars per capita per year.  Growing their own food, the family could achieve an income of a bit more than US$1 per day per person.  However, with a little less land, or with somewhat lower prices and/or higher taxes, the income of the family would drop to below one US$1 per capita per day.  Therefore, with the declining trend in prices and the constant threat of overproduction, a family's income could easily drop to very low levels.  He explained that this was the main problem in the world cocoa economy, and that he would move on at this point to discuss possible solutions to the problem.
He said that the first major option was to increase cocoa bean prices in the world market.  He explained that this option would have to be implemented through an agreement between the major cocoa-exporting countries and would, therefore, always imply a limitation of exports.  For that reason, it was called the export-limitation option.  With the high geographical concentration in cocoa production, only between the three to five largest exporting countries would need to participate in such a scheme to make it potentially successful.  He elaborated that two different strategies could be distinguished in an export limitation scheme.  The first strategy consisted of a mechanism under which cocoa-producing countries applied higher export taxes.  Following such higher taxes, farmers would limit their cocoa production, which would, in turn, result in lower exports and higher prices on the world market.  The advantage of such a scheme was that it would be relatively easy to implement for individual countries.  A technical problem, however, was that the governments in the countries concerned would have to agree on the level of export taxes in each of the participating countries, since differing supply elasticities between countries implied that the applied taxes should not be the same in all countries.  A more serious fundamental problem with any scheme working with export taxes was that all the advantages of the higher taxes would go to the governments, while the burden of the production limitation would fall on the farmers.  He questioned whether this would be acceptable to farmers, and whether farmers would put pressure on their governments to give them a substantive share of the benefits, thereby undermining the whole system.  He also questioned whether such a scheme would trigger a strong reaction from the public and private sectors in the major consuming countries, since the consumers would have to pay more and the money would go to the governments of the producing countries, and not to the farmers.
He said that the alternative strategy in an export-limitation scheme was to work with export quotas for each of the participating countries.  Apart from the costs of the system, all the benefits from such a scheme would go to the farmers.  He noted that a main issue with such a scheme was that the countries had, over time, to agree on the export quota for each of the participating countries.  Another major problem was that an elaborate system was required in each country to buy the excess supply of cocoa beans which would emerge.  The excess supply would have to be destroyed or, at best, used  as fuel, since there was only so much cocoa powder school children could consume as cocoa drinks.  He said that, in his view, it would be difficult for major cocoa-producing countries to agree on export quotas.  What was observed at present was that each country wanted to increase its market share at the cost of the other countries, and a complete change in attitude would, therefore, be required to successfully implement an export-quota system.  There was also a risk that the internal market arrangements required in each country, with the government acting as buyer of last resort, could result in a costly, bureaucratic machinery, prone to manipulation and corruption.
&& The ICCO representative said that the second major option to increase the incomes of cocoa farmers was through the further development of the world cocoa economy.  This option required several types of action with specific objectives, ranging from improving the efficiency of marketing to introducing better farm practices and providing better planting material.  He informed the Committee that the ICCO was already attempting action in some of these areas, and said that he wanted to give a brief overview of the types of action which he believed were most urgently required, following which he would point out some complications that could result from such actions, if successful. 
The first type of action he wished to discuss was action taken to improve internal marketing arrangements, which had the objective of providing a larger share of export revenues to the farmers.  He explained that, in practical terms, this could only be achieved when farmers were organized in cooperatives or associations.  While only a small number of cocoa farmers worldwide were organized in cooperatives, he said that there were a relatively large number of cooperatives in Côte d’Ivoire, the largest cocoa producer in the world.  He said that the ICCO had experimented in Côte d’Ivoire with a system to prepare the cocoa for export at cooperative warehouses in the interior of the country.  To that effect, the ICCO had, through an industry working group, developed a simple but effective system of getting the cocoa from the farmer, through the cooperative, to the port of export.  This was only done after the bags with the cocoa had been checked for quality and sealed for quality guarantee.  The system had the added advantage that all cocoa could be traced back to its village of origin.  He explained that the new system was much better and cheaper than the traditional system, and gave full control of the cocoa to the cooperative, while providing additional income to the farmers.  The financial gain for cooperatives and farmers amounted to only about 5 per cent, but that was significant for poor segments of the population.  He added that the success of the experiment had encouraged the ICCO to roll out the system in other countries.  If successful on a larger scale, the new system of trade and traceability would revolutionize the internal trade in cocoa beans in the producing countries.  He suggested that a next step in the progress of cooperatives, after they were able to successfully deliver the exportable product to the port, could be for them to become exporters themselves, or even undertake further processing before exporting.
He said that this brought him to the subject of adding value to cocoa beans before export.  He explained that the first stage of processing of cocoa beans, consisting of the production of cocoa liquor, cocoa butter and cocoa powder, was traditionally heavily concentrated in the major chocolate consuming countries.  Today, however, more than 30 per cent of this processing took place in origin countries, and Côte d’Ivoire, Malaysia and Ghana had become large exporters of cocoa semi-finished products.  There were, however, a few problems with the production and export of these semi-finished products.  The value added was quite low, and processing in consuming countries took place on a very large, fully automated scale, using beans from different origins.  To attract foreign investors for the processing of cocoa beans, origin countries had to provide incentives by way of subsidies, which further eroded the economic benefit from processing, probably reducing them to marginal levels in some cases. Finally, he said that there still existed a certain amount of tariff escalation for cocoa semi-products.  While effective tariffs on cocoa semi-products were generally zero or very low, some cocoa-producing countries – specifically Malaysia, Brazil and Indonesia – still faced significant tariffs.  For this reason, he called on the WTO to help in achieving the full eradication of tariffs against cocoa processing in origin countries, which would constitute a direct contribution to the further development of the cocoa sector in origin countries.
He explained that a third area of action was in the further development of the consumption side of the market.  The more chocolate consumers ate, the better it was for the farmers, in particular because with a rapid growth of consumption there was a smaller risk of oversupply.  There was, therefore, a "generic promotion" of chocolate and chocolate consumption in place.  He said that in the mid-1990s, the ICCO had been successfully involved in consumption promotion in Japan.  The organization was presently setting up a similar promotion project in Russia, and had just begun initial preparatory work in China.  He explained that some cocoa-producing countries had come up with some funds for this work, but that, in his view, these countries should invest more.  Fortunately, some had recently started to pay more attention to their own cocoa consumption.  He went on to say that working on the consumption side of the market was still something new for cocoa-producing countries, and that the authorities, organizations and farmers in these countries should become much more pro-active in this area.  In particular, he said that the producing countries should give the consumers what they were willing to pay for.  If, for example, the consumer was willing to pay for organic cocoa, this type of cocoa should be provided.  He added that while producer countries correctly complained about the high costs of certification for organic cocoa, he believed they should work together to find a solution to the problem.  As more niche markets were developing in cocoa and chocolate, he suggested that, in order to enhance farmers' incomes, producers should be more enthusiastic in delivering what consumers wanted.
The last area of action he said he wanted to talk about comprised all activities aimed at increasing productivity on the cocoa farms.  He stressed that it was necessary for productivity in cocoa production to increase dramatically.  While cocoa production techniques in most countries were still very similar to the practices of 100 years ago, he explained that it was now possible to use hybrid varieties, fertilizers and some pesticides.  At the same time, there was no forest land left to open up nowadays, and good farm land was becoming increasingly scarce.  He said that he wished to mention three areas of action which were of utmost importance.  First, he indicated that farmers needed better planting material which was more resistant to pests and diseases and which gave good yields of high quality over many years.  The ICCO had been very active in this area and was presently implementing its second large-scale project concerning better planting material.  Considerable progress had been made, and the project was at the stage where the best materials were being selected for distribution to the farmers.  He noted, however, that it was often difficult to reach the farmers.
Another high-priority area was that of pests and diseases, which he said presented a very big problem for cocoa.  According to best estimates, about one third of annual cocoa production was lost due to pests and diseases.  An eradication of these losses would increase world cocoa production by 50 per cent, a figure which illustrated that pests and diseases caused an enormous loss of resources, including land, labour and current inputs.  It was, therefore, necessary to take urgent action to deal with the problem.  In this regard, he said that the ICCO had recently agreed with the Common Fund for Commodities that cocoa pests and diseases would be a priority area in the future, and that a first project proposal in this area had just been completed.
He explained that in order to increase productivity on cocoa farms, it was also necessary to improve the cultivation practices of the farmers.  While significantly more was known today about growing cocoa than 30 or 40 years ago, much – if not most – of  that knowledge was still "on the shelf".  In other words, it was known in research stations but had not yet reached the farmers.  What was required most urgently was good agricultural extension work for the cocoa farmers.  It was, however, unfortunate that in most cocoa-producing countries, the extension services no longer reached the farmers.  He said that this was, in his view, the result of the "liberalization and privatization" drive of some multilateral financial institutions during the 1980s and early 1990s.  A system of agricultural extension, suitable for large-scale farming in North America and Europe, had been transplanted to West Africa, and as a result, in most countries in West Africa the smallholder cocoa farmer had to pay for extension services.  He questioned how a farmer with two or three hectares of land pay could for extension services.  While the idea was that these services would be delivered through cooperatives, he pointed out that it was difficult to find effective cooperatives.  In West Africa, for example, less than 10 per cent of the farmers were organized in cooperatives, so the system did not work.  He said that he believed that it was high time that initiatives towards  liberalization and privatization were corrected, and that farmers were provided with the technology that was "on the shelf".
He added that increasing productivity on cocoa farms brought with it a certain risk.  If it were possible to successfully and rapidly increase productivity on cocoa farms, the production of cocoa might increase much faster than consumption, resulting in sharply declining prices and a collapse in the incomes of farmers, which was exactly the opposite of what was desired.  He said that the solution did not lie in going slow on efforts to increase productivity, but rather in limiting the growth of total production.  It was necessary to make cocoa more competitive, to dramatically modernize cocoa farming and trade, and to turn the cocoa farmer into an agricultural entrepreneur.  This could be achieved through well articulated polices and programmes of the producing countries for their agricultural sectors, including cocoa.  At the same time, what was required was alternative production and income opportunities for the land and labour that would no longer be required in cocoa production. 
He went on to say that each cocoa-producing country needed a sound framework for a rational agricultural policy.  However, there were only very few developing countries in Sub-Saharan Africa that had a well-based and well-formulated agricultural policy.  Only very few cocoa-producing countries knew what their cocoa resources were on the ground, and only had rough estimates of the number of cocoa farms in the country, the number of hectares under cocoa and the age profiles of the cocoa trees.  He pointed out that it was difficult for a country to formulate policies when it did not know what its production capacity was.  Therefore, all cocoa-producing countries needed an inventory of their cocoa resources, as well as an inventory of all their resources in agriculture more generally.  Subsequently, they would need to develop the institutional framework, including the human capabilities, to formulate and implement  policies and programmes.  He said that providing support to countries to implement that work was beyond the remit of the ICCO, although the organization did what it could.  It seemed more the task of institutions such as the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the World Bank and bilateral donors such as the EC and the US.  He emphasized that without well-articulated and well-implemented policies of the producing countries towards agriculture, including the cocoa sector, it would never be possible to solve the problem of the low incomes of the cocoa farmers.  Presently, the cocoa-producing countries had no basis for more sophisticated policies, and knew only one policy prescription, which was to produce more and more cocoa.  What they were in need of was the capability to formulate what they wanted to achieve in their cocoa sectors, in terms of different areas including production and employment, and as part of an overall agricultural policy.
&& The ICCO representative said that the agricultural policies of cocoa-producing countries had to offer alternative production and income opportunities to cocoa farmers.  That was, by definition, a difficult area for the ICCO.  The organization had started to look into this, but hoped that others could be of more assistance to the countries in finding solutions.  He elaborated that the ICCO believed that the education and training of farmers was of particular importance, since "better farmers" would be better able to exploit alternative opportunities in farming, and would more easily grasp that there were other crops to grow apart from just cocoa.  Options for diversification, including in terms of inter‑cropping with cocoa and diversification on cocoa farms, had the advantage that the individual farmer became less dependent on one product for his cash income.  He added that the ICCO believed there was a direct role to play for the WTO.  While there were only limited trade barriers left for cocoa, including cocoa semi-products, he observed that there were still serious trade barriers for many other agricultural products.  To the extent that the WTO succeeded in bringing down these barriers, the cocoa farmers would benefit, as it would enhance their opportunities for production diversification.
In offering some final thoughts, he said that he did not believe in a "quick fix" solution for the income problems of the cocoa farmers, and that it appeared that the problems of the cocoa farmers would only be solved the hard way.  In particular, the only lasting solution was to train and educate the cocoa farmers and to further develop the cocoa economy, the agricultural sector and the economies of the countries concerned.  The only real solution, therefore, was through "development".  On the question of whether the cocoa-producing countries might be able to levy a limited export tax to finance the development of cocoa for the enhancement of farmers' incomes, he said that he believed that cocoa-consuming countries would be prepared to match the resources earned to form a fund for the development of the world cocoa economy.  In this way, the cocoa farmers could benefit enormously from a relatively small export tax.
&& The Chairman thanked the ICCO representative for the presentation, and opened the floor for questions and comments.
&& The representative of the United States said that the ICCO representative in his presentation had briefly mentioned Malaysia as a producer and exporter of cocoa.  She recalled that the CTD had some time ago heard a presentation from Malaysia about its experiences with commodities, but could not recall whether the presenter from Malaysia had specifically mentioned cocoa.  She, therefore, inquired whether the ICCO representative could elaborate on some of the good practices that Malaysia had applied in the cocoa sector, and whether those practices were possibly transferable to other countries, particularly in Africa.  She remarked that the presentation had also touched on the subject of export taxes, and asked whether the ICCO representative could elaborate on this issue, particularly in the context of the ongoing debate among WTO Members as to whether export taxes should be promoted or eliminated.  On the issue of tariff escalation, she said that escalation existed in both developed and developing countries, including in the cocoa-producing countries themselves.  On the subject of cooperatives, she said she found interesting what the presentation had brought out about most models of cooperatives not having been appropriately applied.  She said, however, that she was not quite convinced by the ICCO representative's call for a correction to the liberalization and privatization process, and asked for more clarification on his logic. 
&& The representative of Benin said that there were two points he wished to raise on the presentation.  The first point related to the remark made by the ICCO representative on the lack of well-formulated agricultural policies in countries in Sub-Saharan Africa.  In this regard, he said that tremendous efforts had been made by countries in that region, often with the financial and technical assistance of international organizations, to develop clear agricultural policies.  Pressure from international financial institutions had also contributed to the process of agricultural policy formulation.  He added that the formulation of policies in agriculture and other areas served as the basis for a country's poverty reduction strategy.  Therefore, he felt that the remark by the ICCO representative seemed rather general, and perhaps required some qualification.  In particular, it was his view that the main problem lay in the implementation of policies, due to a number of reasons including a lack of financial and human resources.  He said that his second point related to the issue of diversification, and in particular the difficulties that producers of particular commodities faced in attempting to diversify.  For example, if a cocoa farmer was asked to diversify into cotton production, the farmer would face similar problems, including a continual fall in prices due to international trade policies.  The problem of commodity producers had to, therefore, be seen from a global perspective.
&& The representative of Egypt said that it was important to identify the main cause of the problems faced by cocoa farmers. In this regard, he asked if the ICCO representative could clarify whether the problems stemmed mainly from an inequality in the distribution of profit margins, or from an imbalance between supply and demand.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that, in his view, the main determinant of continually low prices for cocoa was excess supply.  He also pointed out that the benefits to cocoa farmers from diversification was not obvious, since other commodities faced similar problems.  In this regard, he referred to the point made in the presentation that the cost of cocoa beans accounted for less than 10 per cent of the price of most chocolate products, and asked the ICCO representative what the figure would be for other commodities such as coffee or tea.  He also asked whether the ICCO representative could give some examples of countries that had successfully managed their participation in the world cocoa economy.  In this regard, he said that he was interested in the Malaysian experience, since it was his understanding that cocoa production in Malaysia was not based on smallholder farmers but on relatively larger plantations.  On the issue of whether countries should use export taxes to limit exports, he remarked that if the tax revenue was used for welfare enhancement and the development of industry, the burden would not necessarily fall on the farmers.  He also referred to "fair trade" campaigns, and in particular the mechanism through which the revenue from taxes paid to obtain a product with a "fair trade" label was routed back to producers.  He noted that the administrative costs of such campaigns were potentially very high, and suggested that these costs could be reduced if a procedure with similar objectives was undertaken at the national level.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that he had noted from the presentation the importance of enhancing export opportunities for commodity-producing countries and on developing productive capacity within those countries.  He inquired what more could be done on the export side, including through the development of niche markets.  As for the development of capacity within countries, he said that resources for this purpose were available, and referred to the Aid for Trade initiative as a possible source of funds.  He noted, however, that it was necessary for commodity-producing countries to ensure that the development strategies they presented to donors took into account the various commodity sectors that they wished to see develop.  He said that there was a willingness on the donor side to consider projects relating to specific areas, in particular if they were identified as priorities by the countries concerned, but remarked that it was important at the same time to see such initiatives in a broader development context, and therefore to not pursue a narrow sector-specific focus.  He inquired whether the ICCO had a mandate to work in collaboration with other international commodity organizations as well as with development institutions like the World Bank.  On the issue of export taxes, he said that in his view it was probably not necessary to try and raise  resources in a sector-specific manner when funds could be obtained through broader initiatives like Aid for Trade.  Finally, he asked whether the representative of the ICCO could comment on the potential of commodity-producing countries to pursue downstream diversification. 
&& The representative of Brazil said that a  key challenge for commodity-producing countries was to increase productivity.  In addition, he said that part of the solution to the commodities problem lay in a decrease in the number of farmers producing any given commodity, though he recognized that the possibilities of diversification into other agricultural commodities were limited.  He remarked that a large increase in world demand for cocoa seemed unlikely, and that additional consumer expenditure would tend to go into higher value-added products.  Referring to the question by the representative of Sri Lanka on the commodity value in a final product, he said that for some commodities the value could be much less than 10 per cent.  He remarked that the industries that provided the added value to commodities and prepared finished products were for the large part located in developed countries.  In that regard, he inquired what the prospects were for such industries moving to commodity-producing countries, and what were the trade policy measures that would assist such a shift. 
&& The representative of Malaysia, referring to the mention that had been made by the US of Malaysia's earlier presentation in the CTD, clarified that the presentation had focused on the palm oil industry.  She said that even though Malaysia placed emphasis on adding value in commodities production, and placed significant importance on research and development, it frequently faced the familiar problems of declining prices, price volatility and tariff escalation.  She added that cocoa was a relatively less important commodity for Malaysia in terms of production than other commodities such as palm oil and rubber and, in response to the point raised by the representative of Sri Lanka, clarified that cocoa producers in Malaysia were smallholder farmers.  She said that she agreed with the representative of Sri Lanka on the potential use of export taxes, and explained that the revenue obtained from export taxes levied by Malaysia on certain commodities were routed back to assist in the development of industries.
&& The representative of Ecuador said that the present discussion touched upon the important question of how trade could enhance development and contribute to poverty reduction.  On the commodities problem, she remarked that the ICCO representative had mentioned both domestic issues and external issues.  The lack of well-structured agricultural policies, diversification and productivity enhancement were key domestic issues that had to be dealt with.  With regard to external issues, she said that she wished to emphasize the need for coherence between the WTO and other institutions, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions.  She also noted that other specific elements to deal with the commodities problem included education and capacity building.  She asked the ICCO representative for his views on how technological innovation could lead to potential solutions to the commodities problem.
&& The representative of the ICCO said that a major problem in most cocoa-producing countries was that they did not know how much cocoa they had, which made it extremely difficult to formulate policies.  On the point he had made in his presentation on the impact of liberalization and privatization, he said that, in his view, agricultural extension should be a public service.  He explained that a farmer requiring extension had to find a cooperative able and willing to pay for extension work, since the extension service would not be made available unless it was paid for upfront, and that an enormous amount of know-how was not reaching the cocoa farmers because of the systems in place in several countries.
He continued by saying that he wished to address five general points relating to comments that had been made by delegations.  The first point concerned the issue of productivity and why Malaysia enjoyed much higher productivity than other cocoa-producing countries.  He said that Malaysia had relatively high labour costs, and cocoa was very labour-intensive.  Therefore, Malaysia had been forced to increase its land and labour productivity in order to remain competitive.  He added that Malaysia was well organized in its cocoa production and had the best research facilities for cocoa in the world.  Farmers were assisted in several ways and were provided with new techniques as they were developed, for example the "grafting" technique.  He said that other cocoa-producing countries could potentially also achieve similar yields since the knowledge and know-how was there, but resources were needed for this purpose.   
The second point he wished to discuss concerned the question of adding value to cocoa beans.  He said that he believed that many coca-producing countries lost money by processing cocoa beans into semi-finished products.  This was because these countries had to offer subsidies to foreign companies to assist in the processing of the beans.  He explained that there was little value-added in the production of cocoa butter and cocoa powder, and, while trade barriers on these items were on the whole relatively low, he did not believe that cocoa-producing countries would gain much by attempting to produce more semi-finished products.  With regard to final products, he said that there were virtually no trade barriers facing the major cocoa-producing countries.  However, he remarked that if it were profitable to produce chocolate in West Africa, it would already have been done.  There were a number of reasons why chocolate was not being produced in most cocoa-producing countries, for example the fact that chocolate production required different ingredients including beans of different origin, and that it was more profitable to produce close to the consumer.  He gave the example of Venezuela as a country that had begun producing and exporting quality chocolate, but stressed that this was a rare success story.
He said that the third point related to the consumption side, and in particular issues concerning niche markets.  He emphasized that he was generally in favour of niche markets for cocoa, but cautioned that the positive effect arising from the development of niche markets would probably not be strong enough to benefit all cocoa farmers.  With regard to organic cocoa products in particular, he explained that there was currently a shortage on world markets, because it was generally expensive and complicated to obtain proper certification for such products.  That being said, he believed that the market for organic products had potential, and was growing.  On the issue of fair trade, he said that most consumers had not been properly informed of how it worked in practice.  In particular, in the case of cocoa the extra premium paid for the fair trade label went to cooperatives, and not directly to the farmers.  He explained, however, that in his view this was probably the right mechanism to use, as the cooperatives allocated the funds to projects to benefit communities, while cocoa production would increase tremendously – with the corresponding fall in prices – if the premium were given directly to farmers.  More generally on the consumption side, he said that he continued to see great potential for chocolate consumption, and pointed in particular to the potential for increased chocolate consumption in China and India, as well as in other fast-growing developing countries.  He added that in cocoa-producing countries, drinks made with cocoa were another area where consumption could potentially increase, in particular in view of the availability of large quantities of cocoa powder in these countries.
He said that his fourth point concerned the question of export taxes, and expressed his view that such taxes could only serve as a potential tool for the development of the cocoa sector if there was a clear understanding and agreement on their use.  He explained that what had been observed in a number of countries was that the tax revenues raised from the cocoa sector were simply collected by the relevant Ministry and were not used to develop the sector.
Finally, he said that the mandate of the ICCO was broad enough to allow for cooperation with all organizations working on commodity issues, as well as on development issues more generally.  He added that the ICCO was experiencing difficulties in finding resources to undertake activities to develop the cocoa sector in various cocoa-producing countries.  Part of this difficulty stemmed from his observation that many donors were currently not financing specific projects, preferring instead to allocate large sums to only some institutions.  He said that he was willing to explore how resources from the Aid for Trade initiative could be used to develop the cocoa sector.
&& The Committee took note of the presentation and of all interventions.
&& The Chairman said that the Committee had now heard a presentation from one Member – Malaysia – and had also heard presentations from the Common Fund for Commodities, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the ICO, the FAO and the ICCO.  He believed that the presentations had been very useful in allowing the Committee to focus its work and discussions.  He, therefore, suggested that the CTD continue to hear from Members or relevant institutions.  He recalled that Kenya had indicated at the last meeting of the CTD that it would consult with the African Group to see if any Member within that Group would be interested in making a presentation.  He also recalled that specific institutions that had been suggested in past discussions included the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), the World Bank and the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO).  He inquired whether any Member wished to make a presentation at the next meeting of the CTD, or whether the Committee wanted an invitation to be extended to any particular organization. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was interested in hearing from other organizations working on commodity issues, including the ITC, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).  She suggested that it might be useful to invite more than one organization at a time. 
&& The Chairman said that the US representative's idea to invite more than one organization to a meeting of the CTD was a useful one.  He suggested that a panel discussion could be held, to which could be invited a number of organizations such as the IMF, the ITC, UNCTAD and the World Bank.  He elaborated that each organization could make a short presentation, focusing on policy options and solutions, after which the floor would be opened.  
&& The representative of Egypt suggested that, as part of the panel discussion, the CTD could consider the question of, with a view to providing an input on, how Aid for Trade could potentially help in finding solutions to the commodities problem.  
&& The Chairman said that the suggestion of the representative of Egypt was constructive, and indicated that it might be possible to invite the Chairperson of the Task Force on Aid for Trade to the panel discussion.  He proposed that the Secretariat consider how and when to organize the panel discussion, and also suggested that the Secretariat prepare a summary of the main elements of the discussion that had taken place in the CTD on the commodities issue up to the present.       
It was so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last meeting of the CTD that the Committee would continue its discussion of the developmental aspects of the negotiations under this agenda item at the present meeting, and that the Secretariat would continue to update the background paper it had been working on to assist Members in their discussion.  However, given the fact that the negotiations had, for the time being, been suspended, he suggested that the Committee revert back to this agenda item at its last meeting of the year to decide how to proceed.     
It was so agreed.  
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman recalled that the Committee had agreed at the beginning of the year to include for all remaining meetings of the year an agenda item relating to the Hong Kong Decision on the provision of duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access to LDCs.  He said that under this agenda item, the Committee had heard from a number of Members on the steps they were taking, or had taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Interventions had also been made on behalf of the LDC Group.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, recalled that Ministers at Hong Kong, China had agreed that developed countries, and those developing countries declaring themselves in a position to do so, would provide DFQF market access on a lasting basis for all products originating from all LDCs, by 2008 or no later than the start of the implementation period, in a manner that ensured stability, security and predictability.  Taking into consideration the situation of some Members finding it difficult to provide 100 per cent market access to all LDC products, Ministers had agreed that DFQF market access would be provided for at least 97 per cent of products originating from LDCs, defined at the tariff line level, by 2008 or no later than the start of the implementation period.  He went on to say that  Ministers, fully aware of the marginalization of the LDCs in global trade, and sympathetic to them, had asked the Members that might initially provide 97 per cent DFQF market access to take steps to progressively achieve compliance with the obligations of complete DFQF market access to LDCs by incrementally building on the initial list of covered products.  Ministers had also asked Members to ensure that preferential rules of origin applicable to imports from LDCs were transparent and simple, and contributed to facilitating market access.  He said that Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration was a framework, and the Members were encouraged to set out by the end of 2006 the means for implementation of the Decision.  Members were to notify the implementation of the schemes adopted under the Decision every year to the CTD.  The Committee would annually review the steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to the LDCs and report to the General Council for appropriate action.
He said that the LDC Group had submitted modalities on DFQF market access and on transparent and simplified rules of origin in the CTD in Special Session (CTDSS), the Committee on Agriculture in Special Session and the Negotiating Group on Market Access.  The LDC Group believed that when the modalities were finalized, the CTD would have an opportunity to review the implementation process as per the mandate contained in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.  Therefore, while the LDC Group appreciated the notifications that had been submitted by Japan and the US in the CTD regarding their plans for implementation, and sincerely thanked them for their initiatives in providing LDCs with market access opportunities, the Group believed that the CTDSS, and not the CTD, was the appropriate forum for discussing the issue at the present time.  He added that the LDC Group understood the positions of Members which had led to the suspension of the negotiations, but was also worried that undue delay in restarting the negotiations could harm the major theme of "development" in the Doha Work Programme.  There was also a risk that such a delay could lead to a proliferation of bilateral and regional trade agreements, which would run contrary to the spirit of the multilateral trading system.  The LDCs called on the major trading countries of the world to engage in informal consultations and come back to the negotiating table as soon as possible.
&& The representative of the United States said that the domestic process was ongoing in the US to meet the obligation to provide 97 per cent DFQF market access by the end of the Doha Round, and that there would be opportunities for all stakeholders to provide input into the process.  She added that the Hong Decision would be consistent with the US' GSP rules, and that the US GSP scheme was currently undergoing a review.  She said that the US was committed to implementing its commitment to LDCs as reflected in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration. 
&& The representative of Korea said that, like other countries, Korea was fully committed to contributing to the economic development of LDC Members.  She said that Korea had been taking steps with regard to the provision of DFQF market access for LDCs and that since 2000, Korea had been providing DFQF market access for 89 HS 6-digit product lines originating from LDCs.  In addition, in an effort to faithfully implement the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, she said that Korea was currently working on expanding the product coverage of DFQF market access to LDCs, and that the government was collecting views from interested parties on which products could be selected.  Once the product selection process was finalized, related domestic regulations would be revised.  She said that her delegation would continue to inform the Committee of progress in efforts made to expand DFQF market access for LDC products.
&& The representative of Japan made reference to the communication that had been submitted to the CTD by his delegation in document WT/COMTD/W/150.  He said that Japan's domestic process was ongoing with regard to the Hong Kong Decision, and confirmed Japan's commitment to the Decision.        
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman recalled that at the last meeting of the Committee, he had raised the issue of electronic commerce (e‑commerce) in the CTD.  As no delegation had taken the floor at that time, he had suggested that Members possibly needed more time to reflect on the issue, and it had been agreed that the issue would be considered at the present meeting.  He said that the CTD was one of four subsidiary bodies designated to carry out work on e-commerce under the WTO Work Programme on electronic commerce.  However, the CTD had agreed at its 53rd Session in May 2005 that it would only revert to the agenda item concerning e-commerce if requested to do so by Members.  It was for this reason that e-commerce had not been on the CTD's agenda since May 2005 until the present meeting.  He continued by saying that Members had agreed in paragraph 46 of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration to reinvigorate the Work Programme on e-commerce, including the development-related issues under the Work Programme.  In light of paragraph 46 of the Hong Kong Declaration, he asked Members whether they wished to treat  the issue of e-commerce once again in the CTD. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was taking seriously the idea of reinvigorating the Work Programme on e-commerce, but did not as yet have anything specific to propose on how the CTD could contribute to the process.  She said that her delegation was aiming to have an active dialogue with other delegations over the next few weeks on possible ways in which e‑commerce could be treated in the CTD.  
&& The Chairman proposed that the CTD revert to the agenda item concerning e-commerce at its last meeting of the year.  He suggested that delegations could also consult informally among themselves before that meeting.  
It was so agreed.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that he had been informed that consultations had led to the proposal for H.E. Jean Feyder, Ambassador of Luxembourg, to serve as the Chairman of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.  He asked whether this was acceptable to Members.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman said that it was a great pleasure for him to welcome Ambassador Feyder to serve as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  He said that Ambassador Feyder had vast experience in the international arena.  The numerous posts Ambassador Feyder had occupied in his career included Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the European Union and Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations in New York.  He said that Ambassador Feyder currently served as Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations Office, the International Organizations and the WTO in Geneva.
&& The Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs said that it was with pleasure that he was taking on this responsibility.  He thanked Members for the confidence they had placed in him, and said that their cooperation and the help of the Secretariat would allow him to successfully perform his duties.  He said that he had previously served as Director for Development Cooperation in Luxembourg, which had given him the opportunity to travel to several developing countries and LDCs, and had allowed him to gain some understanding of the problems faced by these countries, including in the trade area.      
OTHER BUSINESS 
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.

__________




WT/COMTD/M/59 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/59 	Page  PAGE 19



 

 

 

 



