WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/73
4 May 2009


(09‑2170)


Committee on Trade and Development
Seventy-Third Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 13 MARCH 2009

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203167" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC229203167 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203168" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC229203168 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc229203169" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc229203169 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc229203170" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc229203170 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203171" C.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC229203171 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc229203172" (i)	Communications on the Generalized System of Preferences scheme of Norway (WT/COMTD/65 and Add.1 to Add.3)	 PAGEREF _Toc229203172 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc229203173" (ii)	Generalized System of Preferences, 2009-2011 – notification by the European Communities (WT/COMTD/N/4/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _Toc229203173 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc229203174" (iii)	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union (WT/REG222/N/1 and Corr.1, WT/COMTD/N/25, WT/COMTD/66 and Add.1 to Add.3)	 PAGEREF _Toc229203174 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc229203175" (iv)	Consideration of regional trade agreements involving non-WTO Members – statement by the Chairman	 PAGEREF _Toc229203175 \h 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203176" D.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (WT/L/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC229203176 \H 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203177" E.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC229203177 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203178" F.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC229203178 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203179" -	information by the secretariat on the annual report on technical assistance and training (1 january 2008 to 31 december 2008)	 PAGEREF _TOC229203179 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203180" G.	election of the chairperson of the sub-committee on least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC229203180 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203181" H.	election of the chairperson of the CT D	 PAGEREF _TOC229203181 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203182" I.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC229203182 \H 18
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203183" annex I	 PAGEREF _TOC229203183 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC229203184" annex II	 PAGEREF _TOC229203184 \H 20

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The chairman said that the draft agenda for the 73rd Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3323/Rev.1 issued on 9 March 2009.  He indicated that he wished to add two matters under "Other Business".  He firstly wanted to inform the Committee of a letter that had been sent to him, in his capacity as CTD Chairman, from the Chair of the General Council.  Second, he wished to raise a matter concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system. 
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The chairman said that he wished to inform the Committee of the tentative scheduling of, and preparations for, the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs) in 2009.  The Dedicated Sessions would be held to consider three RTAs that had recently been notified under the Enabling Clause.  It was firstly envisaged that the Pakistan-Sri Lanka Agreement would be considered at the CTD's 2nd Dedicated Session, which was tentatively scheduled to be held on 14 and 15 July, back to back with the Regular Session of the CTD.  On this Agreement, he said that the draft Secretariat Factual Presentation had been sent to the Parties on 20 February, for comments by 20 March – within a four-week period.  If this schedule was met, the Factual Presentation would be circulated to Members by 5 May at the latest.  He urged the Parties to try to send their joint comments to the Secretariat on time.  He next informed the Committee that the Pakistan-Malaysia Agreement would be considered at the 3rd Dedicated Session on 15 and 16 September.  This Dedicated Session would be held back to back with a meeting of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA).  With regard to the preparation of the Factual Presentation on the Pakistan-Malaysia Agreement, he said that the Secretariat had asked the Parties for clarification on some data issues.  He urged the Parties to send their responses as soon as possible to the Secretariat so that the draft Factual Presentation could be sent to them for comments by the deadline of 20 April.  Finally, he said that the Chile-India Agreement was to be considered at the CTD's 4th Dedicated Session, which was tentatively scheduled to be held on 3 and 4 December, back to back with the Regular Session of the CTD.  The Secretariat was currently waiting to receive the necessary data from the Parties.  The data was expected to be provided by 4 June at the latest.  He indicated that further updates on RTAs to be considered in Dedicated Sessions of the CTD would be provided to the Committee as necessary.
Communications on the Generalized System of Preferences scheme of Norway (WT/COMTD/65 and Add.1 to Add.3)
&& The chairman recalled that Norway had made a notification at the 69th Session of the CTD concerning its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme.  Two sets of questions from Brazil on the scheme had been circulated in documents WT/COMTD/65 and WT/COMTD/65/Add.2.  Responses to Brazil's questions were circulated by Norway in documents WT/COMTD/65/Add.1 and Add.3.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that this item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.
&& The representative of Brazil thanked Norway for its constructive and open attitude during the bilateral consultations that had been held with his delegation on this matter.  The replies provided by Norway had permitted a better understanding of Norway's GSP scheme and its rules. 
&& The representative of Norway said that her delegation had engaged in constructive dialogue with Brazil, in the context of which Norway had provided additional information and clarifications on its GSP scheme.  She informed the Committee that her delegation was still waiting for some further clarifications from capital.  She hoped that the information provided would soon be satisfactory to Brazil, so that this item could be taken off the CTD's agenda.
&& The chairman inquired whether Brazil wanted this item to remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of Brazil confirmed that his delegation wished to retain this item on the agenda. 
&& The chairman proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions.  The item would remain on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
Generalized System of Preferences, 2009-2011 – notification by the European Communities (WT/COMTD/N/4/Add.4)
&& The chairman said that the EC's notification of its GSP scheme for the years 2009 to 2011 had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/4/Add.4.  He invited the representative of the EC to introduce the notification.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the EC was notifying its new GSP scheme, which had entered into force on 1 January 2009.  The notification had been made on 4 March 2008, but the document containing the notification had been circulated, with a slight delay, on 12 March.  He explained that the WTO Secretariat had had to reformat some parts of the notification document in order to make it compatible with WTO standards.  An advance copy of the document had, however, been provided to all Members.  He said that the document contained a number of elements besides the notification itself.  These included the legal texts – notably a Council Regulation, and a Commission Decision on the list of beneficiaries of the special arrangement for sustainable development and good governance ("GSP-plus") – a guide to internet resources, and a series of annexes.  The annexes provided data on total imports from GSP beneficiary countries, which were broken down by imports entering under the GSP, imports under other preferential schemes where applicable, imports under a zero-duty Most-Favoured-Nation (MFN) rate, and dutiable imports.  Also included in the annexes was information on the top beneficiaries of the scheme, and the top products by section and chapter of the Harmonized System (HS).  Information was additionally provided on the details underpinning the graduation calculations.  
He said that, prior to the present meeting, the EC had organized an informal presentation session on its GSP scheme, to which all interested delegations had been invited.  He explained that the EC had thought it useful to hold such an event in order to allow an elaborate and detailed presentation of its GSP scheme, and to permit sufficient time for questions and answers.  Representatives from the EC's headquarters in Brussels – including a GSP statistician and a member of the chief economist’s team – were present, and were also available for bilateral meetings after the event.  He said that the informal session, as well as the high degree of detail provided in the annexes of the notification document, were a testimony to the EC's commitment to ensuring transparency in its preferential regimes.  He indicated in this regard that the EC was closely involved in the discussions in the CTD to strengthen the transparency of preferential trade arrangements (PTAs).  Negotiations on a Transparency Mechanism (TM) for PTAs were ongoing, and such a Mechanism was not as yet binding on Members.  Nevertheless, the EC had notified its new GSP scheme in the spirit of the new TM, notably through the information provided in the various statistical annexes. 
Given that an extensive presentation had been made at the informal session, he said that he would limit himself at the present meeting to highlighting the main elements of the EC's GSP scheme.  He said that the scheme was launched in 1971, and was the most widely used of all GSP schemes.  It had been progressively expanded, and the value of preferential imports under the scheme had continued to increase, reaching €58.6 billion in 2007.  The scheme had also been effective in promoting exports from those countries that needed it the most, notably the least-developed countries (LDCs) and the vulnerable GSP-plus beneficiary countries.  With the objectives of predictability, stability and transparency, the new scheme for 2009 to 2011 maintained the main principles and features of its predecessor scheme, which expired at the end of December 2008.  Notably, the new scheme was based on three arrangements:  the general arrangement, the GSP-plus arrangement and the Everything But Arms (EBA) arrangement for LDCs. 
The general arrangement had a product coverage of 6,244 products, split into sensitive and non-sensitive products.  Non-sensitive products, which accounted for about 3,200 lines, entered duty free.  Sensitive products benefited from a tariff reduction below the MFN rate.  In the case of ad valorem duties, the reduction amounted to 3.5 percentage points.  For textiles, a reduction of 20 per cent relative to the MFN rate was offered.  In the case of specific duties, a reduction of 30 per cent applied.  The GSP-plus had a slightly higher product coverage of 6,336 products, and offered additional, more generous, preferences to its beneficiaries.  Finally, the EBA arrangement covered 7,140 products, all of which entered duty free.  In the context of the EBA arrangement, it was worth noting that as of 1 October 2009, the arrangement would grant 100 per cent duty‑free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for all products from all LDCs, except for arms and ammunition.  This was in light of the expiry of the transitional provisions concerning the imports of rice and sugar.  He expressed his delegation's hope that this would encourage other developed countries, and developing countries in a position to do so, to show a similar degree of generosity to LDCs.
On the GSP-plus arrangement, he recalled that it had been mentioned at previous CTD meetings that countries wishing to apply for the additional benefits needed to have submitted their application by the deadline of 31 October 2008.  The criteria to be considered vulnerable and eligible for the purposes of the GSP-plus remained unchanged relative to the previous scheme, with the exception that all 27 conventions listed in the annex to the Council Regulation now needed to be ratified and implemented.  The Commission had duly examined all the applications received and had established the list of GSP-plus beneficiaries on 8 December 2008.  The list of 16 countries included three new beneficiaries, namely Armenia, Azerbaijan and Paraguay.  He observed that a significant novelty of the new arrangement was that a mid-term window for applications had been introduced.  This meant that interested countries that had not yet applied for the arrangement, or had not yet ratified or implemented all conventions by the 2008 deadline, would have a second opportunity to apply.  In particular, applications could be submitted by 30 April 2010, in order to be granted the GSP-plus benefits from 1 July 2010.
He said that an important feature of any GSP scheme was its graduation mechanism.  Such a mechanism removed preferences for countries that had established a sufficient level of competitiveness, and allowed the preference-giving Member to target its scheme to those that needed it most.  Under the EC's GSP scheme, graduation took place when the three-year average of covered imports for a given HS section from a given country exceeded 15 per cent of the same covered imports from all beneficiary countries.  Similarly, when the calculation showed that the average percentage fell below that threshold, graduation was removed and preferences were re‑established.  Calculations, which were made using Eurostat data, were based on the three most recent years for which data were available.  For the new scheme, the legislative process had required that the calculations be done in 2007, which required the use of 2004, 2005 and 2006 as reference years.  Following the calculations, preferences had been re-established for the 2009 to 2011 period for six countries – Algeria, India, Indonesia, Russia, South Africa, and Thailand.  Only one new graduation occurred, which resulted in preferences being removed for Vietnamese footwear. 
On the issue of product coverage under the EC's GSP scheme, he noted that more than 2,400 product lines already carried a zero MFN rate.  In this light, he observed that the preferences offered under the scheme came on top of a trade regime that was already very open.  In value terms, 64 per cent of imports from all GSP beneficiary countries entered at a zero MFN rate in 2007.  If bilateral preferential schemes were included in the calculations, 68 per cent of total imports from GSP beneficiary countries entered the EC market duty free.  Since the EC's GSP scheme was not the only framework governing trade relations between the EC and developing countries, he said that the scheme should be seen in the context of the overall trade openness of the EC's trade regime.  For example, imports from African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries were now governed by interim or full Economic Partnership Agreements, which granted more preferential conditions than the GSP scheme.  In addition, the EC had a number of bilateral or regional free trade agreements (FTAs) with other developing countries – for example, with Chile, Mexico, South Africa and countries in the Mediterranean region – offering them additional market access on top of the GSP preferences. 
In this light, the EC had consistently held the view that it was essential to assess the combined effects of its multilateral, bilateral and autonomous trade policy instruments.  The data on total imports in Annex IV of the notification document were, therefore, presented in such a way as to allow an appreciation of the aggregated effect.  Annex V presented the data in a similar fashion, but further broken down by HS product sections for the top 20 beneficiaries of the GSP scheme.  Annex VI provided insight into the top products imported under the scheme, by HS section and chapter.  His delegation believed that these data went a long way in demonstrating the developmental benefits of the scheme.  He noted, in particular, that the top products imported under the scheme were textiles, some small manufacturing, as well as a high degree of processed agricultural products.  All these were typically labour-intensive products of high importance to the economies of many developing countries.
Learning from best practices in recent GSP notifications by the United States, he said that the EC had also provided in Annex III of the notification document a guide to internet resources concerning the scheme.  He added that the PowerPoint presentation that had been made at the informal information session would be posted on the GSP web-pages of the Commission’s website.  Finally, he informed the Committee that Eurostat was making significant efforts to improve the timeliness and quality of trade data.  To this end, it was expected that a new Regulation would enter into force starting from January 2010.  He concluded by observing that the notification document was long, but also self-explanatory.  In view of the fact that the document had been circulated at fairly short notice, he recognized that Members might need more time to go through all the details.  He indicated, however, that his delegation was available to answer to the best of its abilities any questions Members might have at this stage.
&& The representative of Brazil welcomed the notification and the intervention by the EC.  His delegation expected the EC's GSP scheme to come as a positive response to the development, trade and financial needs of its beneficiaries, and to be fully compliant with the requirements and rules of the Enabling Clause.  He additionally welcomed the EC's initiative to hold an informal session on the scheme prior to the present meeting, without prejudice to formal discussions in the CTD.  He noted with appreciation that the EC had made efforts to make its notification along the lines of the draft proposal for a TM for PTAs.  Brazil received this as a positive signal in support of transparency.  He remarked, however, that no notification could pre-judge the outcome of the negotiations on the PTAs TM. 
He said that the EC's notification document was under review by the relevant authorities in Brazil.  Due to the short time that had elapsed since the notification, as well as to the length and complexity of the notification document, a final analysis had not yet been completed.  He, however, wished to pose a preliminary query to the EC regarding possible differentiation or discrimination between developing countries in the application requirements for the GSP-plus arrangement.  He observed, in particular, that a possible outcome of the stipulated deadlines to apply for benefits under the arrangement might be that potential beneficiaries would be denied inclusion in the arrangement simply on the basis of a missed deadline.  His delegation would appreciate any comments from the EC on this particular issue.  He added that Brazil wished to reserve the right to bring the issue to the CTD at a later stage, if necessary, with comments and questions on the GSP scheme.
&& The representative of Colombia said that his country was a beneficiary of both the general arrangement and the GSP-plus arrangement.  Colombia's trade relations with the EC were based on the GSP.  The GSP-plus arrangement provided tariff preferences to products falling under around 6,400 tariff lines with duty‑free access to the EC market.  Fruit, vegetables, flowers, lyophilized coffee, fishery products, agro‑industrial products, chemicals, plastics, textiles and made‑up articles, leather goods and, in general, almost all of Colombia's industrial goods entered the EC market duty free.  One notable exception was bananas, with regard to which Colombia continued to seek a mutually acceptable solution consistent with the WTO Agreements and jurisprudence.  In 2007, the EC became Colombia's second largest trading partner, ahead of the Andean Community and Venezuela.  Trade flows between the EC and Colombia totalled €4,093 million, with a surplus of €1,071 million for Colombia.  A total of 22 per cent of Colombian exports to the EC benefited from tariff preferences.  Furthermore, the EC was the second largest foreign investor in Colombia, with investments of over €717 million.  Colombia welcomed the efforts by the EC to continue to offer a GSP scheme to developing countries.  He noted that the GSP was created on the recommendation of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) more than 40 years ago, and was consistent with the Enabling Clause and other WTO rules.  The EC's GSP scheme was based on clear, transparent and non‑discriminatory criteria.  As a beneficiary country, Colombia was ready to cooperate in all matters relating to the review of the implementation of the EC's GSP scheme.
&& The representative of Pakistan expressed appreciation for the informal session that the EC had organized to present its GSP scheme.  The event was a positive step towards enhanced transparency, and had allowed a better understanding of the technical aspects of the scheme.  On the GSP-plus arrangement, he noted that Pakistan had in the past had some concerns.  A positive development in the new arrangement was the possibility of mid-point entry.  In this regard, he enquired whether the criteria for entry at the mid-point would be the same as those applied at the beginning of the arrangement, or whether different criteria would be applied.  He observed that his delegation had not yet been able to consider the EC's notification document in detail, and requested that the CTD continue its consideration of the notification at its next meeting.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation had taken note of the comments that had been made.  On the query from Pakistan, he indicated that the mid-point eligibility criteria for the GSP-plus arrangement were the same as those that had been used to identify the countries that were currently benefiting from the arrangement.  He added, however, that the vulnerability calculations were to be based on data for the three preceding years.  For the mid-point calculations, the data to be used were those available on 1 September 2009, which in practice entailed the use of 2006, 2007 and 2008 data.   
&& The chairman proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions.  He noted that there had been a request to continue discussions on the EC's notification at the next meeting.  This item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda. 
It was so agreed.
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union (WT/REG222/N/1 and Corr.1, WT/COMTD/N/25, WT/COMTD/66 and Add.1 to Add.3)
&& The chairman recalled that the Committee had been discussing over a number of meetings the matter of the change in the notification status of the GCC Customs Union from GATT Article XXIV to the Enabling Clause.  The discussion had been taking place under "Other Business".  The present item had been placed on the CTD's agenda at the request of the United States.  He invited the US representative to take the floor.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation continued to be concerned about the change in the notification of the GCC Customs Union to be exclusively under the Enabling Clause.  The US encouraged the GCC countries to re-notify their customs union under GATT Article XXIV, as had been initially done.  Furthermore, the US did not support moving forward with the process of reviewing the agreement under the TM for RTAs until this matter was resolved.
She said that her delegation wanted to respond in detail to the most recent communication from the GCC on this matter, which had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/66/Add.3.  Any future discussion would take place in the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA).  She indicated that the document did not satisfy her delegation's concerns.  In paragraph 7 of the document, the GCC asserted – with respect to paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause – that the fact that Members had not found it necessary to prescribe criteria or conditions for the reduction or elimination of non‑tariff measures did not eliminate such measures from the coverage of the Enabling Clause.  The US strongly disagreed with this assertion.  The Enabling Clause authorized reciprocal arrangements among developing countries only for the reduction or elimination of tariffs.  Non-tariff barriers (NTBs) could be eliminated on a reciprocal basis only where the General Council had established the conditions for such elimination, which it had not yet done.  
The distinction in the treatment of tariffs and NTBs followed naturally from the fact that tariff elimination was a relatively verifiable action based on a review of a country’s tariff schedule.  However, given the well-recognized complexity and general lack of transparency in the area of NTBs at the time the Enabling Clause was adopted, it made sense that the GATT Contracting Parties had wanted to establish the criteria or conditions that would govern the elimination of NTBs in regional agreements entered into under the Enabling Clause.  Contrary to the GCC's view, this understanding did not nullify paragraph 2(c), but instead properly ensured the fulfilment of the intentions of the Contracting Parties at the time the Enabling Clause was adopted.  As such, her delegation did not see how paragraph 2(c) could be interpreted to grant a carte blanche application of the Enabling Clause to agreements eliminating NTBs.  The US, therefore, rejected the GCC’s arguments in paragraph 7 of the document.
In paragraph 9 of the document, she welcomed what appeared to be an agreement with her delegation's view that – as reinforced by the excerpt from the Secretariat’s Legal Note – the Enabling Clause applied only to Article I of GATT 1994, and that nothing under the Enabling Clause could exempt a Member from an Article II violation.  In line with the Secretariat’s Legal Note – as cited by the GCC – she observed that if the formation of a customs union should lead to the breaking of a Party’s WTO tariff bindings, that Party's violation of Article II would not be excused unless the customs union were covered by Article XXIV.  As some GCC countries appeared to be exceeding their WTO bindings in the application of the GCC’s common external tariffs, her delegation continued to encourage the GCC to promptly notify its customs union under Article XXIV.
With respect to paragraph 10 of the GCC’s document, she fully agreed that agreements entered into under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause could be notified to the CTD.  Her delegation had never suggested otherwise.  However, notifying an agreement to the CTD was appropriate only where the agreement could reasonably be said to qualify as an Enabling Clause agreement.  The GCC agreement plainly went beyond the reduction or elimination of tariffs, and therefore beyond the scope of paragraph 2(c).  Equally important, the GCC countries had not contested ‑ and indeed they could not contest in all reasonableness ‑ the fact that the GCC common external tariffs exceeded some of their tariff bindings, an action which plainly could not be justified by the Enabling Clause.  Under these circumstances, the US continued to strongly doubt that the GCC Customs Union fell within the parameters of the Enabling Clause, and as such, continued to request that the agreement be reviewed in the CRTA.  
On paragraph 12 of the document, she noted her delegation's agreement with the Panel's findings in EC – Tariff Preferences.  In particular, her delegation believed that the Enabling Clause was one of the most important instruments in the GATT and the WTO – given its critical role in authorizing differential and more favourable treatment for developing countries – and that it was important to be particularly cautious in the interpretation of its provisions.  The US believed that a cautious interpretation would promote non-discrimination and increased transparency over the expansion of discrimination to cover undefined NTBs.  It appeared that the GCC countries had been striving to interpret the provisions of the Enabling Clause in a manner that would allow them an even greater ability to discriminate against those that were not GCC Parties – not just developed countries, but developing countries as well.  The Enabling Clause allowed for only a narrow form of discrimination under paragraph 2(c), and efforts to expand this interpretation to allow for further forms of discrimination would harm all WTO Members.  However, it was likely to harm the GCC's neighbours ‑ all of which were developing or least-developed countries ‑ most of all.  
In addition to the arguments that had been made encouraging the GCC countries to re-notify their customs union to the CRTA, the US believed that it was important to note the specific commitments Saudi Arabia and Oman had made to observe the provisions of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 in their Working Party Reports on their accession to the WTO.  Paragraph 314 of Saudi Arabia's Working Party Report stated that Saudi Arabia "would observe the provisions of the WTO, including Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and Article V of the GATS, in its trade agreements, and would ensure that the provisions of these WTO Agreements for notification, consultation and other requirements concerning free trade areas and customs unions of which Saudi Arabia was a member were met from the date of accession".  The report further stated that "Saudi Arabia would, upon accession, submit notifications and copies of the GCC Customs Union and the Arab League Free Trade Area for review by the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements".  Likewise, paragraph 156 of Oman's Working Party Report stated that Oman "would observe the provisions of Article XXIV of the GATT 1994 and Article V of the GATS in its trade agreements, and would ensure that the provisions of these WTO agreements for notification, consultation and other requirements concerning free trade areas and customs unions of which Oman was a member were met from the date of accession".  The US called upon the GCC countries to fulfil their accession commitments and rightly re-notify the GCC Customs Union to the CRTA in accordance with the obligations of Article XXIV of GATT 1994.  In closing, she once again maintained that any future discussion of this issue should take place in the CRTA.
&& The representative of Oman, on behalf of the GCC countries, said that the issue before the Committee was purely procedural, as it concerned the basis for the notification of the GCC Customs Union and the forum in which it should be reviewed.  The GCC believed that a discussion on the substance of the agreement could be addressed during the review process.  The GCC had made clear on previous occasions, including through its communication circulated in document WT/COMTD/66, that the Enabling Clause provided a proper basis for the notification of trade agreements among developing countries.  He pointed out that all GCC members were developing countries. 
It had additionally been made clear by the GCC countries that their customs union was fully consistent with GATT Article XXIV.  The GCC was, of course, aware of the concerns raised by some delegations that a notification under the Enabling Clause rather than Article XXIV somehow implied that the obligations under Article XXIV were not relevant to the agreement.  It was not the intention of the GCC to evade any of the obligations deriving from Article XXIV.  However, the GCC was somewhat puzzled by the insistence of certain delegations that Article XXIV was the only permissible basis for the notification of customs unions.  There was no textual support for such a position in the TM for RTAs, the Enabling Clause or Article XXIV.  Moreover, a number of customs unions among developing countries in addition to the GCC Customs Union had been notified under the Enabling Clause.
He said that the GCC had been in consultations recently with delegations that had expressed interest in the matter.  This had been a useful process.  Delegations had been able to gain a better understanding of the positions that had been taken, and some progress was made.  Although no agreement had yet been reached, the GCC was willing to continue to work with other Members to find a solution that was reasonable, fair and balanced.  
&& The representative of the Saudi Arabia supported the intervention by Oman.  He added that the process of preparing the Factual Presentation on the GCC Customs Union was a procedural one, which would allow the agreement to be considered in the CTD in accordance with the TM for RTAs. 
&& The representative of Egypt, on behalf of the African Group, said that the African Group had systemic concerns on the issue of preserving the rights of developing countries to avail of the Enabling Clause on all matters relating to RTAs.  In light of these concerns, he expressed understanding and full support for the position of the GCC.  He encouraged Members to review the GCC Customs Union in the CTD.  He also called on the Chairman to hold consultations on the matter with a broad group of developed and developing countries, including the coordinators of regional groupings.  He stressed the importance of ensuring that the inherent rights of developing countries with regard to the Enabling Clause were not prejudiced.  
&& The representative of Qatar supported the intervention by Oman.  He indicated that Qatar wished to retain its right to notify the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause.
&& The representative of Morocco, on behalf of the Arab Group, expressed support for the interventions made by the GCC countries and other developing countries on this matter.  && The Arab Group encouraged the delegations concerned to find ways to resolve the procedural questions in a manner which fully respected the interests of all developing countries.
&& The representative of the European Communities regretted that the GCC countries had not yet confirmed their intention to overturn their decision to modify the notification status of the GCC Customs Union.  He encouraged the GCC countries to expeditiously reconsider their position and re‑notify the GCC Customs Union under Article XXIV, as it was originally notified.  The EC had clearly explained in writing – in document WT/COMTD/66/Add.2 – its legal concerns about the GCC's decision to notify its customs union under the Enabling Clause.  The legal explanation was clear.  The Enabling Clause did not provide a sufficient legal basis for the notification of a customs union.  The GCC had confirmed that its customs union provided for the elimination of both tariffs and NTBs.  However, paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause could be invoked to justify those arrangements which envisaged the elimination and reduction of tariffs only.  Therefore, the GCC Customs Union did not have a legal cover under the Enabling Clause. 
He added that all WTO Members were required to fulfil their WTO commitments, including those made in the run-up to accession.  As noted by the US, Saudi Arabia and Oman had made clear‑cut commitments with respect to their free-trade areas and customs unions and related obligations under Article XXIV.  The EC urged them to duly honour their commitments.  As had already been indicated at the last CTD meeting, the EC considered that further discussions on this matter should take place in the CRTA, since this was the appropriate forum for discussing an agreement which had been originally notified under Article XXIV, and which could only be justified under this provision.  The EC encouraged the GCC countries to swiftly reconsider the unjustified change in the notification of their customs union.  He indicated that his delegation would continue to work with the GCC, in particular in view of the upcoming CRTA meeting of 20 and 21 April.
&& The representative of India said that his delegation had been following the discussions on this matter very closely.  It was India's understanding that the GCC Customs Union qualified under both the general provision of GATT Article XXIV and the specific provision of the Enabling Clause.  Therefore, the customs union could have been notified to the WTO under either of the two provisions.  Since the members of the GCC were all developing countries, his delegation was of the view that it was the prerogative of the GCC countries to determine whether to notify their agreement under Article XXIV or under the Enabling Clause.  WTO Members, other than Parties to the agreement, could not determine the provision under which the notification was to be made.  It caused systemic concerns to India if developing country Members were denied the right to notify an agreement under the Enabling Clause.  Moreover, this was not the first time that a customs union had been notified under the Enabling Clause. 
He added that there was nothing in the WTO procedures that prevented Members from notifying an agreement under a particular provision.  Members should not lose sight of the fact that the rationale of a notification was to inform the membership.  He also referred to the submission made by the US in document WT/COMTD/66/Add.1, in which the US had raised issues about inconsistencies with GATT provisions.  In this regard, he said that the question of GATT consistency or inconsistency was an issue to be discussed separately.  In his delegation's view, this issue had no connection with the matter of notifying an agreement under the Enabling Clause or Article XXIV.  India looked forward to a formal consideration of the GCC Customs Union in line with the provisions of the TM for RTAs.  He pointed out in this regard that paragraphs 1 and 5 of the TM provided that the consideration of RTAs by the membership did not affect Members' rights and obligations under the WTO Agreements.  Given this provision, it was difficult to see how any scrutiny by the CRTA ‑ based on a notification under Article XXIV – or by the CTD – based on a notification under the Enabling Clause – could prejudice the legal position of an individual WTO Member.  Finally, he indicated that his delegation wished to be associated with any consultations that the Chairman might decide to hold on this matter.
&& The representative of Australia said that her delegation attached importance to the proper notification of customs unions, including the GCC Customs Union.  For the reasons outlined by the US and the EC, Australia was of the view that the GCC Customs Union should be notified under GATT Article XXIV and considered in the CRTA.  Accordingly, she encouraged the GCC to reconsider the withdrawal of its Article XXIV notification.  She added that her delegation had been participating actively in informal work on this matter, and welcomed the GCC's willingness to consider Australia's concerns surrounding the notification.  Australia looked forward to a positive resolution of the matter.  
&& The representative of China said that his delegation had been following this discussion very closely.  China had also engaged in bilateral discussions with concerned delegations, and had a better understanding of the different views.  In the view of his delegation, the matter was a procedural one.  He clarified in this regard that his delegation believed that the substance could be left to the review process.  His delegation also believed that further discussions – led by the Chairman – were necessary and welcome.  China was fully committed to engage in any consultations that the Chairman might call, and in whatever form was considered appropriate.  He additionally indicated that, according to paragraph 6 of the TM for RTAs, the consideration of notified RTAs should normally be concluded in a period not exceeding one year after the date of notification.  He noted in this regard that it had been more than one year since the GCC had notified its customs union under the Enabling Clause, and no progress had been made on the matter.  He urged all parties to accelerate their work in order to meet the requirements of the TM.
&& The representative of Canada highlighted his delegation's interest in this matter.  As had been indicated at the last CTD meeting, Canada was of the view that the GCC Customs Union should be notified under GATT Article XXIV.
&& The representative of Brazil said that nothing in the TM for RTAs authorized any Member to unilaterally decide on suspending the consideration of an RTA.  The process did not depend on consensus or on any agreement by Members, and was designed to start after the notification of the RTA.  He observed that the process was based on technical work done by the Secretariat, consisting of a Factual Presentation prepared in consultation with the Parties.  The refusal on the part of any Member to consider an RTA raised serious systemic concerns, and departed from the general spirit of the TM.  As a practical suggestion, he encouraged the GCC countries to continue to consult with the Secretariat with a view to completing the technical requirements for the consideration of the GCC Customs Union.
&& The representative of Japan said that her delegation shared the concerns raised by the US and the EC.  The GCC agreement was a customs union with common external tariffs, and it was her delegation's understanding that the common external tariffs for certain products were above the bound duties of some GCC countries.  If this was the case, it was a violation of GATT Article II.  Such a violation could not be justified by a notification under the Enabling Clause.  She also indicated that both GATT Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause provided that the notified RTA should not raise barriers to other Members.  For a customs union, according to paragraph 5 of Article XXIV and the Understanding on Article XXIV, there was a requirement that a general incidence calculation needed to be conducted by the Secretariat.  She explained that Japan wished to have the opportunity to consider thoroughly whether the formation of the GCC Customs Union had a negative impact on other WTO Members.  In this light, Japan supported the US and the EC in calling on the GCC countries to notify their customs union under Article XXIV and to have it considered in the CRTA.  She also expressed her delegation's willingness to continue discussions on this matter in order to find a reasonable, clear and balanced solution.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that his delegation wished to place on record its firm support for the GCC's right to notify its customs union under the Enabling Clause.  From a systemic point of view, he believed that placing obstacles at this level would render the Enabling Clause ineffective.  He also believed that it was too early to be having a discussion on legal issues.  He suggested that the GCC Customs Union go through the required process of consideration by Members.  During this process, Members could raise any concerns that they may have about the validity of the notification.  Such concerns could subsequently be dealt with in the appropriate forum which, in the view of his delegation, was not the CTD.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that his delegation had been following this discussion with keen interest.  He noted that Members had different views on the interpretation of the Enabling Clause, but also pointed out that developing countries had certain flexibilities with regard to the provisions under which to notify RTAs.  He indicated that this matter raised systemic concerns, and expressed support for the statement by Egypt.  He called on the Chairman to consult informally with Members with a view to arriving at a positive resolution.
&& The chairman noted that no delegation had requested that this item remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  He also noted that consultations between the GCC countries and some other delegations would continue.  If it was felt that he could be of assistance during these consultations, he was willing to do so, on request. 
&& The representative of Oman said that this was the first time that this matter was being discussed in the CTD as a formal agenda item.  He believed that the item should remain on the CTD's agenda until an acceptable solution for all delegations had been found.  He requested the Chairman to hold an informal consultation on the matter as soon as possible.
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation wanted this item to remain on the CTD's agenda.  He also requested the Chairman to hold an informal consultation on this matter with a broad group of developed and developing countries, including the coordinators of regional groupings.
&& The representative of Saudi Arabia supported the requests from other delegations for the Chairman to hold an informal consultation to explore how progress could be made on this matter.
&& The representative of the United Arab Emirates supported the interventions of the previous three speakers.  The United Arab Emirates wanted this item to remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of Kuwait thanked those delegations that had expressed their support for the GCC's position.  He echoed other delegations in calling for the CTD Chairman to hold an informal consultation.
&& The chairman said that he would look into holding an informal consultation on this matter.  He proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions.  The item would remain on the CTD's agenda.  
It was so agreed.
Consideration of regional trade agreements involving non-WTO Members – statement by the Chairman
&& The chairman said that the CTD – meeting in Dedicated Session – had, in its consideration of newly-notified RTAs under the Enabling Clause, agreed to use the same procedures as those used by the CRTA.  These procedures were based on the provisions of the TM for RTAs.  Since the establishment of the TM, the CRTA – and hence the CTD – had been using these procedures only to consider notified RTAs involving WTO Members, pending a decision on the consideration of notified RTAs involving non-WTO Members as well. 
In this context, he informed the Committee that the CRTA, at its formal meeting of 4 March 2009, had agreed that it would be appropriate to begin considering RTAs involving non‑WTO Members, using the same TM procedures that were being used to consider RTAs between WTO Members only.  Members had emphasized the importance of developing a fuller understanding of the operation of all RTAs.  The Secretariat – to the extent it had resources available, and taking into account practical considerations such as the availability of data and the established work programme ‑ had therefore been requested to prepare Factual Presentations on such agreements.  Members had agreed that these agreements would be considered under a separate agenda item.  He noted that there were three agreements involving non-WTO Members that had already been notified under the Enabling Clause and that would need to be considered by Members in a Dedicated Session of the CTD, on the basis of a Factual Presentation.  These were the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA), the India-Bhutan Agreement and the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). 
&& The representative of Brazil supported the statement by the Chairman.  He requested that Brazil's intervention at the CRTA meeting of 4 March 2009 be included in the records of the present meeting.
&& The representative of the United States welcomed the new procedures relating to RTAs with non-Members.  She said that the US had no objections to the procedures, but wished to reiterate that any consideration of agreements between Members and non-Members could not constitute a waiver from the substantive conditions of the Enabling Clause, nor could it imply any view a Member may have regarding the consistency of any such agreement with WTO obligations.  Her delegation looked forward to the prospect of a greater understanding of all RTAs.
&& The representative of the European Communities requested that the intervention of his delegation at the CRTA meeting of 4 March 2009 be included in the records of the present meeting.
&& The chairman proposed that the Committee agree to adopt the TM procedures used by the CRTA to consider RTAs under the Enabling Clause involving non-WTO Members.
It was so agreed.  
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The Council had since extended the deadline to its July 2009 meeting.
He recalled that the proponents of a TM for PTAs – Brazil, China, India and the US – had presented their draft proposal, circulated in document JOB(08)/103, at the 71st Session of the CTD in October 2008.  As he had informed the CTD and the General Council in December 2008, he had held several rounds of small-group informal consultations after the circulation of the proposal in order to have a detailed consideration of it, and to try to iron out as many outstanding issues as possible.  He had continued this process with another informal consultation in the same format at the beginning of 2009.  In light of the comments that had been made in these small-group informal consultations, the proponents were currently revising their draft proposal.  His intention was to call an informal, open‑ended CTD meeting to consider the revised proposal shortly after it was circulated to Members.  He also informed Members that the Secretariat was in the process of finalizing a "mock" Factual Presentation of a PTA, which was based on the GSP scheme of the US.  He wanted the "mock" to be considered at the same informal, open-ended meeting that he would be calling to consider the revised draft proposal by the proponents. 
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation continued to be actively engaged in the consultations that the Chairman had been calling on this matter.  Although it had not yet been possible to fulfil the mandate from the General Council, he believed that substantial progress had been made in understanding the concerns and needs of Members – both sponsors of PTAs and beneficiaries.  This progress would be reflected in a revised version of the October 2008 proposal, which would shortly be presented by Brazil, China, India and the US.  In this regard, the proponents not only encouraged Members to debate and discuss the contents of the document, but also remained open to suggestions and contributions.  As the need and desire for transparency was growing among WTO Members, the proponents were confident that their initiative would be accepted and approved on its own merits without further delay.  He welcomed the Chairman's efforts to complete the technical work on this matter, and to call an informal, open-ended meeting.  The proponents stood ready to discuss any aspects of the proposal, and to respond to any comments or questions from delegations.
&& The representative of India supported the intervention by Brazil.  He looked forward to constructive engagement from Members with a view to an early conclusion of the technical work on this matter.
&& The representative of the United States supported the interventions by Brazil and India.  She expressed appreciation for the interest demonstrated by other Members on this matter, and for their active participation in the informal consultations.  The US looked forward to continuing the work in advancing the TM for PTAs toward a positive outcome.  The US also supported the Chairman's proposal to continue informal discussions on the draft text in an open-ended format.  
&& The representative of China associated his delegation with the interventions by the other proponents.  He said that China was encouraged with the progress that had been made on this matter in the small-group informal consultations, and was looking forward to participating in the informal, open-ended CTD meeting that the Chairman would be calling. 
&& The chairman reiterated his intention to call an informal, open-ended CTD meeting shortly after the circulation of the revised draft proposal.  He said that he would also open this matter up for discussion once again at the next formal meeting of the CTD.  The item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	
&& The chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  He recalled that the CTD had to date undertaken three of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision.  
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that the Hong Kong Decision was a milestone in terms of market access initiatives for LDCs.  He recalled that the Decision called on developed countries, and developing countries declaring themselves in a position to do so, to provide DFQF market access on a lasting basis, for all products originating from all LDCs by 2008 or no later than the start of the implementation period in a manner which ensured stability, security and predictability.  Developing country Members had been provided the flexibility to phase in their commitments and to enjoy appropriate flexibility in coverage.  The Decision also provided some flexibility to developed country Members that may have initial difficulties in providing 100 per cent DFQF market access.  These Members were to provide DFQF market access for at least 97 per cent of products from LDCs, defined at the tariff line level, while working to comply in a progressive manner with the 100 per cent requirement.
He said that, more than three years since the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference, the US was the notable developed country that had yet to offer DFQF market access to LDCs on at least 97 per cent of its tariff lines.  The LDCs still did not know the lines which the US would include as part of the 97 per cent.  He said that the LDCs would appreciate it if the US could inform the Committee of any progress that had been made in this regard to ensure the provision of meaningful and enhanced market access to LDCs.  He also thanked the developed and developing country Members that had already granted DFQF market access to LDCs.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that developing countries, and in particular the LDCs, were suffering from the impact of the current financial and economic crisis.  In this light, the need to provide meaningful market access to LDCs had become even more acute.  His delegation called on developed country Members, and those developing country Members in a position to do so, to comply as soon as possible with the provisions of the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
&& 	INFORMATION BY THE SECRETARIAT ON THE ANNUAL REPORT ON TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING (1 JANUARY 2008 TO 31 DECEMBER 2008)
The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) said that he wished to make some preliminary remarks on the 2008 Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, which would be presented to Members at the next CTD meeting.  He indicated that a total of 490 technical assistance (TA) activities – including both Geneva-based activities and those held outside Geneva – had been implemented in 2008.  The majority of activities – 162 in total – were held in Africa, representing 33 per cent of the WTO's TA.  Asia and the Pacific accounted for 23 per cent of all activities, followed by Latin America with 12 per cent of the total.  The Central and Eastern Europe, Central Asia and the Caucasus (CEECAC) region, the Arab and Middle-East countries and the Caribbean each accounted for 5 per cent of the activities.  Participants from LDCs were associated with 42 per cent of all activities.  This included 97 national activities held in LDCs, as well as regional seminars, workshops and training activities in which LDCs participated.  Of the 490 activities, a total of 227 were held at the national level, while 144 were regional and global events.
He moved on to discuss the Biennial TA Plan for 2010 and 2011.  In the context of preparing the plan, an extensive consultation process with Members would take place, and would culminate in the plan being presented to the CTD later in the year for adoption.  He encouraged Members to participate actively in the preparation process, so that their needs and concerns could be appropriately addressed in the plan.  He also informed the Committee that the Secretariat was working towards updating Members' needs assessments, in order to ensure that WTO TA activities responded to the needs that Members had expressed.  Among the focuses of the new plan, he highlighted e-training as a tool to offer introductory-level courses.  Beneficiaries could then advance their learning by participating in regional trade policy courses (RTPCs) at the intermediate level and specialization courses in Geneva.
On financial issues, he said that about Sw F 18 million had been received in 2008 for TA activities.  Approximately the same amount had been spent in the course of the year.  While the financial situation was therefore balanced, he indicated that it was a fragile balance.  For example, some activities had been delayed due to the late receipt of contributions.  He indicated in this regard that the Secretariat would continue to work with donors to ensure that contributions were made in a timely fashion.  He added that, in view of the TA Plan now being prepared on a biennial basis, the Secretariat had proposed that donors make their contributions on a biennial basis.  This would help the better planning of TA activities in the future.  In this connection, he was pleased to report that a number of donors had begun making biennial contributions.  He invited other donors to consider moving in the same direction.
He indicated that he wished to say a few words about requests for national TA activities.  In an effort to avoid any possible financial problems, it had been decided that national activities would be held during the first trimester of 2009, while regional activities would take place later in the year.  He explained that national activities were funded from the regular budget – which in any year became available on 1 January – while regional activities were funded from the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF).  While the implementation of national activities had already begun, he nevertheless encouraged Members that had not yet submitted their requests for such activities to do so as soon as possible.
Finally, he turned to the matter of coordination between agencies offering TA on trade issues.  He informed the Committee in this regard that a mechanism had been put in place in 2008 to allow agencies to dialogue on how to better coordinate their activities, avoid overlap and, where possible, undertake the joint implementation of activities.  The agencies had held an initial meeting in November 2008, and had agreed to meet on a regular basis.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that his delegation had requested three national activities in 2008.  These were in the areas of Services, TRIPS and Rules.  While the activities on Services and TRIPS had already been held, he requested the Secretariat to work to organize the Rules activity as soon as possible.  His delegation would communicate to the Secretariat its requests for national activities in 2009.  He added that a request had been made for the funding of an intern from Bangladesh to be attached to the WTO.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that TA must recognize the particular needs of individual countries in order to have maximum impact.  His delegation also wanted to see a better balance between national activities and regional activities.  In particular, Nigeria felt that more activities to help individual countries achieve the objectives that they had identified would be useful.  He supported the initiatives that were being put in place to ensure the timely receipt of contributions, which he hoped would allow activities to be held according to schedule and in the originally foreseen calendar year.
&& The representative of Kenya welcomed the efforts that were being made to improve the delivery and impact of TA.  His delegation hoped that these initiatives would be cost effective and would lead to more TA activities being held at both national and regional levels.  
&& The representative of China emphasized the importance of TA to developing countries.  He said that China had greatly benefited from the WTO's TA, and was committed to this form of assistance to developing countries.  He was pleased to say that – in the context of the Aid-for-Trade initiative – China had made a contribution of US$200,000, which was being channelled into the WTO's training activities.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 
&& The chairman said that he had been informed that consultations had led to the proposal for Ambassador Jean Feyder of Luxembourg to serve for another year as Chairman of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.  He asked whether this was acceptable to Members.
It was so agreed.
&& The chairman said that it was a great pleasure for him to welcome Ambassador Feyder to serve for another year as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  Ambassador Feyder had vast experience in development issues.  He was long responsible for development cooperation in his country, and this experience was valuable for the work of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs.  The numerous posts he had occupied in his career included Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the European Union and Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations in New York.  He currently served as Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Luxembourg to the United Nations Office, the International Organizations and the WTO in Geneva.
&& The chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs expressed appreciation to Members for the confidence they had placed in him.  He noted the extent to which the current financial and economic crisis was affecting LDCs, and in this regard called on Members' full participation in the work of the Sub-Committee.
&& The representative of Tanzania, on behalf of the LDC Group, welcomed Ambassador Feyder back as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  He expressed appreciation to those Members that had already taken steps to address the particular needs of the LDCs, and hoped that Members would intensify their attention on these needs.  
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE CTD 
&& The chairman said that the General Council at its meeting on 3 February had announced the Chairpersons for 2009.  It was with great pleasure that he had accepted to serve as Chairman of the CTD for another year.  He thanked Members for the confidence they had placed in him, and said that he would continue in his efforts to move forward the work of the CTD in Regular Session, the Dedicated Sessions on RTAs and on Small Economies, as well as the CTD's work on Aid for Trade.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Servansing as Chairman of the CTD for 2009.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The chairman said that he wished to inform the Committee of a letter that had been sent to him from the Chair of the General Council.  It was his understanding that a similar letter had been sent to the Chairs of all WTO Councils and Committees.  He said that in the letter, dated 26 February 2009, the General Council Chair recalled that the informal meeting of the Trade Policy Review Body (TPRB) held on 9 February 2009 had initiated a process of monitoring recent trade developments associated with the current global financial and economic crisis.  At that meeting, the then Chair of the TPRB had noted that if this exercise were to be carried out successfully and were to be useful to the WTO membership, the availability of comprehensive, accurate and timely information would be crucial.  The Chairman explained that it was in this context that the General Council Chair had invited him to consult with Members on improving the timeliness and completeness of notifications and other information flows on trade measures falling within the CTD's areas of work.
In this regard, and in terms of the recent work of the CTD, he highlighted the CTD as the body in which notifications under the Enabling Clause of RTAs and GSP schemes were made.  Newly-notified RTAs under the Enabling Clause were considered in Dedicated Sessions of the CTD on the basis of the provisions of the TM for RTAs.  In addition, the CTD was working towards fulfilling the General Council mandate concerning transparency for PTAs.  He also highlighted the standing item on the CTD's agenda concerning DFQF market access for LDCs, under which Members had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access for LDCs.  An annual review of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access also took place in the CTD.  He said that these were examples of transparency in the provision of information on trade measures.  His purpose in citing these examples was to encourage Members to provide to the Committee in a timely fashion information on any relevant trade measures which fell within the CTD's areas of work.  He said that he stood ready to hold any further discussions on the matter raised by the General Council Chair, should any Member so wish.  He added that interested Members should feel free to contact him on this matter.
&& The chairman moved on to the second matter that he wished to raise, which concerned the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  He said that it had been the CTD's practice to hold a discussion on this subject every two years or so.  On previous occasions when this item had been placed on the CTD's agenda, the Secretariat had updated its statistical background paper on the participation of developing countries in global trade, in order to assist Members in their discussion.  He noted that the last such discussion by the CTD on this subject had taken place in December 2007.  He proposed that the CTD have another discussion on the subject at its December 2009, for which the Secretariat would once again update its background paper using the most recent trade statistics. 
It was so agreed.  
The meeting was adjourned.

_______________
ANNEX I

INTERVENTION BY BRAZIL AT THE FIFTY-SECOND SESSION OF THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS (4 MARCH 2009)

	&& The representative of Brazil expressed his delegation's appreciation for the opportunity to share its views on this issue following the Chairman's consultations over the last months.  That process had resulted in the definition of procedures for the consideration of RTAs between WTO Members and non-Members in the context of the TM.  Brazil was aware that this issue touched upon important systemic considerations and was pleased that one of them, related to transparency, appeared to have been settled.
  
	The history of the matter was long and predated the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1947.  In February 1946, a Resolution of the United Nations Economic and Social Council had established a Preparatory Committee to discuss issues related to trade and production, exchange and consumption of goods, with a view to the creation of a United Nations Conference on Trade and Employment.  Based on a proposal from the United States for an International Trade Organization, the first session of the Preparatory Committee took place between October and November 1946 and had addressed, among other matters, preferential advantages extended to non-Members which would result in discrimination against the trade of any other Member of that future organization.  In that regard, the relevant parts of the report of the first session of the Preparatory Committee illustrated what had been happening for the past 60 years, and he quoted: "The Preparatory Committee considered Article 31 of the United States Draft Charter which is concerned with this subject but decided to leave the question for consideration at a later stage".  This might be telling of the great carefulness some delegations had been showing in discussing the issue of RTAs between the WTO Members and non-Members, but did not justify it.

	As a matter of fact, RTAs between WTO Members and non-Members existed, and they continued to be concluded and notified to the WTO.  In the last year alone, for example, 18 such agreements had been notified to the WTO Secretariat under the TM covering goods, services and other matters.  This should, in itself, be sufficient to prompt Members to engage in discussions and debate over these RTAs but, as pointed out, this had not been the case up until now.  

	&& Brazil welcomed the positive reception by Members of the procedures the Chairman had suggested for the consideration of RTAs involving non-Members under the TM.  This would enable Members to have a better understanding of such agreements and to evaluate their adequateness and usefulness vis-à-vis the developmental and economic integration-related objectives that had oriented the existence of RTAs from the beginning of the multilateral trading system.  The WTO's rules on RTAs provided disciplines that addressed RTAs concluded between WTO Members and non‑Members as well as those concluded exclusively between WTO Members.  Brazil understood that any consideration of RTAs between WTO Members and non-Members under the TM would not prejudice any rights and obligations of WTO Members nor the legal status of those agreements, including their compatibility with the WTO's rules on RTAs.
ANNEX II
INTERVENTION BY THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES AT THE FIFTY-SECOND SESSION OF THE COMMITTEE ON REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 
(4 MARCH 2009)


	&& The representative of the European Communities thanked the Chairman for his efforts in having arrived at an acceptable solution.  His delegation did not share the view expressed by Brazil and others particularly with reference to GATT Article XXIV:10.  This was not borne out by the GATT and its practice.  Differences among WTO Members and GATT Contracting Parties had existed in the past on this question, yet the approach that the Chairman had proposed was, in his delegation's view, meant to set aside this issue in view of the shared intention of the Committee to restart the consideration of RTAs involving non-Members under the TM.  The EC considered that the approach proposed by the Chairman was useful and pragmatic, and his delegation supported it.
__________
 && The intervention by Brazil can be found in Annex I of this Note. 
 && The intervention by the European Communities can be found in Annex II of this Note.
 As found in the Note on the meeting (WT/REG/M/52). 
 && Background note by the Secretariat "PARAGRAPH 10 OF ARTICLE XXIV OF THE GATT 1994" ‑ 26 April 2004, paragraph 7.
 As found in the Note on the meeting (WT/REG/M/52). 

WT/COMTD/M/73 Page  PAGE 20



	WT/COMTD/M/73 	Page  PAGE 19



 

 

 

 



