WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/28/Add.1
2 August 2000

(00-3174)

Committee on Trade and Development
Twenty-Eighth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 10 MARCH 2000

Chairperson:  H.E. Mrs. A.C. Diallo (Senegal)

Addendum


SPECIAL AND DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT:  REPORT BY CHAIRPERSON ON SEMINAR HELD ON 7 MARCH 2000
Please find below the note prepared on the Seminar by the Chairperson.

_______________


Note on Seminar on Special and Differential Treatment for Developing Countries
held at WTO on 7 March 2000


	The Seminar on Special and Differential Treatment for Developing Countries was held at the request of Members of the WTO Committee on Trade and Development (CTD).  The objective was to explore different facets of special and differential treatment (S&D), outside of a negotiating context, and outside of a formal session of the CTD in order both to allow a frank exchange of views on the issue and to provide an input into the Committee's consideration of the question.  Background material included WTO documents, material provided by other organizations and papers prepared by some panelists.  A copy of the programme is attached.

The seminar was divided into six sessions:  on the overview of S&D provisions in the WTO and their objectives;  on the role of GSP and other preferences; on the function of technical assistance as an element in S&D;  on the implementation of S&D under the main WTO Agreements;  on the relationship between S&D treatment and developing country reforms;  and finally, on the future of special and differential treatment.

	During the first session, the panelists discussed the origins of S&D provisions and their evolution since the introduction of the first such provision in 1955.  Waivers for non-reciprocal trading arrangements (e.g. Lomé, CBI, etc.), Generalized System of Trade Preferences (GSP), and the Enabling Clause were highlighted as having been some of the main initiatives over the years.  It was pointed out that there had been a shift in attitudes towards S&D over time, especially between the Tokyo and the Uruguay Rounds.  Some argued that the realization that S&D had not yielded many tangible results had led developing countries to accept a dilution of S&D provisions in return for improved market access to developed country markets.  Others claimed that since existing S&D provisions were not legally enforceable and had not been properly put into effect, it was not possible to determine whether S&D as a concept had succeeded or failed.  In addition, it was argued, many possible S&D benefits had been outweighed by losses due to protectionist arrangements of developed countries in the agriculture and textiles sectors. Any evaluation or rethinking of S&D provisions needed to be addressed in its historical and political context, rather than in a purely legalistic manner. Apart from a discussion of existing S&D provisions, some called for new arrangements for small and vulnerable economies.

In the second session, it was argued that given the large and widening disparities in income levels between developed and developing economies and the higher levels of protection that still existed on items of export interest to the developing countries, GSP as well as other forms of preferential trade arrangements were still of major importance.  In 1997 about $100 billion worth of imports into developed countries had benefitted from GSP schemes while levels of domestic and foreign direct investment in developing countries had in many regions remained insufficient to spur growth.  Problems with GSP included the gradual erosion of preferences due to overall tariff liberalization as well as the complexity and unpredictability of the country schemes.  Measures such as extending the scope of the schemes, relaxing their rules of origin, and complementing them with other supply-side policies were mentioned as means of improving the functioning of GSP.  There was a clear trend towards reciprocal preferential trading arrangements between developed countries and developing countries and non-reciprocal ones between developed countries and LDCs.  GSP would remain attractive for those countries which were not covered by these other schemes.  Some participants in the seminar pointed out that one should not to be misled by aggregate results and figures but rather focus on particular needs of countries at different levels of development.  For example, it was not LDCs but rather middle-income countries that stood to gain from GSP.

The third session opened with a review of the technical assistance (TA) activities of the WTO, which had expanded considerably since 1995 (from 79 activities in 1995 to 382 in 1999), and 90 per cent of which were now financed through extra-budgetary contributions.  Not only had the number of activities per year increased but also the diversity of the subjects covered.  Modes of assistance had varied from traditional national or regional seminars and workshops to more recent courses using IT-based training instruments.  It was a commonly held view that the upcoming review of the technical assistance programme needed to address two main issues to enhance effectiveness: developing a coherent and systematic approach and securing a more predictable and sustainable financial base.  Some participants in the seminar proposed that networks of regional groups, as well as contributions from recipient countries within the limits of their resources, could be used to facilitate TA activities.  It was pointed out that TA was the least controversial of all S&D measures as it did not require any trade preferences or concessions.  The objective was to assist developing countries in the implementation of the agreements they had already signed on to.  Some argued that "soft" TA needed to be complemented by "hard" modes of assistance, such as trade-related infrastructure support.  The Integrated Framework, which was meant to address some of these concerns, still had conceptual as well as coordination problems.

	In the fourth session, it was stressed that, with the introduction of new rules for world trade under the Uruguay Round Agreements, the nature of S&D provisions had changed - from an emphasis on preferential market access and non-reciprocity to a greater focus on transition periods, transfer of technology, and capacity-building to assist developing countries in integration into the trading system.  A number of participants said that S&D provisions must address, concretely, the difficulties faced by developing countries in integration - difficulties which might stem from such things as the size or trade sera of the country, administrative shortfalls including availability of trained personnel, or sectoral constraints.  It was also argued that developing countries, being heterogeneous, did not necessarily fall into clearcut groups and that similar problems might overlap currently accepted categories of developing countries.  Some participants also emphasised that, if S&D provisions were to be of value, they should be expressed in legally binding commitments, rather than in ambiguous terms as at present.

	In the fifth session, differing views on the adjustment process were expressed.  On the one hand, economic reform and adjustment were necessary, essential conditions for economic growth and for successful integration into the world economy.  It was suggested that S&D provisions had been counterproductive to the extent that they had delayed adjustment and encouraged the maintenance of policies that favoured the interests of narrow, special interest groups.  On the other hand, others saw an need for policy flexibility in developing countries, given differences in economic conditions and endowments, as well as the existence of market failures that, in the absence of corrective action, could lead to misallocation of resources.  Participants did not agree on the role of subsidies in the economy, whether as a spur to development or as a source of waste and inefficiency.

	In the sixth and final session, some participants recalled the non-discriminatory basis of the multilateral trading system and recognized the tension between this principle and observed inequalities among WTO Members.  Some believed that, rather than addressing these inequalities, the experience of S&D treatment was that it had increased them. Certain aspects of S&D, such as non-reciprocal preferences, had not been notably successful in all cases in promoting development and economic integration.  The debate again turned around the questions of how S&D might be more closely calibrated to the situation of individual developing countries and how far policy flexibility could be a useful tool for promoting development.  One major developed market Ambassador, as a panellist, outlined proposals that his delegation were considering for early action in the fields of market access for LDCs and capacity building for developing countries in general.

	The closing remarks made by Mr Ablassé Ouedraogo, Deputy Director-General of the WTO, are being distributed separately and have also been placed on the WTO web site.
Seminar on Special and Differential Treatment for Developing Countries
Organized under the auspices of the WTO Committee on Trade and Development

7 March 2000

Programme

	The objective of the seminar is to explore different facets of special and differential treatment, outside of a negotiating context, and outside of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) in order both to allow a frank exchange of views on the issue and to provide an input into the Committee's consideration of the question.

	Participation is open to WTO Members and Observers and to Inter-Governmental Organizations with observer status in the CTD


Welcome: 	Mr. A. Ouedraogo, Deputy Director-General

09:30-10:45 First Session:  Overview of S&D provisions and their objectives
	The session would review the origins of special and differential treatment, as well as the various WTO provisions.  How firm is the legal basis?  To what extent are these simply "best endeavours"?
Chair:		Amb. A.C. Diallo (Senegal), Chairperson of the Committee on Trade and Development
Panelists:	Mr. E. Kessie (WTO), Mr. B. Gosovic (South Centre), Amb. R. Smith (Jamaica).
Background material:  Secretariat paper for 1999 HLS on Trade and Development.  E. Kessie, Analysis of the Legal Provisions relating to Special and Differential Treatment under WTO Agreements (mimeo).

10:45-11:45 Second Session:  GSP and other forms of preferences and their future
	The session would look at the importance of GSP and other forms of preferences.  What are its limitations? Who are the beneficiaries?  How much value has the system been?  How does GSP compare with other forms of preferences?  Is there a tendency for preference systems to evolve towards reciprocal trade agreements?
Chair:		Amb. N. Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)
Panelists:	Mr. B. Onguglo (UNCTAD), Mrs. S. Page (ODI), Ms S. Rudder (Barbados).
Background material: B. Onguglo, Developing Countries and Trade Preferences, in M. Rodriguez Mendoza, P. Low and B. Kotschwar, Trade Rules in the Making, Organization of American States and Brookings Institution Press, Washington DC.

11:45-13:00 Third Session:  Technical Assistance as S&D
	The session would look at technical assistance needs, including training, trade facilitation and infrastructure? What is most effective? How can TA be best delivered? What are the roles of different agencies?  How can coordination be improved?
Chair:		Mr. O. Genee (Netherlands)
Panelists:	Mr. S. Delgado (WTO), Amb. E. Custodio (Philippines), Mr. M.A. Mannan (Bangladesh).
Background material: WTO Programme for Technical Cooperation, Note by the WTO Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/64 of 15 October 1999), Report on Technical Cooperation and Training, Note by the WTO Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/62 of 6 May 1999).

13:00-14:30 Lunch break									


14:30-15:30 Fourth Session:  Implementation of S&D under key WTO Agreements
	The session would cover the difficulties of implementation by developing countries and experience of application by trading partners (for example, in agriculture, anti-dumping, customs valuation, dispute settlement).  What are the problems and how can they be resolved?
Chair:		Amb. C.L. Guarda (Chile)
Panelists:	Mr. C. Stevens (Institute of Development Studies), Amb. F. Cuello Camilo (Dominican Republic), Amb. S. Narayanan (India).
Background material: Concerns Regarding Special and Differential Treatment Provisions in WTO Agreement and Decisions,  Note by the WTO Secretariat (WT/COMTD/W/66 of 15 February 2000.

15:30-16:30 Fifth Session:  Impact of S&D and developing country economic reforms
	The session would cover the relationship between S&D and reforms being undertaken by developing countries, autonomously or to comply with international obligations.  To what extent do S&D provisions contribute to or detract from reform programmes? 
Chair:		Amb. K. Rana (Kenya)
Panelists:	Mr R. Sharer (IMF), Mr B. Bora (UNCTAD), Amb. W. Corrales Leal (Venezuela).
Background material: Special and Differential Treatment and the Spaces for Policies in WTO:  Two Elements of the Development Dimension in the Multilateral Trading System, Proposal under Paragraphs 9 and 10 of the Geneva Ministerial Declaration, Communication from Venezuela (WT/GC/W/279 of 29 July 1999).  M. Gibbs, Special and Differential Treatment in the Context of Globalization, note presented to the G15 Symposium on S&D Treatment in the WTO Agreements, New Delhi, 10 December 1998.


16:30-17:30 Sixth Session:  The Future of Special and Differential Treatment 
	The session would cover various aspects of S&D, and its future.  Is there a case for the development of economic indicators for the application of S&D?
Chair:		Amb. G. Raby (Australia)
Panelists:	Mr. C. Michalopoulos (World Bank), Amb. A. Akram (Pakistan), Amb. D. Baichoo (Mauritius), Amb. R. Abbott (European Commission).
Background material: C. Michalopoulos, Trade and Development in the GATT and WTO: The Role of Special and Differential Treatment for Developing Countries, mimeo.

17:30- 17:45 Closing Remarks:  Amb. A.C. Diallo,  Mr. A. Ouedraogo, Deputy Director-General

__________



 Job No. 1554.

WT/COMTD/M/28/Add.1 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/28/Add.1 	Page  PAGE 5













