WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/40
26 June 2002

(02-3551)

Committee on Trade and Development
Fortieth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 25 APRIL 2002

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Toufiq Ali (Bangladesh)

Subjects discussed:

 TOC \o "1-8" A.	ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA	 PAGEREF _TOC12782191 \H 2
B.	OBSERVERS	 PAGEREF _TOC12782192 \H 2
(i)	Request for attendance for ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc12782193 \h 2
(ii)	Further Consideration of request for observer status by League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc12782194 \h 2
C.	TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING	 PAGEREF _TOC12782195 \H 2
(i)	Progress Report on the Implementation of the Coordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan 2002 (WT/COMTD/W/95/Rev.3)	 PAGEREF _Toc12782196 \h 2
(ii)	Report on the Pledging Conference	 PAGEREF _Toc12782197 \h 2
(iii)	Statement by the Chairman of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration in Relation to the Coordinated Implementation of the Technical Assistance Plan	 PAGEREF _Toc12782198 \h 9
(iv)	Report on the 2001 Activities of the Training Institute (WT/COMTD/W/96)	 PAGEREF _Toc12782199 \h 10
(v)	Technical Cooperation Audit Report 2001 (WT/COMTD/W/97)	 PAGEREF _Toc12782200 \h 14
D.	CONSIDERATION OF ARTICLE XVIII AS MANDATED BY PARAGRAPH 12 OF THE DOHA MINISTERIAL DECLARATION (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1), THE DECISION ON IMPLEMENTATION-RELATED ISSUES AND CONCERNS (WT/MIN(01)/17), AND IN CONJUNCTION WITH TIRET 3 OF JOB(01)/152/REV.1 OF 27 OCTOBER 2001	 PAGEREF _TOC12782201 \H 18
E.	REPORT OF THE SEMINAR ON REVENUE IMPLICATIONS OF E-COMMERCE	 PAGEREF _TOC12782202 \H 20
F.	REPORT ON THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT	 PAGEREF _TOC12782203 \H 20
G.	PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED	 PAGEREF _TOC12782204 \H 21
H.	ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE FOR LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	 PAGEREF _TOC12782205 \H 23
I.	OTHER BUSINESS	 PAGEREF _TOC12782206 \H 24
ANNEX I	 PAGEREF _Toc12782207 \h 25
ANNEX II	 PAGEREF _Toc12782208 \h 27

ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA
&& The Chairman indicated that the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in airgram WTO/AIR/1758/Rev.1 of 19 April 2002.  
The agenda was adopted.

OBSERVERS
Request for attendance for ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD), it had been agreed that the following intergovernmental organizations be invited on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the Organisation of African Unity (OAU);  Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the South Pacific Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).  He proposed that those organisations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.  
It was so agreed.
Further Consideration of request for observer status by League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman said that at the last few meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of  outstanding requests for observer status.  They came from the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and from the Common Fund for Commodities.  The positions of delegations were well-known and on the record.  Unless there had been any recent change of position, he proposed that the Committee revert to those requests its next formal meeting.  
It was so agreed.

TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Progress Report on the Implementation of the Coordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan 2002 (WT/COMTD/W/95/Rev.3)
Report on the Pledging Conference
Deputy Director General Mr. Ravier said that he would give the third update by the Secretariat on the implementation of the WTO Secretariat TA Plan for 2002 authorized by Members of the CTD on 6 March 2002.  The update would focus on nine points of importance for WTO Members in general and technical assistance (TA) beneficiaries in particular.
The first related to the Pledging Conference.  The outcome of the WTO Pledging Conference  held on 11 March 2002, had been positive and signficant.  Donors had kept their word to commit themselves to provide predictable funding.  It was also important to highlight the role that the Conference had had in facilitating a policy dialogue among Members and multilateral agencies to better coordinate their technical cooperation activities with the mandates from the Doha Development Agenda.  A full report had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/37.  The Pledging Conference held in March 2002 was the first of its kind.  It would be an annual event in the future.  At each annual event, the occasion would combine the pledging of contributions with maintaining the necessary policy dialogue on how to improve the design and delivery of WTO trade-related TA.  
His second point concerned the implementation of the 2002 Technical Assistance Plan.  Implementation of the Plan was progressing at a reasonable rhythm even if it was somewhat slower than the Secretariat wished.  As of 25 April 2002, a total of 150 activities had been undertaken, totalling 23 per cent of planned activities.  That was somewhat below the expected rate as the date of 25 April corresponded to approximately one third of the year.  However, with the filling of the WTO Secretariat positions opened in the L-series which would be recruited according to a fast-track procedure, the Secretariat would be able to step up the delivery of TA activities in the second half of the year and be better equipped to meet the ambitious targets established in the 2002 TA Plan.  The Secretariat had been invited by Members in the Negotiating Group on Non-Agricultural Market Access, and the Working Group on Trade and Investment to report on TA activities underway and those envisaged, and how they would contribute to the ongoing negotiations and the different work programmes.  Members of those bodies had expressed a reasonable degree of satisfaction with WTO TA.  The rate of implementation was critically dependent on the extent to which beneficiary countries provide fixed, reliable dates for activities to be delivered in their countries.  Frequently, dates were not given on time, and scheduled dates were moved, dislocating the timely delivery of planned activities.
As a third point, he informed the Committee that the Technical Assistance Management Committee (TAMC) had established a LAN-based format for monitoring the rate of the implementation of the TA Plan, and harmonizing and institutionalising back-to-office reports.  WTO back-to-office-reports would remain  internal to the Secretariat, but Members would have the right to know the rate of implementation.  
His fourth point concerned the training component in WTO TA Activities.  Recently, some of the beneficiaries had been weighing the relative merits of WTO seminars and technical workshops, on the one hand, vis-à-vis more in-depth training, on the other. Members had recognized and accepted the indispensable value of WTO seminars and national technical workshops.  All the seminars and workshops in the TA Plan had been requested by the beneficiary countries.  However, beneficiary countries had also conveyed that they wished to see an increase and strengthening of the training component in WTO TA activities.  The Secretariat was responding positively to that request.  There was a strong and growing training component in WTO TA coming broadly from (a) the regular and short trade policy courses conducted by the Training Institute, in Geneva, listed in document WT/COMTD/W/89/Rev.1;  and, (b) the training activities (mainly of two to three weeks duration) in the agreed TA Plan (WT/COMTD/W/95/Rev.3), which were held outside Geneva.  The training component in the 2002 TA Plan totalled approximately 17 activities.
His fifth point was related to the Doha Development Agenda Training for Senior Policy Makers.  To further consolidate the training component as part of the agreed TA activities, and to concretely respond to the need expressed by Members, the Technical Cooperation Division was elaborating on Annex I of the TA Plan.  The Technical Cooperation Division had worked closely with Senior Management on that design. 
&& Deputy Director-General Miguel Rodriguez-Mendoza, who had worked on the design of the intensive training courses for senior policy makers, said that Annex I of the TA Plan called for the initiation of a training programme on the Doha negotiations.  The programme focussed on the training of trade negotiators of WTO Members and Observers from developing countries and economies in transition specifically on the issues central to the Doha Development Agenda.  The main purpose was to strengthen those countries effective participation in the Doha negotiations and work programme through policy analysis and a deepened understanding of the issues involved.  The Secretariat was in the process of implementing that programme which was complementary to other TA and capacity building activities included in the Annual TA Plan.  The Secretariat was planning to conduct a series of two-week training activities on the Doha negotiations and Work Programme for government officials with responsibility in the Doha negotiations.  The programme took into account the experience of a successful course that the WTO, together with the Organization of American States and the Georgetown University, had been conducting for the past five years.  The Secretariat attempted to replicate that experience in other regions as part of the mandate for TA and capacity building adopted by the Ministers at Doha.  The purpose of that programme was not to focus on an explanation of the WTO Agreements, but rather to concentrate on the Doha negotiating issues.  In that sense, it was a pilot activity devoted to increasing the understanding of the negotiating issues and proposals, and to facilitate the participation of developing countries in the debate.  To achieve that task, the Secretariat was not only counting on the expertise of its own staff, but also on that of independent experts and resource persons from the various regions.  The Advanced Training Programme the Secretariat was working on would be implemented in two phases.  In a first phase, the Secretariat contemplated to organize up to eight training activities.  Two in Africa, two in Asia, two in Latin American and the Caribbean, one in Transition Economies and one for Arab countries.  That first phase would cover the period from April 2002 to the Mexico Ministerial Conference.  In the second phase of the programme, which extended between the Mexico Ministerial and the end of the negotiations, the intention was to organize a second set of training activities in all the regions involved.  Although financing for those activities was secured by the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund, the Secretariat was in the process of contacting some regional organizations, including regional development banks, as well as some academic institutions in the various regions to make the courses a joint effort by the institutions concerned.  In preparation for those activities, he had been in touch with a number of delegations.  Specifically, he had met with the African countries, with the CARICOM countries, with the CEFTA+ group and with China, and it was his intention to continue the dialogue with other developing country Members to get their insights and advise as to how to make the activities meaningful, and actually to strengthen the participation of developing countries in the negotiations.  He had received support and enthusiasm for the programme from the countries concerned, and would keep the CTD informed of further developments regarding the implementation of the training activity. 
&& Deputy Director General Mr. Ravier continued with his sixth point relating to ownership through self-financing participants.  He underscored the necessity for increased beneficiary ownership in WTO TA.  Ownership could be expressed in various ways.  It had to be recognized that WTO training and TA activities were integral parts of human resources development (HRD), a key component of national economic development.  WTO delivery of training and TA could only be a supplement to the necessary national expenditures for HRD.  One was not a substitute for the other.  In that regard, he was pleased to report that some delegations were considering self-financing the participation of government officials in selected WTO training activities.  That was a welcome development since it would give a greater degree of ownership.  He recommended it to other delegations who were in a position to do so.  He said that he wished to re-emphasise a point mentioned in a previous update;  it was necessary for TA beneficiaries to also include their TA priorities and demands either in their Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) or in their national plans for economic development.  PRSPs were the basis for World Bank and International Monetary Fund policy lending and grant support.  It was important to know that trade-related TA activities and priorities were integral to national development plans, and should be reflected as such in those plans and/or strategies for poverty reduction.  
The seventh point related to regional development banks.  The WTO Secretariat was continuing its collaboration with regional and sub-regional organizations;  the Director-General had convened a meeting with the Heads of Regional Development Banks, on 3 May 2002 at the WTO.  It would begin with a private meeting between the Director-General and the Heads of the Regional Development Banks, Memoranda of Understanding would then be signed, followed by a Press Conference.  After short presentations by the Heads of the Regional Development Banks, there would be an interactive session in the form of a dialogue between the Heads of the Regional Development Banks and WTO Members on the theme:  "Developing Partnerships: Cooperation Between Regional Development Banks and the WTO in Responding to Capacity-Building Needs of the Doha Development Agenda".  That seminar would be an opportunity to further develop joint activities in beneficiary countries to implement the Doha Development Agenda. 
The 4th "Geneva Week" was the eighth topic.  It had begun on 21 April 2002 and was underway with full participation and high quality presentations.  Non-Resident participants were currently attending the meeting of the CTD.  He urged Members to interact with the Geneva Week participants to the fullest extent possible.  In 2002 there would be two Geneva Weeks: the 4th Geneva Week, currently underway, and the 5th Geneva Week, scheduled for October.  The Geneva Weeks were financed from the WTO regular budget.  
The last point was on the WTO TA Plan for 2003 on which the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division would speak.
&& Mr. Chiedu Osakwe, Director, Technical Cooperation Division said that the Secretariat had initiated the process for designing the WTO TA Plan for 2003.  2001 and 2002 were transitional years in WTO technical cooperation.  A far-reaching re-organization had been undertaken in 2001 of both the structure of the Technical Cooperation Division and the elaboration of the New Strategy.  Post‑Doha, in interaction with Members in the CTD, the architecture of the WTO TA Plan had been significantly changed and Members had assisted the Secretariat in designing the 7 pillars of the Secretariat response to the TC mandates in the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  However, there had been a considerable rush and the work had been done under pressure.  It was the intention of the Secretariat to present a draft TA Plan for 2003 to the CTD after the summer break.  To that end, the Secretariat wished to invite Members and Observers to submit their requests for TA for 2003 to the Technical Cooperation Division before the end of July 2002.  The requests received would be processed on the basis of consultations with the requesting countries.  Requests should include clear indications of venue, for both regional and national activities, and dates.  The Secretariat had began early as one of the difficult challenges that the Secretariat had faced in the implementation of earlier TA Plans was inability to plan ahead because of the late receipt of requests.  Forward planning would assist the Secretariat, Members and Observers to limit ad hoc requests.  While the Secretariat had kept ad hoc requests in the 2002 Plan to a minimum, the intention was to hold it to zero in the 2003 Plan, except in the most exceptional of circumstances.  Ad hoc requests had had a damaging effect on WTO TA Plans and had affected implementation and delivery of agreed activities.  
A similar invitation and message would be extended to partner organizations and agencies.  The Secretariat would be asking them to inform the Secretariat of any invitations they intended to extend to the WTO Secretariat, asking for resource persons, for their programmes and activities in 2003.  The WTO Secretariat needed to immediately plan for them.  In the past few years, the Secretariat had received many invitations from other international agencies, both at the multilateral and regional level, inviting the WTO Secretariat to participate by providing resource persons.  Most of the programmes and activities of many international organizations were essentially focussed on the work of the WTO.  However, many of the invitations were received at the last minute and classified as urgent.  The WTO Secretariat treated those invitations as TA as they could not be classified as anything else in the WTO budget.  To be able to respond to them, the Secretariat had to plan ahead.  Unlike previous years, the Secretariat would not be able to respond positively if it did not plan well in advance.  Members were invited to provide the Secretariat with any ideas they might have, for improving on the design and the architecture of the WTO TA Plan.  He thanked Members for assistance given with the Plan currently under implementation.  If delegations had further ideas at a conceptual level, the Secretariat would be happy to receive them with a view to improve the quality of WTO TA.
&& Deputy Director General Mr. Ravier said that he wished to say a few words on the recent initiative of the Director-General, as set out in his communication of 4 April 2002 to all Geneva-based ambassadors.  That initiative proposed the holding of parallel three-month trade policy courses in English in Nairobi and in French in Rabat.  The programme of those courses would be substantially the same as that of the residential courses run by the WTO Training Institute in Geneva.  The first series of courses was intended for officials from African countries.  Should the experience prove positive, it could be extended to other parts of the world.  The project was a joint undertaking with the respective universities of those two cities.  The courses would, insofar as it was possible, not be given by WTO officials, but by various experts selected from amongst retired GATT and WTO officials, and among experts proposed by Members in response to an invitation from the Director-General, or from experts put forward by the host institutions or donors within the framework of project financing.  He pointed out that the project was an addition to and fell outside both the "normal" activities of WTO Training Institute, of which the Committee had already been informed at a previous meeting, and the consolidated technical assistance programme under the Doha Trust Fund.  It was an additional, and as yet unfunded, activity.  Neither did it replace any other scheduled activities of which Members had been informed.
&& The representative of the European Communities asked whether the Secretariat could expand on some of the basic parameters of the delivery of TA, in particular with respect to paragraph 2 of the Coordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan 2002, in which the coordination with well-defined inter-agency groups and multilateral agencies was mentioned.  At the end of small roman (i) of paragraph 2 there was a commitment to inform the Membership of partnerships under negotiation in the many areas where the WTO was not the best placed to deliver TA.  Although there seemed to be progress with regional banks, he asked how contacts with other agencies had evolved as there were many other international organizations or agencies with which the WTO should cooperate.  He also requested additional information on the in-house coordination, and especially with respect to how the TAMC had functioned.  That information would be useful in ensuring that some of the themes in the plan were being followed up in a manner which met the expectations of the Members.  Nevertheless, his delegation was pleased with the numerous initiatives that had been elaborated on.
&& The representative of Mauritania said that WTO TA was evolving in the right direction.  It was important to intensify and enlarge the content of the WTO TA activities.  The requests made for more innovative TA than the usual seminars seemed to have been taken into account.  The improved programming and evaluation mechanisms of WTO TA were also welcome.  His delegation thanked all the donors who had contributed to the Doha Development Agenda Trust Fund.  The communications sent a political message that all delegations and the Secretariat had to work together in order for current hopes to materialize.
&& The representative of Uganda said that his delegation was pleased with the direction WTO TA activities were taking.  He agreed that the short time-frame for planning had made it difficult for the Secretariat to include elements of the Doha Development Agenda into the 2002 TA Plan.  Advance preparations for the 2003 Plan were welcome and he urged other Members to take advantage of that.  Although there were problems with the Integrated Framework (IF), there was the idea to extend it to other countries.  He said that his delegation saw a problem with such an extension as the IF still was a pilot scheme.  Before a pilot scheme could be extended it had to be ensured that it was effective and working.  He therefore asked the Secretariat to explain the future plans in that regard as the LDCs were getting worried that in an attempt to widen the scope of the IF, its effectiveness might be lost even before it had been perfected.
&& The representative of Barbados said that it was critical to plan ahead in the design of TA plans.  It was not the least important for beneficiaries to articulate their requirements at an early stage and her Government would attempt to meet the deadlines set.  However, she urged that it not be forgotten that situations constantly evolved and that a certain level of flexibility therefore had to be included in all programmes and plans designed.  She did not urge for ad-hocism but for some flexibility.  There should be a preparedness to respond to the needs of developing countries as those needs became apparent.  She welcomed the information regarding the training activities for senior government officials.  It was important to ensure that new initiatives were sustained into the future.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that his Government profited to a large extent from WTO TA.  A seminar on services had been organized in September 2001 for the LDCs and another was being prepared for on trade and environment for September 2002.  He asked whether the Secretariat could consider prolonging the seminars which lasted for less than one week as it was impossible to understand the WTO system in just three days.  So short seminars used donor money which could be better spent, and implied lost time for Secretariat staff.  The participants would not get a result out of it which corresponded to their needs either.  The last seminar in Djibouti had lasted three days with about forty participants.  He asked whether these participants really had obtained a knowledge which corresponded to their needs.  On the contrary, the three week courses for LDC officials gave satisfactory results as did the three months courses.
&& The representative of Morocco said that that his delegation was pleased that Nairobi and Rabat had been chosen as the cities in which courses would be organized.  That was an innovative initiative which would have large value added.  A certain level of expertise in the organization of short-term training courses had been acquired in his country.  A successful national seminar had recently been held (15‑19 April 2002).  His Government would not spare any effort to make the new initiative successful as concerned the new logistical and administrative steps to be taken.
&& The representative of the United States asked whether the Secretariat could provide delegations with a general idea of the type of activities included in the 23 per cent of the forecasted activities that had been undertaken.  That would give delegations a better idea of progress in the implementation.
&& The representative of Malaysia said that WTO TA were implemented more smoothly when supported by funding.  She welcomed the Secretariat's intention to developed the TA Plan for 2003 by the end of 2002.  That Plan could hopefully address some concerns raised with respect to the 2002 Plan, such as better country and regional distribution of TA activities and a balancing of the unmet needs from 2002 by including them in the 2003 Plan.  She wished to hear more about the proposal for a two-faced training of trade negotiators programme.  In light of the dynamism of the negotiations, an intensive first phase of the programme, before the Mexico Ministerial Conference, could provide benefits as the skills acquired could be utilized during the remaining part of the negotiations, in particular after the Mexico Ministerial Conference.
&& Deputy Director General Mr. Ravier proposed that the Secretariat would make a report to the next meeting of the CTD on cooperation with other international organizations as a number of precise pieces of information could be provided.  With respect to internal Secretariat coordination he said that a Technical Cooperation Management Committee (TAMC) had existed for almost a year.  The TAMC met once a month and comprised the relevant directors and one representative of each substantive Division as WTO TA activities increasingly were carried out by the substantive divisions and not by the Technical Cooperation Division.  Those meetings were productive.  As information was exchanged, it was a learning process for all involved.  It permitted to keep the coordinated character of TA between the activities, information, follow-up, audit and financing of all WTO TA.
Mr. Chiedu Osakwe, Director, Technical Cooperation Division confirmed that there was no intention to extend the IF beyond the 49 LDCs.  That position had been taken by the heads of agencies in paragraph 7 of their Communiqué of 26 February 2002.  However, there were several non-LDCs which had asked for the model of the IF to be applied to the assistance they received.  Those Governments considered that the totality of their trade development needs would be better met by the agencies working jointly on the basis of the IF concept.  The agencies were considering applying the concept to other countries.  As they had received specific requests in that regard, there was a favourable disposition in the agencies to do so.  The reason was also that the Members had asked the agencies to coordinate better, to seek coherence and to be complementary in the way they responded to the priority needs of non LDCs as well as LDCs.  It was no question of a simple extension of the IF, nor would the resources of the Trust Fund be applied to non LDCs.  What was considered was an extension of the application of the concept.
He went on to say that he shared the view that there had to be some flexibility in the delivery of WTO TA, and there would be a certain degree of flexibility.  However, flexibility was not another name for ad-hocism.  That there would be flexibility did not mean that ad-hoc requests would be accommodated.  The CARICOM had approached the Secretariat to readjust by replacing some of the activities earlier suggested by new projects.  There was a flood of requests from different organizations to the WTO Secretariat.  The WTO Secretariat therefore needed to be rigorous and disciplined in its responses in order to be able to deliver on the commitments made in a manner that would be qualitatively satisfactory.  With respect to cooperation with other agencies, he said that the WTO had a good working relationship with several agencies such as UNCTAD, UNEP, ITC, WCO and had an active dialogue with UNIDO, OECD and some others.  The challenge was to find appropriate co-financing arrangements.  He did not believe that there was any expectation that the WTO would be funding the totality of the costs out of the Doha Development Agenda Trust Fund for activities with other agencies.  Discussions with other agencies were ongoing.  The issue of the length of seminars had to be looked at in its totality in response to the requests.  With respect to the type of activities delivered so far in 2002 he said that they covered all themes in the Plan.
&& The Chairman said that the Committee had received good information on the technical cooperation and training programmes undertaken by the WTO Secretariat.  It was important that the WTO Secretariat responded to the Members-driven agenda in terms of technical cooperation and capacity building.  There were a number of observations from the floor pointing to the need to look at the issue of capacity building beyond TA per se.  The medium and long term perspectives of capacity building had to be considered in addition to the seminars and  workshops which were valuable in the short run.
&& The representative of Canada recalled the comment made earlier with respect to sustainability both in terms of funding, and more so in terms of the capacity of the WTO Secretariat.  Additional valuable creative outreach activities were being added.  However, the agenda of other activities delivered was large and it was a question of bearing in mind that at some point the organization might have to turn requests down.
&& The Chairman said that he did not believe that the funds available to the WTO Secretariat always permitted it to respond to every request made.  A selection had to be made.
&& The Chairman said that he believed that the comments would be taken into account as the WTO Secretariat designed its programme of TA for 2003.
&& The Committee took note of the reports and the comments made.
Statement by the Chairman of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration in Relation to the Coordinated Implementation of the Technical Assistance Plan
&& The Chairman said that as many of the technical cooperation activities under the Co-ordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan were financed through a new Global Trust Fund, the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration (CBFA) and the CTD were jointly responsible for the execution of the Plan and keeping the spending commitments under periodic review.  A report would therefore be given by Mr. Neil McMillan, who was the Chairman of CBFA.
Mr.Neil McMillan, Chairman of the CBFA, said that it was worth recalling that at its meeting held on 19-20 December 2001, the General Council had approved the terms of reference of the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF) contained in the report of the CBFA (WT/BFA/56).  In particular, the General Council had approved a target of CHF 15 million for the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund for 2002.  Three miles-stones were attached to that amount in terms of the payment of the funds into the WTO Secretariat Bank Account.  An amount equivalent to:
	-	25 per cent of that target (i.e. CHF 3.75 million) should have been deposited into WTO bank account by the end of 2001;

-	75 per cent (i.e. CHF 11.25 million) should have been deposited by the end of March 2002;  and the aim was for 

-	100 per cent (i.e. CHF 15 million) to be deposited at the end of June 2002.

In addition, a buffer account of CHF 1 million was created out of the 2000 WTO budget surplus to cover temporary shortfalls in the Trust Fund in case contributions did not keep pace with activities’ expenses.  The monitoring of the achievements of those mile-stones were jointly entrusted to the CTD and the Budget Committee.  Since then, the CTD had approved the Co-ordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan for 2002 (WT/COMTD/W/95/Rev.3) and the Secretariat had estimated the total cost of that Plan at CHF 17.3 million, after deduction of an ambitious amount of cost sharing (CHF 5 million) with other institutions, including UNCTAD and a number of regional development banks.
The pledging conference held on 11 March had produced an unprecedented level of pledges from Members.  At that conference, donors had announced pledges totalling CHF 21.2 million to the Trust Fund for 2002 and a further CHF 3.7 million of earmarked contributions.  Those figures included transfers of existing funds to the Trust Fund, but not those funds for which the Secretariat had no instructions from Donors to date in terms of a transfer into the Trust Fund.  As the decision taken in December 2001 made clear, where such funds can be used to support the new Trust Funds' activities, they would so be used.  Thus, there was scope for the use of funds which were heavily earmarked still to support the objectives of the Trust Fund overall.  The downside of the otherwise rosy situation was that funds had been slow in reaching the WTO bank account.  In March 2002, the Secretariat had to use up to 80 per cent of the buffer account to cover expenses and commitments which it had already been undertaking according to the Plan.  The balance of the Trust Fund was back in the black and the buffer account replenished.  The 75 per cent target for receipt at the end of March had been missed.  The Trust Fund had by the end of March only received CHF 5.3 million of contributions instead of the target level of CHF 11.25 million as mandated in the General Council’s decision.  That was against a level of pledges which was almost 50 per cent higher than the target of CHF 15 million initially agreed by Members.  According to the General Council Decision, it was for the CTD and the CBFA to closely supervise whether those benchmarks had been met.  Furthermore, when contribution receipt targets were manifestly not met, it was for those to bodies to report to the General Council and for them to meet on an urgent basis to discuss the matter.  He would therefore convey the same message to the meeting of the General Council on 14 and 15 May 2002.  By 17 April 2002, the total new funds had risen to 7.9 billion and further contributions had been received from Ireland and Estonia, which brought the total receipts of the Trust Fund up to CHF 8.4 million.  Document WT/BFA/SPEC/73 would be reissued with any further updates for the meeting of the General Council.  If there were imminent payments which Members wished to bring to the attention of the Secretariat, not reflected in the document, he encouraged Members to inform the Secretariat.
As a personal final comment he said that the contributions had fallen short of what the Membership collectively had agreed in December 2001 to pay into the account of the Trust Fund.  It was understandable that delays occurred in turning pledges into actual payments.  However, he recalled that all had agreed when adopting the decision in the General Council to an ambitious set of benchmarks, with the aim of all funds being remitted to the Secretariat by end of June 2002.  The reason was that there was a link drawn in the Doha Ministerial Declaration between the availability of TA and the agreement of delegations to deal with the issues set out there.  It was therefore important to provide the funds pledged as quickly as possible, to allow the Secretariat to deliver on an ambitious Plan in a short time.  Delegations owed it to themselves to provide the means for capacity building so that capacity building could play the positive role in the Doha Development Agenda which was foreseen in the Doha Ministerial Declaration.
&& The Committee took note of the statement by the Chairman of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration.
&& The Chairman said that there was a slight revision to be made to document WT/COMTD/37.  It had been pointed out that that report on the pledging conference did not directly reflect the references to Japan's pledge and contribution.  The Secretariat would correct that.
Report on the 2001 Activities of the Training Institute (WT/COMTD/W/96)
&& The Chairman said that the report on the 2001 activities of the Training Institute, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/96, indicated that the Training Institute had gone through large changes and carried out numerous activities in 2001.  
&& Deputy Director General Mr. Ravier said that Members would recall that in 2001 the Training Division had been reconstituted as the Training Institute and that its mandate had been considerably extended.  That had led to a complex transition period for the Training Institute.  In fact, that transition period had continued into the year 2002 to enable the Institute not only to come to terms with the new functions it had been assigned, but also to adapt to the doubling, under the 2002 budget, of the three-month trade policy courses held in Geneva which were its main activity until December 2001.  The report before Members covered the year 2001. He said that in his view that report provided a clear presentation of the Training Institute's activities.  Nevertheless, he wished to make two further comments with respect to the document which he hoped would assist Members' discussions.  First, the Institute had used the second part of 2001 to lay the necessary foundations for the introduction of a number of new activities.  That largely unseen groundwork consisted, in particular, of coordinating and harmonizing not only the selection procedures for participants and the arrangements for their stay, but also the training materials and programmes of the various courses.  Most of those changes would only become visible in the course of the year 2002.  To bring up to date the information contained in the report (document WT/COMTD/W/96), he provided the following details for the current year:
4 three-month trade policy courses would be organized in 2002:

the 19th trade policy course (in English) had been completed almost three weeks earlier ;

the 20th trade policy course (in Spanish) would begin the following week;

the 21st and 22nd trade policy courses (in English) would take place for the first time in parallel in the coming autumn in the new training rooms, which would have been fitted out by the end of August. 

2 three-week WTO induction courses for LDCs would be organized in 2002:

the first course (in English) had been completed over three weeks earlier;

the second course (in French) was scheduled to take place, in November. 

3 one-week specialized courses on Dispute Settlement (in English with interpretation in French and Spanish) would be organized in 2002:

the first course had taken place two weeks ago;

the second course would take place at the end of July;  and

the third would take place in December.

3 WTO induction days would be organized in 2002:

the first induction day had been held in February;

the second would be held in May;  and

the third was scheduled for the autumn.

A first series of internet-based training courses was due to begin in the coming autumn on the basis of the results of a pilot scheme.

The first phase of a Training-of-trainers project had been launched in the spring, for WTO officials engaged in technical cooperation or training activities.  It was due to be followed at the end of the year by a second phase designed for officials from developing countries. 

Various cooperation projects with the academic community would be set up over the course of the year.  To begin with, particular emphasis would be placed on building the capacities of the African continent. 

He said he would be in a position to provide Members with more details concerning the implementation of those various projects at a future meeting of the Committee.  His second comment concerned coordination between the Training Institute's activities and the technical cooperation activities carried out by other divisions of the Secretariat.  He pointed out that a TAMC had been established in June 2001.  That body was currently in operation, providing a link between all the Divisions engaged in technical cooperation and training.  The activities of the Training Institute presented were thus an integral component of the coordinated approach taken by the Secretariat.  The WTO Secretariat distinction between technical cooperation and training could appear artificial, especially as the TA activities would be further enriched by training components.  However, the current Secretariat structure contained two different Divisions:  one Technical Cooperation Division charged with the activities outside Geneva and a Training Institute mainly carrying out the Geneva‑based activities.  However, there had to be close and constant coordination between the two and the two were under his responsibility.
&& The representative of Barbados said that the new functions of the Training Institute such as the training of trainers and distance learning were two mechanisms which seemed important to facilitate capacity building and allow access to training of ever increasing number of beneficiary participants.  She asked whether any further information was available regarding how the second phase of the training of trainers programme would be conducted, through what institutions and with what timing.  She recalled from earlier meetings that the Training Institute had hoped to provide fellowships to allow participants to come to Geneva on a regular basis, and she hoped that the Training Institute would be able to meet the regular turn-over in the future.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation had advocated the idea touched upon in paragraph 13 of the report, which was that, in its training activities the Secretariat attempted to work, as much as possible, together with the numerous academic institutions around the world, within the European Communities and within developing countries, who had didactic expertise to train people.  His delegation wished to hear more about progress in that respect.  He encouraged the Secretariat to cooperate as closely as possible with the established institutions in the countries concerned who had the specific knowledge required in training when implementing the new training-related activities.  There were synergies to be made in making the best use of joint programmes and joint modules.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that he wished to raise a point on which he saw synergies with the following point on the Agenda.  The Training Institute had a project, mentioned in paragraph 11 of the report, to train WTO staff involved in the delivery of TA.  It would be beneficial if, during those training courses, there were consideration and discussion regarding how to implement the suggestions in the report by the Technical Cooperation Audit.  The training of trainers courses were the ideal place to creatively tackle the suggestions by Technical Cooperation Audit.
&& The representative of Uganda said that he wished to emphasize the importance of the synergies with other organizations referred to in paragraph 14 of the report.  There was an example from the recent training course where, after the training course, there had been a meeting with some representatives and the Commonwealth Secretariat to discuss how the training could apply to their countries.  Cooperation with other organizations would provide participants with more in-depth knowledge of the issues covered in the training courses.  He encouraged further such cooperation and agreed with the delegation of the European Communities about the usefulness of cooperation between the WTO Secretariat and the academic community, in particular in developing countries, as mentioned in paragraph 13.  His delegation encouraged increased such cooperation.  The training the Director General had proposed for Nairobi and Rabat would go some way to strengthen indigenous capacity.
&& The representative of Djibouti asked how the distance learning courses would benefit certain countries and continents with weak infrastructure.
&& The representative of Thailand said that, as a former beneficiary of the training courses, she was pleased to hear about the progress of the Training Institute.  She asked whether the Training Institute would be given additional funding to increase the number of participants.  The courses given were important for developing countries.  The cooperation with other institutions and academia mentioned in paragraph 13 was important.  At the Pledging Conference, her delegation had mentioned that the Government of Thailand, in cooperation with UNCTAD, had established the International Trade‑Related Training Institute at the Chualalongkorn University.  That was a well-known university in Thailand with good facilities to hold training courses, in particular on trade-related issues and she urged the WTO Training Institute to cooperate with it for possible regional training.
&& Deputy Director General Mr. Ravier said that what he had presented was a list of activities of the Training Institute.  Those activities were in the process of being profoundly renewed, diversified and extended.  The aim was to have an Institute which could provide a large range of activities in order to respond to Members' varying needs.  One of those was the cooperation with universities.  That was the fastest growing area of the Training Institute's activities and the area which would develop the most in the near future.  One of the reasons for the creation of the more independent Training Institute was to facilitate a deepened cooperation with universities.  There were almost daily contacts between the WTO Training Institute and various other training institutions and universities which asked to collaborate with the WTO Training Institute.  One of the current tasks of the Training Institute was to see how to build the network with all those institutions.  The idea was to have contacts with institutions all over the world.
&& The representative of the Arab Maghreb Union asked whether it would be possible for his organization to have access to the training of trainers programme.  He also wished to know if the seminar to be held in Rabat would be open to regional organizations.  The Arab Maghreb Union had its headquarters in Rabat.  He reminded delegations that before the Doha Ministerial Conference, the Arab Maghreb Union had called for a symposium on the Doha Agenda.  His organization maintained the request, but with the topic of the post Doha Work Programme.
&& Mr. Claude Mercier, Director, the WTO Training Institute said that numerous fruitful contacts had been maintained with a large number of academic institutions, both in developed and in developing countries.  The Training Institute was in the process of finalizing a strategy as the large number of contacts required adequate responses within the means at the disposal of the Institute.  The various parameters that would guide the institute in its contacts with other institutions were being finalized.  The main emphasis was on academic institutions in developing and developed countries which had strong collaboration networks of contacts and cooperation with developing countries.  The WTO Training Institute had not been able to move faster in that respect as that activity was not funded.  It was the only activity which had been left out of the budget and the Doha Development Fund.  His small team was doing its best with the means available.  It was anticipated that the networking with universities would at some stage overlap with the training of trainers programme.  It was unavoidable that links would have be made with established learning institutions as the passing on of knowledge was the basic concept of the training of trainers programme.  The university networking would link to activities such as the training of trainers but also to the distance learning Internet-based courses.  The second phase of the training of trainers would be a more complex one than the first one.  The first step was to train the WTO personnel to improve their training delivery and design capacity.  It was in that respect mostly a presentation skills course.  Phase two included training officials from governments and possibly universities to become trainers.  They should acquire the same presentation skills.  However, that presupposed that the "trainers to be" already were experts in WTO matters.  Phase two was thus both presentation skills training and training in presenting the content of the WTO Agreements in a better way.  Instead of the three-day training provided to WTO staff, they would receive a more than two week, or even longer, training.  The plan of how to go about the second phase was still under consideration.  One decision that had to be taken was whether to bring the participants to Geneva or whether there would be training in the regions or the countries.  Another element under consideration was to use the former participants in the regular training programmes who had since been based in capitals.  As they already knew much about the WTO, they were ideal trainers.  The aim was to have a definitive plan at the end of 2002.  The Secretariat would be able to say more about it at the July or October meetings of the Committee.  There had been a question regarding fellowships and if the WTO would continue to grant them.  He was happy to confirm that that was the case as the fellowships came under the regular budget.  The regular budget had even provided for an increase in fellowships, in addition to the more stable and sustainable financing.  The regular activities did not yet include the recent initiative of the Director-General for regional courses in Nairobi and Rabat.  Those were to be financed separately and they had not been included in the regular budget or the Global Trust Fund.  There was no change in the policy with respect to the granting of the regular fellowships.  Regarding distance learning and the participation in the pilot phase, he said that a group of between 60 and 65 people had been selected from former training course participants and other colleagues in capitals who had offered to help adjust and improve the distance learning programme.  An assessment was to be made after the six weeks.  It was a new activity and the WTO wished to do it well.  The software and the user-friendliness of the material had to be tested.  That was why the Institute proceeded with an initial pilot project before it was expanded.  The first real course would be launched in the fall of 2002.  How to select the participants for that course would have to be decided.  However, the number of potential beneficiaries from that kind of activity would be limited only by the number of tutors that could be guaranteed at the WTO, as the programme was based on two-way communication.  The participants had to have access to a tutor at the WTO or elsewhere, e.g., professors at a university.  Ultimately, all developing countries would be touched by the programme.  As to the university networking, a number of ideas had been received following the request by the Director General for places where training could be carried out. There had been responses from Latin America, various parts of Asia, the South Pacific region and central and eastern European countries as well as from Arab countries.  The potential was there but the Training Institute had only begun to look at them and what would become the overall policy of networking with universities.  At the moment, the main effort was focussed on organizing, at short notice, the two courses in Africa in the summer of 2002. On another matter, he recalled that the second joint course between the WTO Training Institute and the Commonwealth Secretariat had recently been held.  It was a special programme of two weeks held at the end of the three-month training course.  The participants seemed to have enjoyed the specific, tailor-made programme.  Lastly, the question of whether regional organizations would be invited to the courses in Rabat and Nairobi had not yet been considered.
&& The representative of Mauritania said that his delegation was satisfied with the direction in which the WTO training activities were developing.  His delegation supported the request made by the representative of the Arab Maghreb Union as the regional dimension was essential for the multilateral trading system and as the WTO and its Members would gain from developing synergies with regional organizations.
&& The representative of Tunisia said that his delegation supported the request made by the representative of the Arab Mahgreb Union regarding the participation of that organization in the WTO training activities in Rabat.
&& The Committee took note of the report and the comments made.
Technical Cooperation Audit Report 2001 (WT/COMTD/W/97)
&& The Chairman said that it was the first time the CTD had received a report from the Technical Cooperation Audit.  The report for the activities carried out in 2001 was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/97.  The author was Mr. Paul Rolian, Director of the WTO Technical Cooperation Audit.
&& Mr. Paul Rolian, Director of the WTO Technical Cooperation Audit said that the CTD had before it in document WT/COMTD/W/97 the first annual report of the Technical Cooperation Audit.  The report covered the period from February 2001, when the function had been created, to 31 December 2001.  Judging from the repeated references that had been made by Members to the importance of a system of evaluation for the WTO TA programme, that report responded to a real need that had been identified by Members.  He hoped that the report could serve as a basis for discussion and guidance from Members both for future TA activities and for the evaluation thereof.  He would confine his introductory remarks to highlighting three main points.  The first concerned the context or, the background.  The report recalled that the year 2001 had been a year of transition.  Not only was it the year in which the evaluation function had been established, in response to Members' clearly expressed desire, but it had also been the year, in October, in which the strategy for WTO TA had been debated and approved in the CTD, giving a new direction to that aspect of the WTO's work.  Reflecting those changes, the Technical Cooperation Division had been reorganized and had absorbed the unit dealing with the IF and LDCs.  The Training Division had been renamed the Training Institute and given an expanded mandate.  A TAMC had been created as had a focal point in each Division, responsible for TA matters.  Some 400 TA activities, more than ever before, had been carried out.  That was also the year that saw an end to the debate that had not entirely subsided as to whether TA was or was not a core function of the Organization.  Certainly, the Doha Development Agenda could leave no doubt that it was.  As the report pointed out, those developments were not merely of academic interest.  In the absence of agreement on the legitimacy of TA as part of the mandate of the WTO, it would have been difficult to conduct a strategically coherent programme of TA, and even to evaluate it.
He continued by saying that his second point concerned the question of methodology.  From 1999, work had begun on the development of a monitoring and evaluation system for WTO TA, with the assistance of a consultant.  That work had been promising but had been abandoned before being completed when the consultant left the Organization.  When the TCA had been established, action had therefore been taken to revamp the function of TA monitoring and evaluation.  In doing so, due account had been taken of the work that had been carried out prior to February 2001, as had been the high priority given to TA by Members and the TA Strategy adopted by the Committee.  The main conceptual work had therefore been the development of a methodology for the evaluation of WTO's TA, to reflect the specific nature of that assistance.  He acknowledged the contribution made by the Department for International Development of the UK Government, which had sponsored that work through a dedicated trust fund.  The methodology that had been approved by the Director-General was briefly outlined in paragraphs 9 to 14 of the report, but the full methodology, which was in the Director-General's Notice to Staff (OFFICE(02)/40), had been distributed to Members as well.  In relation to the methodology, three observations could be made:
The WTO's TA portfolio consisted of a large number of activities (around 400 in 2001 and over 500 in 2002) almost exclusively in the form of training and capacity‑building, which were of short duration and covered a great number of different topics, i.e. they were fragmented.
Because WTO TA was of that nature, the more common forms of evaluation methodology had not been found to be entirely relevant.  One of the most challenging aspects of evaluation in the WTO context was to establish yardsticks for measuring long-term impact.  The methodology addressed both that aspect and what had been called process aspects, for which criteria of success were easier to determine in terms of long-term sustainability.
The resources devoted to evaluation were limited in relation to the number of activities that had to be covered.  That was why the methodology envisaged a shared responsibility between the Technical Cooperation Audit and the providers of TA.  Inevitably, most of WTO's TA would be the subject of self-evaluation by the providers themselves, and the methodology went into some detail in setting out the framework for such self-evaluation.  The fact of the matter was that without self-evaluation, if only the resources of the TCA were to be used, the basis for drawing any conclusions about WTO TA would simply be insufficient.  The role of  TCA would be inter alia to conduct evaluations on a broader basis, bringing together information and drawing lessons from the self-evaluations and from its own, more generic studies.
He went on to say that the third main point that the report drew to the attention of the Committee concerned some of the observations made and the lessons learned during the first year of operation.  
The first of those was that over all, the quality of execution of WTO's TA was high.  It was not just the Auditor who said that;  it had been confirmed consistently in feedback from participants and in consultations with representatives of beneficiary Members.  WTO staff were on top of that aspect of their work, professional in their approach and dedicated to what they were doing.  It was worth recalling in that connection that most of them were not hired for their skills in delivering TA, and that in the period under review the pressure on them of competing work priorities remained high.
The second observation was that making TA successful called for a cooperative effort between the WTO Secretariat (providers) and Members (beneficiaries).  That cooperation could take several forms, from purely practical ones – pre-activity logistics, meeting room arrangements, security, back-office assistance, hospitality, etc. – to more substantive issues relating, for example, to the selection of participants in WTO TA activities.  Appropriate selection of those who would participate in training activities meant that those activities would have a greater chance of producing substantive results than they would otherwise.  In a demand- and Member-driven context, the selection of participants was obviously a matter for Members, but they could and do enhance the impact of TA activities when they ensured that those who participated really were concerned in their day-to-day work by the issues under discussion, and were likely to remain in the trade business.  More outreach to sectors other than government also turned out to be a factor which adds value to TA.
Third, TCA had observed that there was a need for the Secretariat to continue to focus on what was termed "upstream" activities, namely analysis of the needs of Members and design of TA.  For example, the report made the point that a simple thing, such as clearly setting out the objective that was being sought in a given activity or cluster of activities, should be an automatic step in planning for TA.  The identification of needs could rely on more than just the input from Members;  TPR reports, the work of Committees, and cooperation with other agencies might also be factored in.  Thinking about objectives had to begin early in the process of determining the programme of activities.  The DDA and the strategy for TA would be helpful in that respect.
Fourth, with regard to sustainability, which was the most difficult aspect to evaluate, there had been confirmation that the value of TA was enhanced when beneficiaries recognised that they had more than a passive stake in the process.  The success of TA activities over the longer term would depend on factors such as the following:
beneficiary governments had national strategies that ensured that participants and other stake holders gained maximum benefit from WTO TA;
beneficiaries continued with their own capacity-building activities even after WTO TA had ended, in order to consolidate and extend the results;
beneficiaries took steps to ensure that WTO TA activities were extended beyond the immediate recipients to other government and non-governmental actors in the national context.
Fifth, at almost every TA activity that TCA had attended, remarks had been made concerning the fact that the WTO type of assistance addressed only one aspect of the trade capacity deficit faced by developing countries, and in particular by LDCs.  Those remarks echoed those that had been made also in the Committee.  Having a fuller understanding of the Agreements and rules underpinning the multilateral trading system was important, but so was having concretely the possibility of taking advantage of the opportunities that were beckoning, or at least overcoming the main obstacles to trading more.  While TA evaluation had not focussed particularly on that aspect, it would be interesting to observe the extent to which, for example, the idea of mainstreaming WTO policy into national policy, and the IF programme could constitute a response to that concern that was so deeply felt.
Much had been done in 2002 as well that would have an impact on TA activities;  the preparation of an annual plan specifically tied to the Doha Development Agenda, and a pledging conference that had produced commitments almost double those of previous years, would have an impact on TA activities, was would the onset of mandated negotiations.  But that was for future reports.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that his delegation did not consider the auditing mechanism and such reports as instruments for criticizing those providing TA, but as a means of learning and improving the TA provided.  The recommendations of the TCA seemed useful and his delegation expected that they be seriously taken into consideration and that there would be follow-up upon them.  Mr. Rolian had provided a comprehensive overview and had outlined the main findings.  However, he said that four aspects were of particular importance to his delegation.  The first was the need to set clear objectives for the various groups of TA.  Close dialogue with the beneficiaries could assist in setting such objectives.  As a second point, his delegation would welcome continued efforts in defining the tasks of, and the interface between, the operational divisions and the TC Division.  His third point was that the selection of the participants in the different courses was crucial.  Increased attention had to be given to that aspect, both by the Secretariat and by the beneficiary countries.  It might help to analyze the reason why participants in the Trade Policy Courses seemed to remain longer in the trade area than participants in other courses.  Collaboration between the WTO and agencies specialized in networking, such as the International Centre for Sustainable Development (ICSTD), might therefore be helpful.  As the fourth point he said that his delegation supported the ideas mentioned in the last chapter of the report under the heading "Lessons Learned", although his delegation was aware that they were not easy to implement.  However, some reflection on them was worthwhile.  That included the suggestion that expanding the duration of the seminars at the expense of reducing the overall number of seminars, would, in the long run, prove beneficial for all.  Given the Doha Work Programme and the pressing need for TA related to it, it was probably not something which could be done in 2002 or 2003.  Nevertheless, it should be kept in mind for the future.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation was one of those which had underlined the need for more coherence and improved evaluation of WTO TC.  It was not a coincidence that one of the European Communities' Member States had taken the initiative to pay for much of the preliminary work of the Technical Cooperation Audit.  His delegation therefore remained attached to that exercise.  He noted that the basis for the audit had been nine projects and forty back‑to‑office reports.  His delegation would appreciate it if the basis would be broader the second time.  However, it was a good start.  A more in depth analysis of some of the issues involved would be helpful in the next report.  For example, paragraphs 17 and 21 dealt with the important question of demand-drivenness and objectives.  His delegation found it worrying that paragraph 17 stated that "Members are on the whole receptive to discussing with the Secretariat priority areas and other details based on the Secretariat's experience".  That did not correspond to his delegation's mainstreaming dogma which was firmly established and which stipulated that measures planned and objectives set should be part of the overall development strategies of the beneficiaries.  His delegation would be pleased if more could be done to deepen that important preliminary step before other measures were taken.  The question of sustainability had been highlighted by other delegation.  It would be a key point to follow up on to see how difficult it might be to measure success, track the impact and see how WTO TA could be improved.  More than ever after the Doha Ministerial Conference and the commitments made there, Members were under pressure to live up to the TA commitments made and had to ensure that the activities were effective.  The report of the TCA would help delegations answer the question whether the TC provided had been effective or not.  He therefore encouraged the Secretariat to continue on the chosen track.
&& The Committee took note of the oral report and the comments made.

CONSIDERATION OF ARTICLE XVIII AS MANDATED BY PARAGRAPH 12 OF THE DOHA MINISTERIAL DECLARATION (WT/MIN(01)/DEC/1), THE DECISION ON IMPLEMENTATION-RELATED ISSUES AND CONCERNS (WT/MIN(01)/17), AND IN CONJUNCTION WITH TIRET 3 OF JOB(01)/152/REV.1 OF 27 OCTOBER 2001
&& The Chairman said that in paragraph 1.1 of the Decision on Implementation-Related Issues and Concerns (WT/MIN(01)17), Ministers had reaffirmed that:
 "… Article XVIII of the GATT 1994 is a special and differential treatment provision for developing countries and that recourse to it should be less onerous than to Article XII of the GATT 1994."
The need to revisit Article XVIII was originally recognized in tiret three of Job(01)/152/Rev.1 of 27 October 2001 which stated that:
"A complete review of Article XVIII shall be undertaken with a view to ensure that it subserves the original objective of facilitating the progressive development of economies in developing countries and to allow them to implement programmes and policies of economic development designed to raise the general standard of living of their people."
Tiret 1 of the same document (Job(01)/152/Rev.1) stated that:
"only the Committee on Balance-of-Payments shall have the authority to examine the overall justification of BOP measures."
He said that it was his understanding that the Committee on Balance-of-Payments was considering section B of Article XVIII and would report to the General Council at the end of the year 2002.  It was now up to the CTD to consider what should be done with regard to the remaining elements of the Decision of Ministers adopted at the Doha Ministerial Conference relating to Article XVIII of GATT.  
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation reserved its position on the issue of which was the appropriate WTO body for dealing with tiret 3.  Her delegation was not persuaded that the CTD would be the appropriate body to address that tiret.  However, for the purposes of fulfilling Member's obligations in 12.(b) of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, her delegation would not oppose having a discussion in the CTD on Article XVIII, excluding Article XVIII:B handled by the Committee on Balance of Payments, and proceed to the report required in 12.(b).  The Council for Trade in Goods (CTG) might be the more appropriate body for dealing with Article XVIII:C.  
&& The representative of India said that before she would reintroduce the proposal set out in document WT/GC/W/63 and recalling the discussions on sections A and C of Article XVIII, she sought clarification from the Secretariat in light of the comment made by the representative of the United States.  She wished the Secretariat to comment, in view of the terms-of-reference of the CTD, on whether issues related to governmental assistance to economic development, which was the title of Article XVIII, were to be dealt with in the CTD.  Her delegation observed that sections A and C of Article XVIII, and Section 4(a) specifically, were limited to economies which could only support low standards of living and were in the early states of development.  That meant that Article XVIII was a development provision.  She asked the Secretariat to clarify whether the CTD was the relevant body by reference to paragraph 12 of the Ministerial Declaration.
&& The representative of Argentina said that his delegation did not mind Article XVIII being discussed per se, and he did recognize the existence of a proposal in that context under implementation.  However, in light of the heading of the Agenda item, he stated that his delegation did not recognize document Job(01)/152/Rev.1 to have any status in the context of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.
&& The representative of India referred to footnote 2 of the Decision on Implementation-Related Issues and Concerns, which stated that "A list of these issues is compiled in document Job(01)/152/Rev.1."  The issues referred to were to be deemed as outstanding implementation issues.  That Job-number document drew its status and relevance from a ministerial decision.
&& The representative of the United States said that it was her delegation's understanding that Article XVIII:C, in various forms, had been handled in the CTG.  Delegations might benefit from further research as to how it was handled in the GATT.  However, her delegation did not oppose consideration of the implementation proposal.  The reference in the footnote mentioned by the representative of India was to define what constituted an outstanding issue for purposes of the implementation exercise.
&& The representative of Canada said that although his delegation agreed to discussion of the implementation proposal in the CTD, it was without prejudice as to what constituted the appropriate body to examine issues arising under GATT Article XVIII.
&& The Chairman said that the delegation of Bangladesh had sought protection under Article XVIII:C for selected categories of commodities.  However, his delegation had not selected the body to which the matter would be referred.  His delegation had only forwarded its request to the Director General of the WTO who, in turn, had referred it to the CTG.  That was why the notification of Bangladesh had appeared in the CTG.  However, that was in a different context than the Doha Ministerial Declaration.
&& A representative of the Secretariat said that tiret 3 referred to a review of Article XVIII which might be understood to be different from the question of whether any delegation wished to make use of the provision.  As the review under tiret 3 was a different question, it might not be possible to draw on past experience for guidance.
&& The representative of India said that her delegation appreciated that history would not provide guidance on the relevance of the CTD in that respect.  However, the CTD's own terms of reference might give some light.  Her delegation attached importance to the issue and wished to see that it be dealt with in the manner in which the ministers at the Doha Ministerial Conference had required it to be dealt with, which was to provide a report by the end of the year 2002.
&& The Chairman said that he understood the Secretariat's problem in providing a factual position immediately on the subject.  He therefore requested the Secretariat to provide historical background on the question raised by the representative of India.  He would arrange for consultations on the issue and it would remain on the Agenda of the CTD until a decision on how to handle it had been taken.
&& The representative of India said that that approach was acceptable as long as the discussion on the matter was suspended in order for expeditious consultations to be held.  It was urgent to deal with the issue and her delegation did not wish it to be postponed.
&& The representative of the United States could accept to suspend discussions on the condition that the suspension did not affect treatment of Article XVIII:C in other fora.  More specifically, she referred to Article XVIII:B issues dealt with in the Committee on Balance-of-Payments and other Article XVIII:C issues.
&& The Chairman said that he had understood that invocations of the different sections of Article XVIII were different matters from what was supposed to be addressed under the Doha Ministerial mandate.  Article XVIII:C issues raised by the delegation of Bangladesh would continue to be handled in the CTG without prejudice to what was happening in the CTD.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that it had to be kept in mind that the CTD was the body overseeing all special and differential treatment provisions.  Article XVIII was a particularly important special and differential treatment provision.  The CTD therefore had a role to play in that regard.  A special session of the CTD had been created to deal with issues related to special and differential treatment.  Special and differential treatment was a matter for the CTD.  However, whether it was dealt with in the special or regular sessions did not matter as the objective of enhancing the utility of those provisions remained the same.  She agreed that consultations on the matter would be useful and that the discussion should be suspended.
&& The Committee suspended discussions on the item and requested a factual report by the Secretariat on the issue raised by the representative of India.  It also decided to hold informal consultations on the matter.

REPORT OF THE SEMINAR ON REVENUE IMPLICATIONS OF E-COMMERCE
&& The Chairman said that many delegations might have attended the seminar which had been organized under the auspices of the CTD.  The theme chosen by delegations had been "Revenue Implications of E-commerce".  In his absence, Ambassador Whalen of Ireland who was the chair of the Services Council had agreed to chair the seminar.
The text of Ambassador Whalen's short oral report and her extensive written report are annexed to this report. 
&& The Committee took note of the oral report.

REPORT ON THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT
&& The Chairman said that, in the absence of deputy director general Mr. Ablassé Ouedraogo, Mr. Patrick Low, Director of the Development and Economic Research Division would provide the Committee with a report of the International Conference on Financing for Development.
&& Mr.Patrick Low, Director of the Development and Economic Research Division said that, the International Conference on Financing for Development had been held on 18-22 March 2002 in Monterrey, Mexico, where the "Monterrey Consensus" had been adopted.  The Monterrey Conference had marked the first quadri-partite exchange of views between governments, civil society, the business community, and institutional stakeholders on global economic issues, and key financial and development issues.  The Monterrey Concensus document, addressed six main themes:  (i) domestic resource mobilization in developing countries;  (ii) the role of private capital flows;  (iii) the role of trade;  (iv) international development cooperation, including the role of Official Development Assistance (ODA);  (v) debt;  and (vi) "systemic issues" relating to the framework of international cooperation on economic, financial and developmental questions.  The document highlighted the importance of trade and recognized that in many cases, trade was "the single most important external source of development financing".  The statement by the Director-General to the conference, which spelt out his views on the importance of trade in a broader development context, had been made available on the WTO website.  In a section of the Monterrey Consensus document entitled  "Staying Engaged", all stakeholders had been urged to participate actively in the follow-up to the Conference.  The discussions at the Conference on poverty reduction, development and coherence were being seen as part of a process which started with the UN Millennium Summit, had been advanced by the WTO Doha Ministerial Decisions, and was to be continued with the World Summit on Sustainable Development, scheduled to be held in Johannesburg, South Africa, in late August/early September 2002.  The Sustainable Development Summit, was also being seen by some as an opportunity to have an early stock-taking of the results of the Monterrey Conference and effectiveness in carrying out the operational aspects of the Monterrey Consensus.  Additional information on the Conference, including the text of the Monterrey Consensus, the Plenary sessions, the twelve Roundtables and the various side-events might be found at the web-site address www.un.org/esa/ffd. 
&& The Committee took note of the statement made.

PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& The Chairman said that Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration stated that:  
"The Committee on Trade and Development and the Committee on Trade and Environment shall, within their respective mandates, each act as a forum to identify and debate developmental and environmental aspects of the negotiations, in order to help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected."
&& The Committee on Trade and Environment (CTE) had already decided to keep paragraph 51 as a standing item on the Agenda.  At the last regular session of the CTE, delegations had had the opportunity to come forward with ideas as to how to approach the issue.  It had then been suggested that the CTE have a first exchange of views on the matter at its October 2002 meeting.  Some delegations had indicated that they considered it premature to discuss Paragraph 51 at the current stage of the negotiations.  Further informal consultations would be held in the CTE.  The  CTD also had to deal with the subject, in accordance with the decision in paragraph 51.  He sought Members' views on how they wished to proceed with that directive from Ministers.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that he wished to present some preliminary ideas of how to deal with paragraph 51 and he encouraged other delegations to consider the issue.  His delegation believed that it was a potentially useful paragraph in the Doha Development Agenda as it would allow delegations to have focussed debates on one of the main overall objectives of the Doha Development Agenda.  The question was where to start and how to make the work systematic and useful.  His delegation had presented some ideas in the CTE.  Those ideas had not been very structured and might have been too ambitious.  The first reaction from other delegations had been to go slow and to think about them further.  What his delegation wished to discuss was the idea of starting off modestly by providing a basis for how work could proceed.  That had led his delegation to realize that if any delegate was asked how far the work on the development dimension of the Doha Ministerial Declaration had progressed, it would be difficult to respond.  That delegate would have to ask his colleagues dealing with other bodies what they were doing in their respective bodies, under what items they spoke about development, and how work was progressing.  Because of that difficulty his delegation suggested some kind of a tracking exercise or all comprehensive exercise to identify progress in various bodies, focalised and centralised in the CTD.  Some sort of score board or document that the WTO Secretariat would collect in interaction with the various bodies.  A state of play to regularly monitor what happened with respect to development in other bodies.  It would be one single paper which would regularly be updated which showed what actually was going on with respect to development, containing short paragraphs of what happened with respect to the IF, TA, S&D, the Working Group on Trade, Debt and Finance, Transfer of Technology, Small Economies, and the Sub-Committee on LDCs for example.  This paper did not have to be very detailed but should allow delegations to see the ongoing work in a comprehensive way.  He asked other delegations whether they thought that it would be useful for the CTD to ask the Secretariat to consider and explore the idea and suggest the approach to be taken.  His delegation believed that it would allow delegations to be more specific and to identify themes for focussed discussions on individual items when it became clear how and where progress was being made.  That exercise might also be useful for providing the public at large with an idea of what happened with respect to development in the WTO.  The round was called the Doha Development Agenda and delegations had to be able to respond to the question of what progress was being made with respect to development.  His delegation's proposal was meant to be a tool to assist in that respect by providing a concise assessment through a continuous tracking exercise throughout the negotiations and during the execution of work programmes.  Without asking for an immediate decision, he asked for other delegations' reactions.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation would welcome a consultation on the proposal by the representative of the European Communities and on how to proceed.  Her delegation agreed with the general purpose and attitude offered by the European Communities in relation to paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.
&& The representative of India said that all Members would need to reflect on the idea put forward by the representative of the European Communities and on how to proceed with the issue in the CTD.
&& The representative of Norway said that his delegation supported the proposal by the representative of the European Communities.  He encouraged reflection on the proposal and consultations on what would be the most appropriate and practical way of dealing with it.
&& The representative of Canada suggested that there be reflection on the question of cooperation between the CTD and the CTE as the paragraph 51 mandate and the issue of sustainable development concerned both bodies.  There had already been some discussion on cooperative reporting in the CTE.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation also saw merit, in light of paragraph 51, in having some kind of relationship between the CTD and CTE.  However, her delegation envisioned that the chairpersons of the two bodies kept each other informed about progress in their respective fora.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that, before moving forward with the issue and considering future work, it was necessary to evaluate what had already been done.  It was important to consider how the two Committees could work together and keep delegations abreast of progress.
&& The Chairman said that the matter was complex, given that it covered a wide range of issues and that two different committees dealt with it.  He had already discussed it with the chairperson of the CTE and they would continue such consultations.  Delegations seemed to need time to reflect on how to proceed and on the proposal made by the representative of the European Communities.
&& The Committee agreed that Paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration be a standing item on the Agenda, and that informal consultations be held on it.

ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE FOR LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that the Committee annually had to select the chairperson for its Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries.   The consultations that he had conducted in cooperation with the Secretariat had resulted in the proposal for Ambassador Molander of Sweden to chair the Sub-Committee.  He asked if the CTD could elect Ambassador Molander to chair the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries.  
It was so decided.
&& The Chairman said that the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries had, over the past twelve months, been under the chairmanship of Ambassador Simon Fuller of the United Kingdom.  The Chairman said that as chairman of the CTD, and as a representative of an LDC himself, he wished to express his deep appreciation to Ambassador Fuller.  Ambassador Fuller had made a significant contribution to the Sub-Committee and the work of the Sub-Committee had, in turn, contributed to the process of integrating the LDCs into the multilateral trading system.  The period of his chairmanship had been a distinctive one during which much was achieved.  The Sub-Committee had agreed to the substantive contributions of the WTO deliverables to the thematic session on trade at the Third UN Conference on LDCs which was held in Brussels in May 2001.  In the period of his stewardship, the Sub-Committee had lent its support to the LDCs in preparing for the ministerial meeting in Zanzibar as part of the overall preparatory process for the Doha Ministerial Conference.  Above all, the Sub-Committee had appreciated Ambassador Fuller's leadership in the negotiations that led to the adoption of the WTO Work Programme for LDCs in February 2002.  Ambassador Fuller's leadership and deep personal commitment had been a critical factor behind the concrete results achieved.  On behalf of the Sub-Committee he formally expressed appreciation for Ambassador Fuller's work.  To carry forward the good work, the Sub-Committee was fortunate that Ambassador Molander of Sweden had agreed to take on the chairmanship and he welcomed his election as chairman.
&& The representative of Uganda said that, on behalf of the LDCs, he wished to reiterate their appreciation for the commendable work of Ambassador Fuller and the progress the LDCs had been able to make within the WTO during his chairmanship.  He also looked forward to working with Ambassador Molander and ensured him of their full cooperation.  The challenge he faced, contained in the Work Programme for the LDCs, was how to mainstream the programme of action into the WTO activities in order for the commitments entered into therein to be fully reflected.  The LDC group ensured the incoming chairman of their support.
&& The representative of Sweden said that, on behalf of his ambassador who deeply regretted not to be able to attend the meeting, he wished to express gratitude to Members for electing him Chairman of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries.  It was a great honour for his country Sweden and for him personally.  The Government of Sweden was fully committed to supporting the efforts of LDCs to integrate into the multilateral trading system and the global economy.  In that regard, the WTO had a significant role to play.  LDC's integration required special consideration from other Members of LDCs' interests and concerns.  It also required active commitment from LDCs in the work of the WTO.  He wished to assure Members of the CTD of his deep personal commitment to the task of LDCs' integration process.  The election was a great honour and a big responsibility, which he accepted.  He believed that the effective execution of the role required of the Sub-Committee already was underway with the adoption of the WTO Work Programme for LDCs.  He would attach priority and his full attention to the implementation of the Work Programme in the Sub-Committee.  He recognized that there was substantive work to be done, including focussed attention on market access opportunities for LDCs; accessions; trade-related TA, including through the IF; and mainstreaming and following up on Ministerial Decisions in favour of LDCs.  He counted and would rely on the support of the WTO Secretariat and all Members, in particular the LDCs, in moving that work forward.  The CTD and the Sub-Committee were essential for making the WTO system as a whole respond to the interests of the LDCs.  Finally, as part of the acceptance remarks, he paid tribute to Ambassador Fuller who had, over the last year, worked to achieve significant and concrete progress on LDCs' issues, in the Sub-Committee.  He hoped to draw on his considerable experience.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that during Ambassador Fuller's chairmanship of the Sub-Committee on LDCs, the delegation of Bangladesh had felt that Ambassador Fuller had supported and cooperated with them in conducting the business of the Sub-Committee.  The WTO Work Programme on LDCs, instructed by Ministers of the Doha Ministerial Conference had been adopted under his chairmanship.  That was a remarkable achievement.  The hard work and sincere efforts of Ambassador Fuller had helped delegations to adopt the Work Programme.
&& The representative of Djibouti said that his delegation wished to thank Ambassador Fuller for all he had done for the LDCs, and in particular for his open mind and the easy and direct contacts he had had with delegations.  His government had always played an important role when it came to supporting LDCs' development.
Ambassador Simon Fuller of the United Kingdom said that it had been a great honour for him to serve as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee.  The CTD had made the right choice when choosing his successor.  There was a rule in the British House of Commons that in no circumstances whatsoever could previous speakers be accused of having been untruthful.  However, some of the remarks regarding his own contribution to the work of the Sub-Committee over the past year came close to what Winston Churchill once described in an effort to get around that rule as "terminologically inexact".  That there had been a solid body of achievements over the past year was due to his colleagues.
&& The Chairman said that although Ambassador Fuller left the chairmanship of the Sub-Committee, he would continue to be associated with its work.

OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman reminded delegations that the provisional date for the following formal meeting of the CTD was Monday, 1 July 2002.
No other business was raised under this Agenda Item.
ANNEX I
Seminar on “Revenue Implications of E-commerce”
WTO, Geneva, 22 April 2002

Oral Report by the Chairperson

Upon the request by delegations and as part of the Committee on Trade and Development's Work Programme on Electronic Commerce, a seminar on the topic of "Revenue Implications of E‑commerce" was held under the auspices of the Committee on Trade and Development on Monday, 22 April.  In the absence of the Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development, I had the pleasure to chair the seminar.  A more extensive written report will be attached to the minutes of this meeting.
A general introduction to the topic with some recent trends in e-commerce, a description of the taxation-related issues at stake, what the situation for developing countries looks like and the WTO perspective were given in the morning session.  In the afternoon, the speakers provided different country and private sector experiences.
Delegations learned that there was a dramatic drop in firm's spending on information technologies in late 2001 due to the general economic situation but that the private sector expects to increase technology spending in the near future.  E-commerce's next wave is productivity increases via the use of technologies.  Firms must thus harness technology to drive productivity.
An  overview of the problems raised by taxation of electronic commerce and of the initiatives that are currently being undertaken to resolve them was presented.  Three technical features of the Internet and Intranet systems likely to have significant impact on the operations of tax systems are the lack of central control, the lack of central registration and the difficulty of tracing transactions.
It is not sales of tangible products carried out through electronic networks but rather sales of digital products that raise novel and difficult questions for the collection of consumption taxes.  The implications of the technological changes for territorially based taxed systems are vast.  First, there is the sheer increase in cross-boarder transactions.  Second, the digitization of information creates difficulties in defining the source, origin and destination of both consumption and production.  The principle challenge is to determine how to implement geographically limited tax systems in a technological environment that renders geographical borders essentially irrelevant.  The difficulty of tracing transactions enhances the danger of increased tax avoidance and evasion.  The most significant issues raised by the advent of e-commerce for income tax regimes are those relating to jurisdiction to tax and the characterization of income.  The problems concerning the application of consumption taxes are generally recognized as having more immediacy than the issues concerning direct taxation.
Considering 1999 figures, it is clear that the share of digitized products in world trade is extremely small.  It constitute about one per cent of world exports and imports and about 0.4 per cent of developing country exports and imports.  The shares of digitized product import revenue of total government revenue is only about 0.4 per cent in developed countries and 0.6 per cent in developing countries.
Electronic commerce poses both challenges and opportunities for developing countries.  The challenges includes the potential tariff revenue losses which are higher in developing countries than in developed countries, although they are still very small in terms of overall government revenue.  However, the potential tax revenue losses from value added taxes are significant in developed countries.  Developing countries will be net e-commerce importers in the short to medium term.

There was also a presentation of issues related to the classification issue of whether digital deliveries fall under the GATT or the GATS framework.  The classification issue is important because of the structural differences between GATT and GATS.  The levels of benefits under GATT can differ significantly from those available under GATS in the short term.  Questions that need to be considered in this context include:
1.	What are the implications of e-commerce for the promotion of economic development and what are the implications for development of erecting barriers to e-commerce?
2.	What are the implications for expanding trade and economic growth of legal uncertainty about how WTO agreements apply to e-business and e-trade?
3.	Transparency, legal certainty, predictability and spreading of economic growth equitably are what the trading system is all about.
4.	Does WTO risk falling behind as commercial players continue apace to adopt and employ the new advances in technology in commercial trade?
The afternoon session provided country and private sector experiences.  There was agreement that e-commerce is business as usual apart from the poorer developing countries who need to concentrate on the build up of human and physical infrastructure.  Electronic commerce can provide additional opportunities for development, especially for developing countries losing their comparative advantage in traditional economic sectors.  Some speakers said that many developing countries stand to gain much more by maintaining an environment in which electronic commerce can flourish, rather than introducing new, cumbersome and restrictive measures to tax digital products and services and that they should not stand in the way for the development of e-commerce.
Estimates suggest that up to 90 per cent of e-commerce is business to business.  E-commerce helps reduce the cost of information flows which some companies estimate to 40 per cent of investment costs, and it can facilitate the harvesting of further benefits from existing systems.  Companies will continue to optimize according to their needs, but will not necessarily exploit the Internet to avoid taxes.
In conclusion it seems that e-commerce poses both challenges and opportunities to developed and developing country governments and companies alike.  The direct effects on government revenue through tariff losses seem to be very small whereas the effects on the efficiency of an economy can be large.
ANNEX II
Seminar on "Revenue Implications of E-commerce"
WTO, Geneva, Monday, 22 April 2002

Report by the Chairperson of the seminar, H.E. Mrs. Mary Whalen


Introduction

A seminar on electronic commerce (e-commerce) was held under the auspices of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) on 22 April 2002.  This seminar was part of the Committee's Work Programme on Electronic Commerce under the overall WTO Work Programme on Electronic Commerce.  Three seminars on e-commerce have been organized under the auspices of the CTD.  Their proceedings have fed into the regular work of on e-commerce in the CTD and participation has been open to WTO Members and Observers and international intergovernmental organizations with observer status in the CTD.  The first seminar, held on 19 February 1999, provided delegations with a general introduction to e-commerce and development under the headings:  "Potential for Electronic Commerce for Businesses in Developing Countries" and "Infrastructure and Regulatory Issues at the Government Level".  The 14 June 2001 seminar provided an in depth analysis of what governments can do to facilitate the use of e-commerce for development.  Delegations had requested that this year's seminar focus on the revenue implications of e-commerce.  A general introduction to the topic with some recent trends in e-commerce, a description of the taxation-related issues at stake, the situation for developing countries and the WTO perspective were given during the morning session.  In the afternoon, the speakers provided different country and private sector perspectives.  (See programme annexed)
As background, the Secretariat had provided a bibliography on revenue implications of e‑commerce contained in document WT/COMTD/W/98.  It includes articles, books and working papers published between 1997 and 2000, as well as the addresses of three Internet sites which offer interesting papers on e-commerce, taxation issues as well as other related material.  The bibliography was intended to facilitate delegations' preparations for the seminar and deepening their understanding of the revenue implications of e-commerce.

The private sector perspective

Delegations heard that there was a drop in spending on e-commerce in late 2001 due to the overall economic downturn.  The information technology (IT) boom is over and doing business using electronic means is business as usual for the private sector.  However, the decrease in the spending on e-commerce is not a sign of a lack of interest in information technologies on the part of company executives.  It is rather due to the limited availability of financial resources.  The private sector experimented with information technologies in the 1995-2000 period, which led to the over-spending that created the IT "bubble".  Firms currently tend to spend on internal information technology rather than on external e-commerce. Nevertheless, the private sector expects to increase technology spending over the next few years.
Even companies dealing in physical products such as oil and gas use e-commerce.  In order to be competitive in a market where mergers and acquisitions are daily affairs, companies need to be global and use e-business.  Globalisation of large business affects both developed and developing countries.  It is becoming increasingly expensive to extract oil.  It is therefore necessary to reduce costs to be competitive.  One way is to reduce costs of extraction and refining.  Another is to maximize the use of scarce and dispersed resources.  New information and communication technologies (ICTs) are useful in that respect.  Firms take advantage of the technical advances that ICTs provide and have completely different ways of transferring information than just a couple of years ago.  They need to innovate with the use of modern technologies to lower transaction costs and improve market information to deal with intensified competition.  ICTs are also used to identify best practices, to mitigate risks, and in training.
The large majority of on-line trade is going to be business-to-business (including raw materials to manufacturing and manufactures to distribution) rather than business-to-consumer e‑commerce.  It will not only involve business-to-business trade in developed countries but also between developed and developing county companies and among developing country firms. Business-to-business e-commerce is shown to have taken off much faster than business-to-consumer trade.  Reasons given include the diversity of consumers, geographical differences, and consumer concerns on security issues.  Estimates suggest that over 90 per cent of e-commerce is business-to-business.  Apart from business-to-business and business-to-consumer e-commerce, firms are also using e-commerce internally.  E-business includes e-learning and e-collaboration where electronic contacts replace physical presence, always with the aim of reducing internal and external transaction costs and achieving better, quicker, safer and cost-efficient information flows.  Even in "physical" activities such as building an oil field, information costs amount to 40 per cent of total costs.
Forrester expects that the next development in e-commerce is going to be driven by companies using the technology already acquired to increase productivity.  That firms currently do not have the new resources to spend does not mean that they can not make productivity gains.  Forrester forecasts that firms using net-based technologies to streamline procurement have the potential to add about 15 per cent productivity by 2012.  It has to be noted that these productivity gains are not immediate.  It will take at least five years before the productivity gains begin to become visible.
The future "executable Internet" will be more interactive and create a conversation with the user rather than only providing answers as is the case with today's Internet.  It will also be "extended" in that it will be able to link the digital world to the physical world.  One example is using tags as sensors and through radio frequency identification (RFID) or global positioning system (GPS) make the supply chain more efficient by keeping track of trucks, their content, the traffic situation and the demands of different storage areas.
The Internet creates a demand for new products and services.  Tangible goods will become digitised and transformed into services.  Instead of buying a pipeline, an oil company might in the future buy a "guaranteed flow-through" service.  The service provider would, through digitised monitoring from anywhere in the world, ensure a satisfactory flow.  Many of these kinds of services are today provided from the United States.  However, it is possible that such service providers will move to developing countries with good infrastructure but lower costs in the near future.
Taxation on procurement of tangible goods across borders has led to consolidation of suppliers and created opportunities for good local suppliers in new markets.  There are other effects of taxation on procurement of intangible goods across borders.  Internet is a powerful delivery platform.  Intellectual property will be distributed using the Internet, Intranet and  Extranet but will be difficult to track.  From the business perspective, they are efficient as travelling employees can have remote access to the company software for example.  Companies can optimize according to their needs by managing access through corporate wide Intranet for example.  In the services area, companies can buy services from people still located abroad as their services can be transferred digitally, instead of bringing skilled people to their offices.  Companies will continue to optimize the use the Internet as a transaction, delivery and communication tool according to their needs, but will not necessarily exploit the Internet to avoid taxes.

E-commerce challenges to taxation regimes 

An overview of the problems raised by the advent of e-commerce for taxation, and of the initiatives that are currently being undertaken to resolve them was presented.  The implications of technological changes for territorially based taxed systems are vast, partly because of the sheer increase in the number of cross-boarder transactions.  Second, the digitization of information creates difficulties in defining the source, origin and destination of both consumption and production.  The principal challenge is therefore to determine how to implement geographically limited tax systems in a technological environment that renders geographical borders essentially irrelevant.  E-commerce influences the operation of tax systems in several ways.  It:
-	has the ability to establish public and private communication systems on a global basis;
-	reduces the need for intermediaries in business transactions;
-	enables encrypted communication;
-	integrates business functions such as design and production;
-	provides greater flexibility for international business organization;  and it
-	leads to the physical disintegration of economic activities (location of supplier, provider, user, customer).

Four technical features of the Internet and Intranet systems likely to have significant impact on the operation of tax systems are:
-	the lack of central control; 
-	the lack of central registration; 
-	the difficulty of tracing transactions;  and 
-	the weak correspondence between domain names (Internet address) and actual location.

One of the most significant issues raised by e-commerce for income tax regimes is related to jurisdiction.  Countries generally exercise jurisdiction over taxable income on the basis of residence or source.  Both are likely to become more elusive with e-commerce. “Permanent establishment” and "fixed base" are difficult to determine with respect to electronic transactions.
The difficulty of tracing transactions and verifying the parties to a transaction also enhances the danger of increased tax avoidance and evasion.  Insofar as a jurisdiction is relying on the residence principle as the basis for taxation, e-commerce will provide enhanced opportunities to move income out of high-tax jurisdictions.  Source-based taxation is at least as difficult, as e-commerce does not seem to occur in any particular physical location but takes place in the nebulous world of cyberspace.  
Another problem for income tax regimes is the characterization of income.  E-commerce is generating countless transactions that raise income characterization issues whose resolution is uncertain under existing categories of income.  The characterization of income either as royalty income or as business profits might have important implications for developing countries and countries in transition.  For example, a developed country company might have some kind of subsidiary in a developing country that uses and pays for the services of a database from the main company.  The main company could then attempt to have that income classified as business profits in order to avoid to pay tax in the developing country, claiming that it does not have any permanent establishment in that country.  The developing country government could argue that the payment in question is royalty income and that it has the right to impose a withholding tax as the source of the royalty income would be the developing country.  One important question with respect to direct taxes is thus what the appropriate rules are for the division of the taxable income between different countries.
Abandoning the source-based principle in favour of the residence-based principle in the context of e-commerce would violate accepted international norms of tax policy.  In addition, it is by no means clear that residence-based taxation provides a panacea for the difficulties of assigning income from e-commerce on a source basis.  A residence-based rule raises troublesome questions of international tax equity.  A shift to residence-based taxation would be a boon to the United States as the world’s leader in the production of electronic content.  The reduced need for a seller or service provider to have a physical presence in the country of the customer threaten to shift the balance of taxing jurisdiction and revenue in favour of the country of residence.  Since income flows between developed and developing countries often are severely out of balance, such a shift could have significant revenue consequences.
A third problem for income tax regimes is the potential for transfer pricing.  Defining the price of a physical good transferred between related enterprises might be difficult enough.  Defining the price of digital transfers is even more difficult as the units within which the transfers are made are difficult to trace and as the value might to a large extent be intangible.
The problems concerning the application of consumption taxes are generally recognized as having more immediacy than the issues concerning direct taxation.  In examining the impact of e-commerce on consumption taxes, a distinction should be made between value added taxes (VAT) like those adopted by members of the European Union and the retail sales tax (RST) in force in the United States.  The problems created by e-commerce for indirect taxation are in many ways analogous to those for direct taxation.  For example, the jurisdictional problems of getting remote vendors into the taxing regimes are the same.
It is not business-to-business or business-to-consumer sales of tangible products effected through electronic networks that raise novel and difficult questions for the VAT, but rather business-to-business and business-to-consumer sales of digital products.  Although the large majority of e‑commerce transactions are business-to-business, it is the business-to-consumer sales of digital products which has drawn most attention.  There is not yet any perfect system for the collection of indirect taxes on electronic deliveries. Consumers might have to self-assess how much VAT they are obliged to pay.  Software to trace transactions is available, although expensive.  It is a question of the price the user is willing to pay for the accuracy sought.
Characterization is important because liability for the VAT depends on the place of supply, and the determination whether a supply is one of goods or services is critical in determining if and when the VAT is due as well as establishing the party responsible for paying it to the taxing authorities.
As transactions are increasingly digitized, mechanisms to tax consumption where it occurs have to be put in place.  There are no real divergences of view in that respect.  Governments need to agree on how to divide the income tax base among themselves.  The challenges posed by e-commerce for tax administration are enormous.  However, the implications of modern information technologies for tax administrations are not exclusively negative.  New technologies create increased opportunities for streamlining tax administration by replacing paper documentation with electronic data interchange (EDI), by providing for electronic filing of tax returns, and by automating other aspects of tax reporting and compliance.  Some countries might almost be able to "skip the paper generation". Nevertheless, even if the many technical issues are resolved, political questions, which may be even more formidable will remain.  However, it is possible to arrive at an effective, even if not perfect, tax regime in a world of e-commerce.

Implications for developing countries

Tax revenue constitutes more than 80 per cent of total government revenue in developed countries and just below 80 per cent of developing country government revenue.  Import duties account for a small share of 2-3 per cent of total government revenue in developed countries, whereas it is more important for developed countries where it accounts for almost 20 per cent.  Customs duties are normally levied on physically imported goods.  The increase in the number of goods that can be traded digitally, and the customs moratorium on electronic transmissions, have raised the possibility of a loss of customs revenue, especially for developing countries.
The products concerned are a limited group.  Digitized products can be defined as products that can be identified by HS code, delivered physically (via carrier medium such as cd, tape, diskette, hard copy), and be transformed into digital format and transferred digitally (via networks).  Digitized products include items such as books, newspapers  and other printed material, software, recorded music, film, video and video games.  According to 1999 statistics, developed countries accounted for more than 80 per cent of both imports and exports of these products.  However, digitized products accounted for less than one per cent of the value of world imports and exports respectively and less than half a per cent of developing country imports and exports.  Nevertheless, the growth of developing country digitized exports has been higher than the corresponding growth rates for developed countries in the last few years.  This indicates that developing countries are increasing their share of digitized exports.
Considering the tariffs on products that could be delivered in digitized form over the Internet, developing countries applied an average MFN rate of about 15 per cent whereas in developed countries the figure was under 4 per cent in 1999.  However, there are large variations between individual countries in each group and between products.  Although developing countries only import about 20 per cent of world digitized imports, the higher import duties they levy means that developing countries receive more than 60 per cent of world tariff revenue from products in this category.  Other duties levied on imports of products that could be delivered in digitized form over the Internet include customs surcharges such as fees, uplifts, statistical taxes and port taxes which on an average adds about 7 per cent to the customs tariff, and internal taxes such as VAT, sales taxes and consumption taxes which add an additional 15 per cent to the tariff.  World tariff revenue on digitized products amounted to just less than one billion US$ in 1999 whereas the figure is 8 billion US$ when other customs surcharges and internal taxes are included.  
Although developing countries receive the largest share when tariff revenue alone is considered (about US$ 0.6 billion out of the world total of almost one billion US$), developed countries have the lion's share when all import revenue, including consumption taxes are considered.  Nevertheless, tariff revenue from digitized products in 1999 was minimal to total government revenue in both developed (0,04 per cent) and developing countries (0,16 per cent).  The share of total government revenue stemming from the revenue of imported digitized products is 0.6 per cent in developing countries and 0.4 per cent in developed countries.  The potential relative revenue losses are thus relatively higher in developing countries than in developed countries although they are small in terms of overall government revenue.  As developing countries generally tend to rely to a greater extent on tariffs for their government revenue, any tariff reduction is costly.  This is nothing specific to e-commerce.
Developing countries are likely to remain net e-commerce importers in the short to medium term in spite of their current high growth rates of e-commerce exports.  Despite that, e-commerce offers several opportunities for developing countries.  Duty-free imports of electronic deliverables will provide consumers and the private sector in developing countries with cheaper imports, especially as software is becoming increasingly important for businesses wishing to engage in e‑commerce.  E-commerce will spur cross-border trade and the highest growth rates are in developing countries.  Developing countries are diversifying into exports of ICT-related products and services and are gaining market shares.

WTO specific considerations

The e-commerce classification issue concerns whether digital deliveries of certain types of products fall under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) or the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) framework.  This issue seems to have become one of the most difficult and sensitive issues of the entire WTO Work Programme on e-commerce.  The classification issue relates to other questions such as customs duties and the potential differences in how internal taxes are dealt with.  However, the classification issue is not only a revenue consideration, it is also linked to levels of liberalization and benefits across the two agreements.  In this connection, it is important to note that the Moratorium on customs duties on electronic transmissions relates only to customs duties and not to other taxes.
Under the overall WTO Work Programme on e-commerce, the Council for Trade in Services has observed that the majority of online trade consists of services.  It had also been observed, although no final conclusion has been arrived at, that the modes of supply through which services are defined in the Services Agreement (GATS) make no distinctions with regard to the technologies involved in the delivery.  There are no references or exclusions of any technology that might be used for electronic supply.  If that could be formally agreed, it would mean that existing obligations and commitments of the GATS apply to e-commerce in services.  With regard to goods, the Council for Trade in Goods has observed that when a purchase is made on-line but the product delivered physically, the normal GATT rules apply.  However, the Council for Trade in Goods has left open the question of how to treat a product that can be traded in either physical or digital form.
It is important to keep in mind that only a narrow range of media products may currently be imported under HS classifications and/or downloaded online.  Trade in these products amounts to approximately 1 per cent of total merchandize trade and less than 1 per cent of total duties collected world wide.  Moreover, only some on-line products are concerned as much of what can be delivered electronically is regarded as services.  The vast majority of services are therefore not at stake.  Most media and entertainment products never did cross borders in physical formats and are clearly regarded as services, such as television and radio programming and broadcasting for example.  Approximately 99 per cent of merchandise trade and more than 99 per cent of duties collected world wide are not at stake and there has not yet been any dispute with respect to the classification problem.
The GATT covers the physical carrier medium, but it is not clear whether that includes the content or if it is irrespective of it.  It can also be questioned whether new forms of "carriage" without a physical medium is part of the GATT and what that content is.  The question goes to the heart of the definition of information.  The GATS appears to cover the development, production, and distribution of information and entertainment, as well as the live performance and adaptation of radio and TV broadcasts. 
As already noted, classification has become a pivotal issue because of the structural differences between the GATT and the GATS.  The essence of GATT is to reduce or eliminate tariffs over time through the binding of tariff concessions, but tariffs are permitted under those rules.  National treatment of internal taxes is obligatory under GATT.  On the other hand, tariffs are so uncommon in services trade that the GATS does not even mention them.  National treatment for internal taxes is negotiated service by service under GATS.  Levels of benefits extended by GATT can thus differ significantly from those available under GATS in the short term.  While quantitative restrictions are prohibited under the GATT and national treatment is obligatory, under GATS the progressive elimination of barriers to trade is negotiated and national treatment progressively implemented.  The differences between the agreements are largely eliminated if the full implementation of each is considered.  In addition, the scope of the GATS is wider.  The main difference between the two agreements remaining with full liberalization would be the scope.  The GATS covers not only the imports of a product but four different modes of supply and there are benefits accruing to the suppliers of the products, in particular through "commercial presence" mode.  Generalizing, it can be said that the GATT corresponds to the GATS mode 1 which is "cross-border supply".  The classification issue is thus both limited to a small group of products which can be traded on-line and/or physically, and to only one of the four modes of supply under the GATS.
Some of the products concerned can and do enter markets under both GATT and GATS at the same time depending on the "carriage" or delivery vehicle used.  This may continue to be the case for some time to come.  In some cases, the content is similar or even identical but receives different treatment depending on whether GATT or GATS applies.  Even if the status quo was accepted as an option some classification work might still be needed as neither GATT nor GATS classification schemes may fully or unambiguously cover some of the products or content concerned.  If the products concerned were classified as goods it may clarify the situation with respect to tariffs and national treatment for these products.  However, it could have unintended consequences for the scope of the GATS as it might affect the status of other on-line services beyond those actually at issue.  On the other hand, if the products concerned were to be classified as services, it may clarify the status of most forms of e-commerce.  It would nevertheless leave open the issue of differing treatment of similar products delivered by physical and electronic means and it could raise questions on the GATT status of the content of digital products that remain traded in physical formats.
What needs to be considered with respect to tariff revenue is how significant the value of GATT tariffs are on these products and what the status of tariffs is under GATS.  As concerns tax revenue, Members are entitled to non-discriminatory internal taxes under both GATT and GATS and need to consider the feasibility and desirability of taxing on-line products.  With respect to the levels of benefits, the implications of classification concerns for products traditionally subject to sensitivities and trade restrictions are different from the implications for products for which freer trade has been the norm.  Delegations will have to consider if it is reasonable that a determination on classification, in itself, might result in the removal of barriers on certain products or in the evaporation of benefits heretofore available for others, and if there is a case for possible consideration of sector-specific solutions for certain products.
In considering the classification issue, the broader picture has to be kept in mind with questions such as:
	-	the implications of e-commerce for the promotion of economic development;
	-	the implications for development of erecting barriers to e-commerce; 
	-	the implications for expanding trade and economic growth of legal uncertainty about how WTO agreements apply to e-business and e-trade when transparency, legal certainty, predictability and spreading of the benefits economic growth equitably are what the trading system is all about; whether;  and
	-	the WTO risks falling behind as commercial players continue to adopt and employ the new advances in technology to commercial trade.

It was mentioned that developing countries might not wish to rush into multilateral disciplines before understanding the implications for the sector.  However, it was also said that the understanding of some delegations is that the existing rules already apply to e-commerce.  The cost of imposing tariffs or taxes on electronic transmissions will be larger than the revenue that can be collected.  Internally in the US there is a moratorium on imposing new or discriminatory taxes.

Government Experiences

European Communities

The European Communities (EC) has experience of the implications for consumption taxes of e-commerce, specifically in relation to the European Union Value Added Tax (VAT) system.  The current urgency is the potential competitive imbalances that could be created.  The EC is not of the view that there is a need for an international moratorium on domestic taxes on e-commerce.  However, there is a need for an international agreement on fundamental principles.  One of the building blocks was laid at the OECD's Ottawa Conference in 1998 where, as far as consumption taxes are concerned, there was a measure of agreement on two general principles.  One was that if e-commerce transactions are to be taxed, then taxation should accrue to the jurisdiction in which consumption takes place.  The second was that for consumption tax purposes, these transactions should not be treated as goods.  When the European Union considered applying these principles to its own tax systems there were some potential points of tension.  Three possible paths could be taken.  One was to wait for e-business to mature before taking any action.  The second was to adopt a moratorium on e-commerce taxes and remove them where they had already been applied.  Thirdly, there was the path the EC opted for, which was to change the tax system to take account of cross-border transactions in e-commerce where they cause tension within the domestic regime.
The Council of the European Community is currently in the process of changing the VAT legislation to take into account specific problems raised by e-commerce.  The new laws will take effect on 1 July 2003.  The EC is the first large jurisdiction to attempt to implement the OECD principles.  The reasons include that the EC has a VAT system with a general tax on consumption (whether a good or a service).  For businesses there is a provision for credit for input tax.  These changes are not revenue driven.  The intention is rather to rectify a competitive imbalance.  What had happened was that the EC effectively taxed exported services while imported services became tax exempted.  The potential for competitive imbalance was found in the areas of software, Web-hosting, programme maintenance, data processing, entertainment, music, sports events, distance teaching and gambling.  The tax rules with respect to broadcasting were changed at the same time, as the tax problems were similar and as convergence in technology will bring them together.  The competitive imbalances occur where EU-based companies are required to pay VAT whereas companies supplying EC consumers from a base abroad are tax exempted.  What the EC will do is to change the place of supply (taxation) in order for all companies supplying EC consumers with digitally delivered services to be taxed equally.  The EC attempts to introduce the changes to create a level playing field without disrupting legitimate business activities.

Whether or not to tax services and intangibles is a matter for each jurisdiction.  The EC has always sought to tax them without putting domestic companies at a disadvantage.  The technologies exist to make such a system work in practice.  Most tax systems deal with business-to-business taxation on a self-assessment basis in the jurisdiction where consumption is deemed to take place.  The place of taxation for consumption is not always easy to determine for intangibles, especially where intangibles are linked to physical goods.  Such cases create opportunities for businesses to split the transactions among different companies.  For internal business-to-business transactions the EC has a system with tax collection taking place in one of the 15 EC Member states.  The new tax laws will be put in place for an initial three-year period after which the evolution of e-commerce will be evaluated.  It can be asked why, for a relatively small area of activity, has EC gone the trouble to make a significant change in a tax system to attempt to collect taxes from companies which do not have a physical presence in the jurisdiction.  The reason is the potential importance of e-commerce for the tax-base for the European VAT system.  
Malaysia

Though e-commerce has the potential to increase productivity and even increase revenue for developing countries the experiences in the developing world differ as to the gains that can be attained.
The Malaysian Government has the vision for Malaysia to be a developed nation by 2020 but with strong moral and ethical values and an equitable distribution of wealth.  The idea is to go from an information society through a knowledge society to a value-based knowledge society considering both social and economic aspects.  The tool is the Multimedia Super Corridor (MSC) which will enhance Malaysia's competitiveness.  The strategy is first to offer an ideal multi-media environment to attract world-class companies which in turn can catalyze Malaysian companies to become world class over time.  The Malaysian MSC is more than just a technology park.  It has special cyberlaws, policies and practices and modern infrastructure.  The seven flagship applications are smart schools, multi-purpose cards, electronic government, telehealth, R&D clusters, borderless marketing centers and a Worldwide Manufacturing Web.  Progress to date (i.e. during the seven years the project has existed) include almost 700 companies with MSC status out of which 50 are world-class, the initiation of the Government multi-purpose card, growing investments in technology and high value-added economic activities, rapid growth in sales and exports, creation of new knowledge-based employment opportunities, growth in higher learning institutions, increased SME participation, and spin-offs to the rest of the economy including enhanced productivity.  The idea is for the MSC to expand to all of Malaysia before 2020 and for Malaysia to leap-frog into leadership in the knowledge economy.  It is estimated that when 20 per cent of the Malaysian population has access to the Internet, e-commerce growth will really take off.
Some lessons have been learned.  Nations need to identify clusters for industrial development and reposition themselves to be at the centre of the virtual marketplace.  E-commerce reduces the transaction costs which represent a large portion of the activities within an economy, thus leading to efficiency gains.  E-commerce has also led to the destruction of the vertically integrated value chain.  Consumers have the choice of new intermediaries or no intermediaries at all.  Enhanced information and new channels make it easier for companies to buy at lowest cost and sell at highest price.  The global implications are that first movers enjoy entrenched positions.  Companies will move location if the policies are more favourable elsewhere.  There will be winners and losers in the knowledge age and companies and governments need to be ready.  Government interventionist policies are needed to correct for market imperfections.  Capital will gravitate towards a few "hubs" which have developed a critical mass of users and producers.  Developing countries might soon become attractive.
E-business may be used to circumvent non-tariff barriers and gain access to the protected service sectors of emerging economies.  The Government of Malaysia is concerned with the impact of e-commerce on taxation.  The concerns are based on the growth of virtual organizations which cannot be tracked as electronic trade does not require the physical presence of the people or agencies involved, the absence of a clear definition of "transaction" for tax collection purposes, and the potential loss of revenue due to increased tax evasion and the "black economy".
Other pressing issues for the Government, demanded by vendors, include requests for standard guidelines (regulations) for e-commerce, the endorsement of credible merchants, the promotion of local e-commerce products and services, consumer protection, IP protection and enforcement, and grants and subsidies.  The existing legal framework in Malaysia is insufficient.  The role of existing regulators has to be reviewed.  Changes to the regulatory framework is necessary to boost consumer confidence.  The aim is to expand existing laws to apply equally to online and offline transactions with minimal and light-handed interventions.  Self regulation is promoted and consumer guidelines should be drawn up.  There have been conflicts between trademark rights and registration of domain names and there has been inequality in bargaining power in registration of domain names.  Much work is needed to develop an intellectual property management system.  Another challenge for the Malaysian Government is to enact new laws based on the UNCTIRAL Model Law to apply contractual principles to e-commerce.  The domestic laws for settling disputes also need to be revised to take the electronic business environment into account.
The Malaysian Government has come across several difficulties in taxing e-commerce.  For income taxes it has experienced the difficulty of applying "source-based" taxation and the question of whether a server is considered a "physical presence" for tax purposes.   Another difficulty experienced is that the tax provisions do not cover multi-jurisdictional transactions and that there are enforcement problems as information can be encrypted and lack audit trails.  The Government might consider the introduction of stringent regulations as to identity, legislation that would impose a duty on the Internet Service Provider (ISP) to obtain information from businesses registering with them, and powers to decode encrypted private data.  It might also attempt to renegotiate double tax agreements as in current agreements it is not clear whether websites or host servers are permanent establishments subject to tax.  The Malaysian Stamp Duty Act of 1949 based on paper instruments is difficult to enforce on electronic documents. The Government might try to extend the stamp duty to electronic documents.  For other types of taxes the difficulties include the fact that record keeping requirements are based on paper documents.  Enforcement provisions should provide for electronic records.  The delivery of intangible goods increases the ease of avoiding the payment of duties and current provisions for enforcement are insufficient to capture e-commerce transactions.  The monitoring, audit and investigative powers of the Government therefore need to be enhanced to take modern information technologies into account.
It has to be recognized that E-commerce will transform the national and global economic landscape and the emergence of a new breed of companies providing services in cyber-space.  The borderless nature of e-commerce will expose countries to the effects of liberalization and globalization and it is imperative for nations to be "e-ready."  They need to focus and develop skills in the knowledge-intensive areas required by global markets such as e-commerce tax advisors and e-commerce lawyers.  A clear policy framework is required to create a climate for growth of the ICT sector.
Barbados

The experience of Barbados shows that it is possible for small countries and small suppliers to take advantage of e-commerce opportunities.  One example is a St. Lucian entrepreneur who attempted to sell a "cocoa-stick" out of which one could make hot cocoa, on the Internet.  He targeted the St. Lucian diaspora in North America and Europe.  After two days he had to shut the Website down.  The problem was that he had sold three years of supply.  This story shows that the opportunities are there, but they need to be backed by business plans to take account of unforeseen circumstances.  Flexibility to involve other people and build alliances is also necessary to meet market demand.
E-commerce provides an opportunity to the developing world for a significant period of economic expansion in an increasingly interconnected world.  It provides the potential for more sustainable development, the creation of better jobs, expanded world trade and improved social conditions.  It offers the possibility of breaking the cycle of incremental change with marginal improvements or stagnation by vastly improving efficiency, reducing transactions costs and expanding both markets and products at an unprecedented rate.  E-commerce involves much more than transactional activity.  It involves marketing, customer service, problem solving and research.  Research is vital for many businesses who need to track things such as commodity prices to keep the local suppliers honest.  
New challenges have arisen and will continue to arise in areas such as taxation, where governments will continue to seek to protect revenue streams.  The Government of Barbados believes that this should be done without distorting economic and technological choices.  Any changes require a reassessment of the effectiveness of government policies towards commerce and of traditional commercial practices and procedures, most of which were formed in an analogue world with a different image of commerce in mind.  Present experiences with e-commerce fall into two broad categories: trade in physical and digital products and trade in a growing number of services.  Because of the nascent stage of development of e-commerce there is much uncertainty about the nature of the trade that will take place in intangible or digital products and a difficulty in determining the classification of such products as goods or services.
At present all electronically ordered and/or paid physical products are taxed at the port of entry through the application of import duties and VAT.  However, electronically transmitted products such as software, music and video, and other services escape both import duties and VAT.  This loss in revenue for the Government of Barbados must be balanced with the need to encourage the growth of e-commerce to maximize the sale of goods and services from Barbados to the rapidly expanding global electronic market place.
In light of the potential for the expansion of the economy by utilizing e-commerce to reach a wider market and to focus on specific high yield customers, the Government of Barbados believes that it would not be prudent to implement direct taxation on trade in digital products and services delivered through electronic means at this time.  Thus the Government of Barbados supports the provisional agreement not to introduce any new tax on electronic transmissions through which digital products and services are delivered.  Governments must also be mindful of the rapidly changing technological environment and the introduction of second Internet (II) that will expand the range and complexity of e-commerce through the introduction of high speed transmissions coupled with enhanced security systems.  This will introduce new products and new ways of conducting business which are unpredictable at this time.
The Government of Barbados will continue to develop systems that integrate with e-commerce and facilitate the clearance of physical goods through the port.  In this regard there is an existing system of integration of express delivery carrier operations with the customs department which facilitates the automatic download of an aircraft's manifest upon take off which allows for the automatic generation of tax computation for the entire manifest and the payment of all import duties and VAT for all cargo upon landing.  This system can be expanded to all air and sea freight carriers.  The technology can thus be used to enhance the discipline and the accuracy of the current system of tax collection.  As e-commerce is a dynamic activity, it would be imprudent to burden the private sector with cumbersome regulations and tax systems which would inhibit experimentation in the current period of developing new products, services and delivery systems.  A vision could be the steam engine developed in Europe with a man carrying a red flag walking in front of it to ensure that it did not go too fast.  The Government of Barbados does not intend to put any red flags in front of the Internet.  Barbados stands to gain much more by maintaining an environment conducive to the growth and development of e-commerce than by introducing new and restrictive measures to tax digital products and services at this point in time.  Barbados's experience to date does not indicate a significant loss in revenue while there has been a positive contribution in several areas.  This includes the expansion of the hospitality industry and the development of repeat customers, direct marketing of local products, and the development of new business opportunities that expand economic activity beyond the island shores into the region, the Western Hemisphere and the global marketplace.
Kenya

The perspective of Kenya is quite different to that of Malaysia and Barbados.  The Government of Kenya recognises the important role that e-commerce can play for trade and development and in particular for poverty alleviation.  However, the current focus is on developing policies which recognize the electronic aspects of trade in transforming the economy into a modern market economy.  This is done through various initiatives.  First, the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) recognizes that ICTs have an important role to play in poverty alleviation.  Trade and e-commerce are also important in that respect.  The telecommunication and postal sector policy statement of 1999 is another initiative.  Third, Kenya is a participant in the New Partnership for African Development (NEPAD).  Finally, the Government had set up a sector Working Group on Information Technology under the Ministry of Finance and Planning.

The state of the information technology infrastructure in Kenya gives a picture of the development of its e-commerce.  Access to the Intenet is exclusively controlled by "Jambo Net", which is a subsidiary of the state-controlled Telkom Kenya.  "Jambo Net" sells bandwidth to various Internet Services Providers (ISPs).  Although more than a hundred ISPs have been licenced by the Communications Commission of Kenya (CCK.) as required, only about 30 are operational.  Similarly Telkom Kenya has the exclusive rights for the provision of international Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) facilities.  The following statistics gives an indication of the use of e‑commerce in Kenya:
	-	Teledensity is pegged at 4 lines per 100 people in urban areas and 0.16 rural in areas;
	-	Internet access is limited to about 200,000 people out of a population of 30 million;
	-	50 per cent of the users are multi‑national corporations, international corporations and NGO'S; 
	-	Less than 5 per cent of the users are government and educational institutions;
	-	There are only about 50,000 e-mail accounts;
	-	The number of ".ke"-domains was about 1,700 in 2001;
	-	Most websites are run by exporters of products or services, i.e. 

Tours and Travel	50%
Hotels and Restaurants	20%
Arts and Handicrafts	16%
Agriculture		4%
Manufacturing		1%
Shipping		1%

From the above information it is clear that the level of usage of the Internet in Kenya is relatively low.  The challenges of e-commerce development in Kenya include to:
	-	develop a policy framework on e-commerce.  A common policy spanning many different ministries and government agencies is necessary but currently lacking.
	-	adopt a legal framework, possibly based on the UNCITRAL model law.  There is as yet no legal framework covering electronic transactions.
	-	develop the telecommunications infrastructure, especially in rural areas where 70 per cent of the population live, but where access to electricity, telephone and financial services is limited and costs high.  

Kenya is a developing country that relies heavily on import duties to supplement government revenue to meet various development objectives.  Out of KShs. 200 000 million collected every year, direct taxes contribute about a quarter while indirect taxes contributes slightly over half of the total revenue.  Only import duties and VAT on imports together accounts for a quarter of total government revenue.  Since 1997 import duties collected have shown an upward trend, although as from the year 2000 the increase has been marginal.  This latter can be attributed to the liberalisation measures being undertaken both at regional and international level and particularly within the COMESA as member states adopt the Free Trade Area.
The growth of e‑commerce has great potential to expand markets, productivity and competitiveness.  The challenge and dilemma for the Government is how to tax the increased revenue arising from e‑transactions.  On the other hand Kenya's competitive edge is in the agriculture and manufacturing sectors and the priority concern for the Government is rather how to enhance access to the Internet to improve productivity in those sectors rather than how to tax Internet transactions.  The major challenges therefore include:
	-	enhanced technical and institutional capacity to monitor e-transactions;
	-	human resource development;
	-	compliance and enforcement, especially in the large informal sector;  and
	-	improved communications infrastructure.

Although intellectual property rights in Kenya are governed by the Industrial Property Act, the onus of monitoring infringement of intellectual property rights rests with the owners.  The Government will only act on enforcement.  One private sector organization, the Music Copyright Society Kenya (MCSK), has been active in monitoring the infringement of copyrights and they have in certain cases been successful.  Other rights holders do not have associations.
The Government of Kenya recognises the important role that e‑commerce can play in trade development and particularly in poverty alleviation and that the country needs to catch up with e-commerce.  A national Task Force on e‑commerce was therefore established in 1999 with the mandate of enhancing the use of e‑commerce.  The task force has now been re-constituted and registered as an independent organization: the Nationwide Task Force on E-Commerce (NTFECOM).  The initiatives have been strengthened further through the International Trade Centre's (ITC) "E‑Trade Bridge"-Programme for Kenya which is spearheaded by NTFECOM.  Through this programme the NTFECOM has been able to identify Kenya's e-commerce strengths and weaknesses and is currently in the process of translating the E-Trade Programme into a policy document for submission to the Government.  The Government should then prioritize:
	-	policies for facilitating e-trade;
	-	telecommunications infrastructure;
	-	the legal and regulatory framework;
	-	the financial environment;
	-	human and institutional capacity building;  and
	-	the e-commerce support network.

Delegations felt, in conclusion, that there is need to continue the debate and further analytical work including impact studies to get a clearer picture of the implications of e-commerce for the development of developing countries in fulfilment of the Doha Development Agenda.  It seems that e-commerce poses both challenges and opportunities to developed and developing country governments and companies alike.  The direct effects on government revenue through tariff losses seem to be very small whereas the effects on the efficiency of an economy can be large.


PROGRAMME OF THE SEMINAR ON
REVENUE IMPLICATIONS OF E-COMMERCE

	The seminar is being organized under the auspices of the WTO Committee on Trade and Development.  The proceedings are intended to serve as an input into the Committee's consideration of the issue of electronic commerce as part of the overall WTO Work Programme.

Chair:		Ambassador Mary Whelan, Ireland 

10:00-11:00	First Session:	Trends in e-commerce

Statistics on the evolution of e-commerce
Recent developments and forecasts

Panellist:	Mrs. Julie Meringer, Group Director, European Research and
		Managing Director UK, Forrester Research.


11:00-12:00	Second Session:
		Revenue effects of e-commerce and the underlying information technology

Overview
How the development of e-commerce affects and may affect government revenue (customs tariffs, consumption taxes,  income taxes)
How information technologies provide opportunities for tax authorities

Panellist:	Mr. Walter Hellerstein, Francis Shackelford Professor of Taxation - University of Georgia Law School, United States

Development Dimension
Sources of government revenue in developing countries, dependence on tariffs and taxes
Current taxation practices in developing countries
Implications of the moratorium on customs duties on electronic transmissions for developing countries
Other revenue implications of e-commerce for developing countries:  sales tax, profit tax, etc.

Panellist:		Dr. Susanne Teltscher, Economic Affairs Officer, E-Commerce Branch,  UNCTAD


12:00-13:00	Third Session:	
		Fiscal implications of e-commerce:  A WTO perspective

GATT/GATS implications for customs duties (discrimination, progressive liberalization and classification)
GATT/GATS implications for internal taxation (non-discrimination, regulatory issues and classification)
Issues related to harmonization
Considerations relating to the moratorium on customs duties on electronic transmissions

Panellist:		Mrs. Lee Tuthill, Counsellor, Trade in Services Division, WTO

13:00-15:00	Lunch Break

15:00-16:30	Fourth Session:
		Government and Private Sector Experiences

Government experiences 
Private sector experiences

Panellists:	Mr. Arthur Kerrigan, Head of Sector, International Services, Electronic Commerce and Financial Services,  Directorate-General for Taxation and the Customs Union, European Communities
Mr. Suhaimi Nordin, Senior Manager, E-Commerce, Multimedia Development Corporation, Malaysia
		Senator Philip Goddard, Special envoy for technology, trade and investment, Prime Minister's Office, Barbados
	Mr. Morten Sven Johannessen, Corporate Project Leader for E-business, Statoil, Norway
	Mr. James M. Kiiru, Department of External Trade, Ministry of Trade And Industry, Kenya

__________






 WT/IFSC/1.
 Document WT/BFA/SPEC/73.
 WT/COMTD/LDC/M/24
 WT/COMTD/35.
 The WTO Work Programme on Electronic Commerce, adopted by the General Council on 25 September 1998, is contained in document WT/L/274.
 The report of the 1999 seminar can be found in document WT/COMTD/18.
 The report of the 2001 seminar is an attachment (beginning on page 32) to document WT/COMTD/M/35.
 The views expressed with respect to the WTO specific considerations were those of an individual Secretariat staff member, speaking in her personal capacity, and do not reflect any views on the part of the WTO Secretariat.
 The detailed text and some comments to the legislation is available on the website: www.europa.int (under taxation).

WT/COMTD/M/40 Page  PAGE 42



	WT/COMTD/M/40 	Page  PAGE 41













