RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/12

25 November 1996

ORGANIZATION

(96-4992)

 

Committee on Trade and Development
Twelfth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 15 AND 31 OCTOBER 1996

&& Chairman: Mr. Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)

A. Adoption of the Agenda
1. The Committee adopted the following agenda:

A. Adoption of the Agenda

B. The Report of the Committee on Trade and Development to the General Council
C. Other Business
2 The Committee agreed to take up the question of observer status of international organizations

at one of its future meetings, taking account of the relevant guidelines adopted by the General Council
and, for the time being, to follow the Committee's ad hoc procedure of inviting the same organizations
for the next meeting which were invited to this meeting.

B. The Report of the Committee on Trade and Development to the General Council

3. &&The Committee adopted its Report to the General Council (subsequently circulated in document
WT/COMTD/9).

C. Other Business

- Draft Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation

4.&& The Committee adopted the Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation (subsequently circulated
in document WT/COMTD/8).

3: && The representative of El Salvador said that her delegation attached particular importance to
technical cooperation as a way to facilitate Members in fulfilling their commitments under the WTO.
It was her delegation's understanding that the practical training programmes envisaged in Section II. 1
of the Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation included internships in both the WTO Secretariat
and in Geneva-based Missions.

6. && The Chairman said that the Committee would include the matter of practical training programmes,
including the internships mentioned by the delegation of El Salvador, in its future discussions on the
monitoring, management and evaluation of WTO technical cooperation activities.

- Ministerial Meeting for Ministers of Least-Developed Countries Members of the WTO
to be held in Geneva in November 1996. The Chairman said that he had been informed by the Secretariat that a Ministerial Meeting
for Ministers of Least-Developed Countries Members of the WTO would be held in Geneva from 13 to
15 November 1996. The meeting, financed by the governments of Norway, the Republic of Korea
and the Czech Republic, would focus on the preparation of the Ministerial Conference in Singapore.
He welcomed the initiative taken by the three Members.

8. &&The Committee took note of the statement made.

- Draft Comprehensive and Integrated WTO Plan of Action for the Least-Developed
Countries

9.&&The Committee agreed to forward to the General Council, as a draft, the text of the WTO Plan
of Action for the Least-Developed Countries which it had before it, for its consideration and submission
to Ministers for adoption in Singapore. (The text, as forwarded to the General Council was subsequently
circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/20. )

10.&& The representative of the European Communities expressed disappointment with the text of
the Plan of Action, which had been considerably emptied of substance. His delegation was, however,
prepared to go along with it in the interest of joining a consensus. The draft, as it would be transmitted
to the General Council, was really a minimal guideline, and his delegation was hopeful that Members
would use the time between this meeting and the Singapore Ministerial Conference, and indeed, the
Singapore Conference itself and beyond, to build on what was an absolutely minimalistic structure.
This was a necessity.

11. && The Chairman said that he appreciated the spirit of the statement of the delegation of the
European Communities. He hoped, as a Chairman and as a representative of a developing country,
that the draft Plan of Action would be considered as a good framework, enabling additional initiatives
to be included. In that context, he drew the attention to part IV of the Plan of Action, entitled "Other
Initiatives", which could appropriately be expanded, not necessarily on a multilateral basis. He was
hopeful that between this meeting and the Singapore Conference, and maybe before or during the
High-Level Meeting planned for next year, some Members would be in a position to contribute more
substance to the Plan of Action. This would be in line with the Committee's objective to avoid
marginalization of the least-developed countries and to bring them on board, at a time when the WTO
might be embarking on new areas within its competence.

12. && The representative of the United States said that his delegation wished to express its appreciation
for the Chairman's efforts in putting together not only a Report but also a Plan of Action for the
Least-Developed Countries, which was a start, even though it was not necessarily satisfactory to all.
The one element that was important about the Plan of Action was its integrity and credibility. The
Committee had rightly avoided the inclusion of text which would have sent a message which could
not be turned into realities. In that respect it was a credible Plan on which to build without creating
false expectations. This was an important element of the Committee reflecting its maturity.

13. &&The Committee took note of the statements made.

- Next meeting of the Committee

14. && The Chairman proposed that the Committee, at its next meeting, planned for 25 November,
set the track for the modalities of WTO technical cooperation activities in light of the newly adopted
Guidelines, and start to reflect on ways to conduct its discussions on that item next year, when it might
have another Chairperson. Taking up this issue at the Committee's next meeting in November would
signal that Members were serious about identifying the best possible technical cooperation in WTO.
He also proposed that the Committee invite UNCTAD and the ITC to contribute with a description
of their respective modalities of providing technical assistance. This would enable the Committee to
compare notes and would be in line with the aim of enhancing the WTO/UNCTAD/ITC institutional
dialogue with a view to ensuring a coherent approach and identifying areas of competence and
complementarity. In this context, he recalled that the Guidelines also called for a three-year plan for
WTO technical assistance activities, similar to the three-year cycles of UNCTAD and ITC.

15. && The Committee took note of the statements made.
