RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/14

17 March 1997

ORGANIZATION

(97-1075)

 

Committee on Trade and Development
Fourteenth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 17 FEBRUARY 1997
 

&&Chairman: H.E. Mr. Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)

1. The Committee on Trade and Development held its fourteenth session on 17 March 1997.
The agenda for the meeting, contained in WTO/AIR/519, was adopted.

(i) Agenda Item B: Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries

 

- High-Level Meeting on Least-Developed Countries

 

2 &&The Chairman recalled that Ministers in Singapore agreed to organize a High-Level Meeting
with the UNCTAD and ITC in 1997, along with aid agencies, multilateral financial institutions and
least-developed countries (LDCs), to foster an integrated approach to assist these countries to enhance
their trading opportunities. The initiative for the Meeting had come from the CTD. He had been
conducting informal consultations with a number of delegations and the three secretariats involved,
and the secretariats had circulated an informal Note on the preparation of the meeting in the CTD as
a basis for discussion. He encouraged delegations to comment on the substance of the Note, noting
that the WTO Secretariat would have to act quickly in organizing the Meeting and needed guidance
fromthe CTD. Two questions deserved immediate attention: what should be the Agenda of the meeting,
and which international organizations should be involved? Regarding procedure, he requested the
agreement of the CTD in principle on the four steps suggested for the preparatory process under Item C.3
of the Note.

3.&& The representative of Madagascar said that the Meeting should testify to the complementary
activities of different international organizations in giving integrated assistance to LDCs. He hoped
it would be an opportunity to launch immediate, integrated and coherent activities. He approved the
current focus of the Note on technical issues, but noted there were other measures which could help
prevent the trade and development of LDCs from being marginalized and in that regard welcomed
the inclusion of improved market access for LDCs as an objective of the Meeting. Regarding the
Agenda, his delegation stressed the need to consider initiatives that could be applied and implemented
immediately. He welcomed the inclusion of a study on the use of information technologies for LDCs,
as their potential needed to be better understood, and he felt that synergies could be developed in this
area with UNCTAD. As regards other aspects of coordination, he reminded the CTD that UNCTAD
would organize a pilot seminar on partnership with the private sector in order to mobilize investment
for LDCs, and he hoped this would be integrated into the Meeting to further enhance synergies. He
asked that the list of international agencies involved in the Meeting not be closed until after further
consultations. He supported the participation of the private sector, and suggested inviting industrialists
and exporters from LDCs. The proposed date and duration of the Meeting was acceptable to his
delegation. Regarding the preparatory process, he urged the close involvement of LDCs to allow them
to define their needs; they should be assisted in this regard by the three secretariats.

4.&& The representative of Bangladesh hoped the High Level Meeting would lead to a more coherent
and integrated international approach for supporting trade-related activities of the LDCs, at all levels,
and appreciated the leadership of the Chair. There needed to be a close cooperation among the three
secretariats in order to find solutions to problems. He was pleased the World Bank, IMF, and other
international and regional financial institutions would be invited. The support of key developed and
developing countries was needed for the Meeting to be successful. The Secretariat Note included views
already expressed in the CTD, and he urged further CTD input. The scope for assisting LDCs went
beyond aid and technical assistance, and should involve market access and export diversification, as
well as investment opportunities and the immediate launching of country-specific cooperation
programmes. Most problems facing LDCs were structural, and these constraints needed to be removed
to allow for progress. Regarding Africa, he said the burden of debt remained a deterrent to development.
There was also need for international cooperation in the commodity field, although this and other issues
might amount to too much to address at one Meeting. It would be necessary to be selective, but other
issues should not be disregarded. He noted that Bangladesh had had a measure of success with donors
in achieving common goals, and he appealed to the key global economic actors, both public and private,
to send high level delegations to the Meeting. All LDCs should be encouraged to participate, and they
would need to be assisted financially and with preparatory expertise. Ministers in Singapore had
envisaged the Meeting could take place in the first half of 1997, and the Secretariat needed to begin
preparations immediately.

5: && The representative of Bolivia said the initiative for the High-Level Meeting reflected the spirit
of the WTO Agreement to fully integrate all Members into the multilateral trading system and contribute
to the expansion of trade. He appreciated the effort being made by the three Secretariats in cooperating
to better integrate LDCs into world trade. He said the results of the Meeting should be integrated
and applied to other countries with small economies, including land-locked countries.

6.&& The representative of Nepal said it was fitting that the High-Level Meeting would take place
at the end of the Chairman's term. He was aware of the limitations posed by his delegation's current
observer status, but Nepal took its participation in the WTO process with utmost seriousness. The
Singapore meeting had been significant in two respects. First, it had helped with Nepal's process of
accession; the Government was in the process of updating the Memorandum on the Foreign Trade
Regime in accordance with WTO provisions, and it was about to establish a WTO division. Secondly,
the comprehensive and integrated WTO Plan for Action for LDCs was a significant development.
His delegation would be participating in preparations for the High Level Meeting in the context of
Nepal's processes of economic liberalization and trade diversification, which would allow it to more
fully integrate into and benefit from the increasingly globalized economy. He believed the integrated
approach taken in defining the objectives of the Meeting was correct. Short, medium and long-term
objectives should be defined, relating to enabling LDCs to participate more fully in the WTO
institutionally, to improved market access for products of importance to LDCs, and to improving their
supply capacity through resource transfers and technical assistance. He welcomed the proposal for
involving an inner circle of international institutions, and said the LDCs themselves should provide
the major inputs on priorities. He appreciated the Chairman's consultations in that regard, and hoped
further mechanisms for such inputs would be defined. All interested LDCs should participate in the
Meeting. In deciding on its timing, account should be taken of other meetings scheduled to address
LDC concerns, such as the Special Session of the UN General Assembly in June on land-locked
countries.

7. && The representative of Egypt said that investment issues should be prominent on the Agenda
of the Meeting, especially in light of the fact that less than one per cent of total global investment went
to LDCs. Regarding the involvement of international organizations, he felt economic commissions
and prominent regional organizations involved in economic issues, particularly the Economic Commission
for Africa and the Organization of African Unity, should be included. He believed it would be important
to have regular progress reports in the CTD, and felt an informal process of consultations should take
place in this regard to address the priorities of LDCs and to ensure adequate preparation.

8. &&The representative of the European Communities said his delegation was very supportive of
LDC-related issues and fully committed to the organization of the Meeting. While it should take place
as early as possible, proper preparations were necessary to ensure it would be a success. With regard
to the objectives of the Meeting, he suggested the item relating to information technologies should
be integrated into the item covering technical assistance rather than being taken up separately. He
thanked the Chairman for his leadership of the CTD, which had allowed it to make great strides within
the WTO.

9.&& The representative of India thanked the Chairman for his leadership in arranging the Meeting.
His delegation was committed to working with the CTD to advance trading opportunities for LDCs,
and it was pleased with the follow-up to the Singapore Conference. He felt the scope of the Agenda
and other preparations for the Meeting would be best addressed through informal consultations. He
supported the suggestion that the list of intergovernmental organizations invited to the meeting should
not be closed too early. Regarding specific points in the preparatory process, the CTD would need
to ensure that it was fully responsive to the specific needs of LDCs and he proposed that it meet in
open-ended informal sessions as preparations for the Meeting advanced so as to provide guidance to
the Secretariat and to keep track of progress.

10.&& The representative of Zambia thanked the Chairman for his efforts in organizing the Meeting
and hoped the Agenda would be developed on the basis of further consultations involving the LDCs.
The CTD should not be too preoccupied that certain issues put on the Agenda would not be resolved
in the course of the Meeting. If the IMF and the World Bank were to become co-organizers, it would
be an unprecedented opportunity to discuss LDC policy issues. He referred to the need for global
coherence, and felt the Meeting would be an opportunity to take a bold stance by addressing policy
issues in terms of both trade and finance. He felt that the CTD focused too much of its attention on
issues of marginalization, market access and technical assistance, while the fundamentals of the problem
were not addressed. He commented that even with additional market access opportunities, there remained.
for LDCs the basic issue of capacity constraints.

11.&& The representative of Switzerland expressed concern about the number of issues proposed for
inclusion on the Agenda of the Meeting and urged the CTD to choose between words and action. The
Meeting should be devoted the core issue identified in the Singapore Ministerial Declaration, which
was “to foster an integrated approach to assisting these countries and enhancing their trading
opportunities". The focus should be on trade assistance to the LDCs, although other general items
could be added. He supported the need for the CTD to have regular progress reports and said that
Switzerland wished to actively participate in informal consultations. As regards the international
organizations to be involved in the preparation, he recalled that the Ministerial Declaration had clearly
stated that UNCTAD, ITC and WTO should prepare the Meeting.

12.&& The representative of Korea reminded the Committee that funding was one of the most important
elements to be taken into account when organizing a meeting and asked the Secretariat for an estimate,
its proposals for funding, and whether the costs would be shared by the ITC and the UNCTAD. The
Chairman acknowledged the importance of this point.

13.&& The representative of Norway thanked the Chairman for his excellent work in the CTD. The
Informal Note was a useful and expeditious follow-up to the Ministerial Conference. He expected
that the cooperation which had already begun would continue and that common documentation from
the organizations concerned would be prepared. Regarding the Agenda, he supported the point made
by the delegation of Switzerland that it should not be too comprehensive in order to advance due
preparation and ensure a successful outcome. He agreed on the importance of involving the private
sector, but felt that Member governments should first consolidate the objectives. He asked for
clarification of the reference in the Note to "selected investors". He urged that the Meeting take place
as soon as possible in order to maintain momentum, while ensuring that it was properly prepared.

14. && The representative of Uganda appreciated the Chairman's efforts in steering the CTD successfully
to adopt an integrated programme of action for the LDCs, and hoped that concrete activities would
result. He thanked the three secretariats for moving expeditiously to prepare for the Meeting. His
delegation felt that the Agenda should cover the problems that faced the integration of LDCs, and
supported the point made by the delegation of Zambia about the need for greater policy coherence.
He urged the involvement of the financial institutions and UNDP in preparing the Meeting, and stressed
the need for the active participation of LDCs in identifying the problems to be addressed. He agreed
with the importance of involving the private sector, especially in LDCs, in order to assess the difficulties
they faced and how they could be supported. He welcomed Geneva as the venue for the Meeting.
He recalled also the need to avoid overlap with the UN meeting on land-locked countries, urged
expediency so that momentum be maintained, and asked to be kept regularly informed of the preparatory
process.

15. && The representative of the United States thanked the Chairman for his leadership in the CTD
and in proposing the High Level Meeting. Regarding the Informal Note, he agreed the phases suggested
were within the framework of the Agenda. Tangible results would entail much work and tough decision-
making prior to the Meeting itself, and he made two general points. First, he recommended no change
to the organizations that had been identified as co-organizers; although many other international
organizations might make useful input to the process, this should be channelled through the co-organizers
for the sake of efficiency. Secondly, he supported the involvement of the private sector and encouraged
arrangements to be made for their participation, through a parallel process, early in the process. He
felt that the Meeting should not be held until concrete results were available. Rhetoric should be avoided.

16.&& The representative of Canada said the Meeting should not be considered a pledging session.
The objective was to launch integrated, country-specific, cooperation programmes. He agreed that
information technology was critical for LDCs' trading opportunities, and supported the view that it
should be incorporated into the issue of technical assistance and not treated separately. He noted that
a Conference, "Global Knowledge 97”, would take place from 22-25 June in Canada to consider the
contribution of information technology to development, and he suggested that a report from that
Conference be used in the High Level Meeting to focus on the trade-related aspects of information
technology and how they relate to LDCs. The date of 26-27 June for the Meeting was acceptable as
long as proper preparations could be completed in time to produce meaningful results. He was somewhat
concerned that broadening the co-organization of the Meeting would make it more difficult logistically,
but he was open to inviting the IMF, World Bank and UNDP to express their interest in this regard.
Finally, he supported others in thanking the Chairman for his leadership in the CTD.

17. &&The representative of Hungary also thanked the Chairman for his leadership. His delegation
supported the Informal Note on the Meeting. He shared the view that information technology be included
in the Agenda. He was convinced that the Committee had the necessary guidelines to focus on the
problems of the LDCs and their solutions through the Plan of Action adopted in Singapore. He felt
the continuation of informal consultations would be the best method of preparing for the Meeting.

18. && The representative of Hong Kong said the Informal Note would be useful in focusing on the
preparation of the Meeting, which should be an action-oriented with clear objectives in mind. For the
outcome to be sustainable for the LDCs, it would be essential to involve them in the identification
of priorities. The Agenda seemed comprehensive. He felt the developed and more advanced developing
countries could help facilitate the LDCs' trade and investment opportunities, and he recalled lengthy
discussions regarding this prior to the Singapore Ministerial. He supported the participation of the
private sector, and felt its role should be precisely defined. He agreed with the suggested timing of
the various phases of the preparatory process, and with the suggested duration of the Meeting.
Hong Kong was committed to making a positive contribution to the Meeting, and he thanked the
Chairman for his commitment to the work of the CTD.

19. && The Chairman said it was clear that everybody expected a practical outcome to result from
the High Level Meeting. The Plan of Action would form the framework. He stressed the immediate
need for the Secretariat to contact the IMF, World Bank and UNDP to clarify their intentions as regards
their participation. In his view there was no need to include too many other organizers. Further work
needed to be done on the basis of the CTD discussion, and he trusted that the Secretariat had taken
good note of all the comments made. Further informal consultations and meetings with delegations,
led by the Chairpersons of the CTD and the Sub-Committee on Least developed Countries would allow
Members to keep track of progress and provide input. The secret of success in the WTO was to be
in tune with its Members.

- Election of Officers

20. && Ambassador E. Herfkens of the Netherlands was elected Chairperson of the Sub-Committee
on the Least Developed Countries by acclamation.

(ii) Agenda Item C: WTO Technical Cooperation and Training Activities as They Relate
to Developing Country Members

21. && The Chairman recalled that the Committee had begun a discussion of a Secretariat non-paper
on "WTO Technical Cooperation: Implementation Modalities”, dated 25 November 1996. A revision,
dated 3 February 1997, had been circulated. He noted also that representatives from the ITC and the
UNCTAD had been invited to the meeting to present the CTD with their views on activities.

22.&& The Secretariat said the revised non-paper incorporated comments made by delegates at the
last CTD meeting and a submission received from the delegation of New Zealand. It followed the
guidelines for technical cooperation in Part 2 of the Operational Directives and included five sections:
Modes of Delivery, Long-Term Engagement, Coordination with Other International Organizations,
Management, and Monitoring Follow-Up and Evaluation. Three broad objectives were identified.
First, to provide broad and systematic coverage of WTO issues, while allowing flexibility for the
Secretariat in the application of its programmes. As requested, an Annex had been added to provide
for indicative descriptions of the modes of delivery used in the Secretariat's activities. The section
on Coordination with International Institutions had been revised to be more precise. The role of the
Technical Cooperation and Training Division had been clarified in the section on Management, and
included suggestions by Members regarding its procedures for the presentation of their requests. The
second objective concerned procedures for the Preparation of Programmes, and the third related to
provisions of Voluntary Contributions by Donors. The last section on Monitoring Follow-Up and
Evaluation had been expanded to include an external evaluation of technical cooperation activities every
three years.

23.&& The representative of UNCTAD Secretariat welcomed collaboration between the WTO, ITC,
and the UNCTAD on technical cooperation issues. UNCTAD IX had broken new ground on these
matters, and had given a mandate to strengthen and expand work on technical cooperation and to integrate
it into the general work programme of UNCTAD. This would enhance common objectives of UNCTAD
and the WTO. UNCTAD strived to respond to the requests, concerns and priorities of member States
while taking into account the "supply-driven” aspects of financing and the secretariat's capability to
meet a division of labour so as to maximize its comparative advantage. He quoted the following passages
from UNCTAD's mandate:
“Enhancing national capacities, in terms of human resources and administrative infrastructures
to enable WTO Members to adjust effectively to meet their obligations and to take advantage
of their rights, including by helping them to enhance their understanding of WTO rights and
obligations, as well as improving the transparency of their trade reviews"
" Assisting developing countries in collaboration with WIPO and WTO to identify opportunities
provided by the TRIPS Agreement, including for attracting investment and new technologies
and contributing, as appropriate to the work of relevant international organizations in the
implementation of the Uruguay Round Final Act Decision on Measures in Favour of the Least-
Developed Countries, by assisting the LDCs, ... WTO Members to take maximum advantage
of the special and differential measures provided for in the Uruguay Round Agreements."
 Assistance was directed towards helping countries strengthen their services sector, develop
their competition policies, legislation and institution building, and integrate their overall trade,
environment and development goals. The WTO and UNCTAD were already working together to integrate
countries into the trading system in an efficient way. He cited the success of the Joint Programme
for Africa. Thus far, assessment missions had been sent to eight African countries, including four LDCs,
which focused on human resources development and institutional capacity building with regard to the
Uruguay Round Agreements. The next stage would focus on supportive measures required to strengthen
the export capacity of beneficiary countries.
 UNCTAD's Technical Cooperation Programme covered all areas of the work of its Secretariat,
including trade in goods and services, investment, technology and enterprise development, trade efficiency
and services, infrastructure and transport, finance and debt management. Annual delivery amounted
to about US$20-25 million a year, out of total budgets of about US$50 million a year. At any given
time, about 300 projects were under implementation, with about one-third directed at LDCs and 40 per
cent for Africa. Operations responded to requests from individual beneficiary countries, developing
or in transition, and at regional and inter-regional levels. Activities included policy advice on select
issues within UNCTAD's competence, such as analytical work, public sector decision-making, and
information from data bases. He added that training and human-resource development had been major
elements of UNCTAD's activities; these were crucial to the development of capacity building. This
ranged from ad hoc activities, seminars and workshops, to more structured activities such as the
development and strengthening of local training capacities through UNCTAD's work with “train for
trade", which included a training programme for maritime transport. Emphasis had been on a more
structured and deliberate long-term process of developing training capacity. As for funding, UNDP
continued to be the single most important source of support for UNCTAD's technical cooperation
activities despite a significant decrease in its share for the total Programme. In addition, a variety
of trust funds had been established for the purpose of implementing these projects. These were financed
from a wide range of bilateral donors, of which the European Commission's DG8, which handles the
European Development Fund, and DG1, responsible for developing countries and those in transition,
were mentioned along with support from foundations and trust funds held by international financial
institutions, including the World Bank. Developing countries also contributed to the Programme as
a whole, or for activities in their own countries through resources available or from proceeds of loans,
particularly from the World Bank and the International Development Association. Cooperation took
place with numerous agencies including the World Bank on trade and financial issues, the IMF with
its Customs Reform Programme and ASECUDA, which was its single largest programme, with UNDP
and UNIDO, among other UN organizations, and a variety of regional and sub-regional organizations
through joint activities or sharing information. Contributors also included the private sector and non-
governmental organizations.
He added that UNCTAD was guided by the UN General Assembly overall, particularly by
the system-wide decisions the Assembly took on operational activities for development which have
been the basis for collaboration with governments through the national execution modality. This was
an increasing feature of the way technical cooperation was carried out by UN organizations. Projects
were monitored regularly by both beneficiaries and the Secretariat and were subject to independent
evaluation and review by member States, the Trade and Development Board and its subsidiary machinery.
Procedures ranged from the use of a project document format to the use of UNDP resident
representatives, who acted on UNCTAD's behalf on issues pertaining to technical cooperation. As
a UN organization, UNCTAD was bound by the financial rules and regulations governing the
administration of trust funds and UNDP financed projects. Adoption of a strategy for technical
cooperation work as part of a rolling three-year plan was scheduled for discussion at the Executive
Session of the Trade and Development Board in March. UNCTAD IX clearly indicated the priority
assigned to LDCs, which should receive increased attention of about one third in the future. To that
end, the Secretariat had established a trust fund, which included contributions from developing countries,
especially directed towards LDCs to encourage them to launch comprehensive programmes of trade
and investment. The Integrated Programme for Africa would be part of this arrangement.

27; && The representative of the ITC said technical cooperation was an essential part of ITC's activities.
He cited its mandate to support developing and transition economies, and especially their business sectors,
to realize their full potential for developing exports and improving import operations, with LDCs a
priority in its work. ITC's first objective was the development of national capacities for improving
trade performance of businesses in the context of building national business service institutions to help
them expand and carry out their activity. It had comparative advantages in six core services: product
and market development, trade support services, trade information, trade-related human resources
development, international purchasing and supply management and needs assessment and programme
design in the trade field. Although its main focus had been the international competitiveness of
businesses, trade promotion strategy remained crucial as the ITC was concerned with the nexus between
the public and private sectors. He noted that all of its technical cooperation activities were at the national
level, and cited two examples. At one extreme, it had tailor-made, multi-year, and multi-faceted
projects, combining information training, trade training and product upgrading components. Inatypical
case, an ITC Project Coordinator in the country would be the focal point for implementation; thereby,
the country was at the centre of gravity for implementation. At the other extreme, projects would
be headquarters-based, inter-regional or global, such as the Uruguay Round Follow-Up Programme,
financed by the Global Trust Fund. Here, the business implications of the Uruguay Round Agreements,
and trainer training events were offered to partner countries. Presentations were adapted and directed
toward national circumstances through the events organized from Geneva with national contacts. Sixty-
eight such events were held last year, and benefitted from input by the WTO Secretariat and others,
including FAO and ISO.
 The WTO, UNCTAD and ITC had experienced success with the Integrated Programme for
Africa, leading to full implementation of several programmes in 1997. In all cases, the project started
with an idea based on country-specific or collective needs assessment. If it required a major undertaking
or new approaches, it would be first reviewed in an inter-divisional forum within the ITC that brought
together functional, product and marketing, and geographic expertise and clarified the respective roles
of its staff in the project development process. Donors would then be contacted and the development
of the project taken to its final stages. In a country-specific context, a donor might finance pre-project
design work, although it was not unusual for projects, whether national, sub-regional, or inter-regional,
to be designed to a large extent before financing was secured. The project in its final form would
be subject to an inter-divisional review where substantive issues would be sorted out. At this stage
the focus would be on implementation arrangements, including sources of expertise, internal and external,
to complete the task according to the indicated schedule. Project monitoring responsibilities and
evaluation arrangements were specified in the project document, usually based on a UNDP format.
At any given time, the ITC was implementing over 100 projects, most of which were national or
sub-regional projects.

29.&& The representative of the United States appreciated learning more about the specific aspects
of coordination and noted the potential for overlap, which he said was of common concern in the CTD.
He noted that potential overlap between the WTO and the UNCTAD might arise in training functions
where representatives of developing countries become acquainted with the disciplines and instruments
of the WTO. He asked for clarification as on this point.

30. && The representative of Morocco asked three questions: about assessment of the Integrated
Programme for Africa, which he felt had started well, noting that UNCTAD members had recommended
such a review take place; about the breakdown of expenditures between different regions, whether
it was done according to criteria and what the criteria were; and about the structure of technical
assistance?

31.&& The representative of Egypt welcomed increased coordination between the three organizations
on technical cooperation, and asked for further details on assessment of the Integrated Programme
for Africa. He felt it might be difficult to deal with its evaluation as it included more than one
organization.

32.&& The representative of the European Communities said it was clear that in regards to trade, the
activities of the WTO, the UNCTAD and ITC were complementary. WTO Members had stressed
the need to ensure greater coordination and cooperation among the three organizations in delivering
technical assistance. He acknowledged that progress has been made, noted commitment to this at the
highest levels and welcomed the continuation of a closer relationship. He agreed with the need to
minimize overlap. On the Integrated Programme for Africa, he also asked about monitoring and
evaluation and requested the WTO Secretariat to circulate a list of projects envisaged this year.

33, && The representative of Singapore, speaking on behalf of ASEAN, noted the common desire
for coordination of technical cooperation but cautioned against excessive homogenization.
Complementarity was important, but variety should be maintained so that Members could address their
particular needs in the preferred way. He suggested that Members might benefit from having the
organizations compete to provide the best technical cooperation services.

34.&& The representative of India asked UNCTAD to provide details of the increasing participation
of developing countries in its programmes, including financing. He asked for clarification in the WTO
Secretariat non-paper of the nature of the proposal and what was meant by the reference in paragraph 5C
to "external evaluation"? He also referred to the long-term engagement noted in paragraph 2C, and
asked whether it was limited only to trainers and expertise developed under WTO technical cooperation
activities or whether there were possibilities for a national government to nominate experts to participate
in programmes undertaken jointly in its territory? He asked for clarification of the term "information
technology-based training material” referred to in paragraph 6, and said it might be clearer to use the
phrase "electronic-based training material” to avoid confusion for recipients of the Assistance Programme.
His delegation strongly endorsed the statement by Singapore to allow for flexibility in the assessment
of programmes that might be duplicated or overlapped, and felt that in the context of the demand-driven
nature of such programmes more flexibility should be allowed.

35.&& The representative of Switzerland said it might be in the interests of participating countries
to allow for a little overlapping and cited the point made by some delegations that joint programmes
would lead to joint evaluation. He asked about the preparation and design of the project, and asked
to allow for coordination and updates at various stages. He welcomed the Secretariat's non-paper and
would try to provide additional written comments, particularly on the section regarding the management
of the Trust Fund. He added that coordination, noted in Section 3, should also take place within the
Secretariat itself. He asked about the status of questions posed recently by the delegation of Morocco
in the Budget Committee (WT/BFA/W/12).

36.&& The representative of Peru asked the Secretariat about the status of the new bodies established
after the Singapore Declaration to promote investment and competition. His delegation was interested
in participating in such areas of technical cooperation and asked if UNCTAD would be involved as
it was experienced in such issues.

37.&& The representative of Kenya said his country received technical assistance under the Technical
Programme for Africa, and noted with satisfaction the results so far. The Programme involved the
Government in identifying sectors and institutions which required this type assistance. He added that
it was meant initially for a few countries and had been extended, and urged countries to continue funding
so that it might include other African countries which he felt would benefit from it. He reiterated his
country's approval of the work of the three institutions and its extension to other LDCs.

38.&& The representative of Norway welcomed the revised version of the Secretariat's non-paper
and noted that implementation modalities were considered important by all Members. It provided a
good basis to strengthen relevant technical cooperation activities and make the approved guidelines
more operational. Citing paragraph 3A, he asked whether the CTD would like to include UNDP among
organizations explicitly mentioned as he saw value in such a consultation. Citing paragraph 4C, regarding
an indicative three-year plan comparable to the rolling plan already established under UNCTAD, he
requested coordination between the two organizations on this question. He was concerned with sub-
paragraph 4D regarding the definition of the needs for contributions, in terms of human resources and
financial means. He said it suggested an annual programme based on specific requests from recipient
countries, and asked the Secretariat to clarify the amount of contributions needed in order to attain
a balance between the needs requested and the contributions available. He asked whether it was possible
to make available human resources from donor countries as well? Citing paragraph 4F, on the Provision
of Voluntary Contributions, he recalled the suggestion for a time-limit for the announcement of voluntary
contributions and wondered if it was possible to consider another deadline; his delegation would favour
an earlier deadline.

39. && The representative of New Zealand said his delegation supported the views expressed by other
delegations regarding the need for complementarity between the activities of the three organizations,
and agreed with Singapore that competition would be healthy. He said the Secretariat's non-paper
was quite comprehensive and provided practical guidance. He was particularly pleased with paragraph
SC that incorporated his delegation's suggestions regarding an external evaluation. He explained that
the process would involve hiring an independent consultant from an international organization or privately
that would undertake an overall management audit of the programmes, not only to provide for efficiency
but also to conduct a qualitative evaluation of their impact. This should evaluate both the effectiveness
of WTO technical cooperation and ensure that feedback mechanisms were working so lessons learned
would be registered into the programme's preparation and delivery. He supported the conduct of an
annual internal review in addition to a three-year review, reasoning that it would bring WTO procedures
in line with international practice and maximize improvements in the programme’ s operation by drawing
on lessons from past experience. As regards training, he felt that four weeks seemed to be enough
time for most courses of a substantive nature and reasonable time for WTO officials to be absent;
he accepted the range of 2-6 weeks cited in the non-paper, although he felt the nature of the training
would be a consideration. Citing the example of the two-week trade policy course proposed for Pacific
Island countries, he felt the period adequate for its purposes. He congratulated the Netherlands for
its generous contribution to the Fund, and encouraged others to do likewise.

40. && The representative of Turkey asked for elaboration of the criteria for assistance to the countries
and regions concerned, and stressed that complementarity and competition could go well together, for
both bilateral and regional technical assistance; while bilateral technical assistance could be very
beneficial, more time and money could be saved when complemented by regional schemes. He cited
Turkey's own participation in the Black Sea Economic Cooperation and the Economic Cooperation
Organization, which were comprised of new and prospective WTO Members. Turkey was assisting
these states to become more familiar with the workings of the WTO and was in contact with ITC and
the WTO to support these regional schemes.

41. && The representative of Bangladesh appreciated that the presentations accorded due priorities
to the needs of LDCs, which was of key interest to his country, and in particular the requirements
of Africa. His country had received considerable technical assistance in the past and had been able
to effectively use it in enhancing its capabilities. He endorsed the caveat raised by Singapore, among
others, against taking an excessive view on coordination which would eliminate the distinctive features
of the three respective institutions.

42.&& The representative of Argentina appreciated the work being done on technical cooperation.
While supporting the point made by Singapore, he cautioned against overt competition between the
three organizations and added that they should render services according to needs, The Secretariat's
non-paper raised the issue of flexibility, which he felt should be maintained as regards the modalities
of rendering technical cooperation. He shared the view of the UNCTAD representative in that new
areas of interests to the WTO, such as competition policies, should be integrated into a cooperative
programme which would draw upon work already done by the UNCTAD. He cited trade facilitation
as an area in which UNCTAD had expertise, and requested further information on other areas in which
the respective organizations planned to cooperate.

43. && The representative of Korea generally agreed with the Informal Note. He had intended a question
regarding the commissioning process for an external evaluation, but had since heard the reply from
the representative of New Zealand. Regarding Point 4C in the Management section, he asked about
the rationale for having a three-year plan, considering that Ministerial Meetings were held every two
years; perhaps it would better to coincide with them. With respect to Point 2 of the Annex, he felt
that five-day seminars and workshops were too lengthy and advised against making such an exact
reference in this document.

44. && The representative of Uganda appreciated the presentations made. He emphasized the need
to reach the private sector in developing countries, and felt that these types of programmes would succeed.
only when the private sector was able to take advantage of the international trading environment. He
welcomed the efforts of ITC to this effect, and asked for clarification about the business guide being
formulated for the private sector, particularly on how the feedback on its impact had been arrived at
as well as its implications. He shared the views of Singapore that coordination should avoid overlap
while maintaining each organisations areas of specialization. He noted that the UNCTAD and WTO
programmes were more focused on public institutions, whereas ITC could complement them in reaching
the private sector. Coordination should not be used to curtail important activities, but rather to enhance
programmes that were effective. He asked the representative of the UNCTAD to explain his statement
about the "educative process" of LDCs. He noted agreement with the direction of the Secretariat's
non-paper.

45.&& The representative of the European Communities said his delegation wanted to discuss the non-
paper in more detail on a future occasion. He felt it would result in useful input for the discussion
on the High Level Meeting, especially the last section on the identification of needs. He stressed the
need to continue discussion of ways to overcome deficiencies.

46. && The representative of Senegal recalled that the call for coordination between the three institutions
was recent. She agreed with the Long-Term Engagement noted in paragraph 2 of the Secretariat's
non-paper, particularly that the training of trainers allowed for better dissemination of information
at a lower cost; she added that her country was among those interested in this item. In regards to
external evaluation, she hoped that the beneficiary countries would be involved in the selection of their
examiners. Citing paragraph 1 on the Modes of Delivery, she hoped that within the seminars more
importance would be given to the specific benefits of the participation of LDCs in the multilateral trading
system.

47. && The representative of Venezuela recalled that at the last Committee meeting in November, his
delegation asked a series of question that remained unaddressed relating to the possible impact of the
canalization of cooperation activities towards LDCs through the Trust Fund.

48. &&The Chairman affirmed his commitment to ensure that technical cooperation between the WTO
and other institutions would be carried out in a useful and beneficial manner. He invited Members
to give their views on how cooperation should be achieved. He assured Switzerland that the question
raised by Morocco at the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration would be addressed also
in the CTD.

49. && The representative of UNCTAD replied to comments on the issue of complementarity and
duplication. The point made by Singapore and others to allow for healthy competition was well taken.
It was a difficult issue to place in a neat framework, due to the dynamics involved between a potential
beneficiary requesting help, an organization that was able to respond and a donor. Clearly, duplication
in a wasteful sense should be avoided. He agreed with Argentina on the need to avoid overlap while
allowing for joint approaches to the same issue. He cited the initiative of the Government of Switzerland,
which convened a workshop at the end of 1995 in Ascona, to discuss this issue with international
organizations concerned with trade-related technical cooperation. The meeting did not succeed in
clarifying the role of each institution, but it did promote an effort to establish a mechanism for
information exchange and to avoid duplication. In addition, the ITC had taken the initiative, together
with UNCTAD and the WTO, to produce a succinct and clear statement regarding the main elements
that differentiated the technical cooperation work of each organization. In that light, the Integrated
Programme for Africa and others should provide opportunities for further learning and lead to
maximization of complementarity and minimization of overlap. He added that this process should also
involve the World Bank, the IMF and UNDP. The comparative advantage of the WTO Secretariat
with regard to the outcome of the Uruguay Round, particularly in explaining contractual obligations,
was obvious. UNCTAD would help countries take advantage of trade and other opportunities that
emerged from these negotiations. For instance, UNCTAD's Commission on Investment had called
for the convening of an extra meeting to discuss the possible impact of multilateral investment regimes
with a view towards regional, sub-regional and bilateral arrangements; this would contribute to an
area generally handled by the WTO. Ina wider sense, trade-related technical cooperation was included
in the mandate, and covered investment-related, technology-related, finance-related matters as they
pertained to the supply response. In addition to increasing exports and trade efficiency, capacity
development would include infrastructure and human resources; these were areas in which UNCTAD
would play a role. The negotiation process was another area where UNCTAD could assist countries
through programmes supporting commercial diplomacy. Officials from LDCs could then better
understand the issues that would arise from a built-in agenda and other forms of negotiations. Accession
procedures would remain the domain of the WTO. UNCTAD could complement this process by assisting
Members with the substantive issues that might arise, while ITC had enormous expertise in the field
of export promotion and in dealing with specific sectors and with enterprises. 
50. At the Ascona meeting, the focus was on the national level as the coordination of technical
cooperation programmes and other forms of development cooperation was evidently the responsibility
of the host country. He cited the case of a country in the process of accession to WTO that had invited
the three organizations and others, such as UNDP and the World Bank, to conduct an exercise regarding
the coordination of trade-related technical cooperation; this had proven to be a promising initiative.
He stressed the importance of emphasizing the demand-driven nature of technical assistance, as the
beneficiary country was in the main position to determine its needs in light of its own capacities and
resources. UNCTAD had a good working relationship with the WTO and ITC, and it found the exchange
of information particularly helpful. He personally had not encountered a clear case of duplication or
lack of prior consultation, but even so the full potential for cooperation among the organizations had
yet to be realized. From UNCTAD's standpoint, the preparatory process for the proposed High-Level
Meeting on LDCs would be useful in carrying forward efforts to enhance and deepen existing
cooperation. Regarding the evaluation of the Integrated Programme for Africa, he noted that a request
for such a review had been made in the Trade and Development Board last October, whereby the three
organizations agreed to proceed when the results were sufficient to justify such an exercise. It was
UNCTAD's view that such a stage had not yet been reached. In response to the question of criteria
from Morocco, he said UNCTAD's Programme had no a priori criteria but its projects were based
on the nature of requests and availability of funding. From there, the secretariat evaluated requests
to determine questions of competence and capacity. Some popular programmes such as the Customs
Reform Programme and the Debt Management Programme had resulted in heavy demand beyond current
capacity. The next stage of consideration would lead to the design of projects based on generally
accepted guidelines to ensure they would be responsive to the needs of beneficiary countries and the
secretariat's capacity.
Regarding financial participation by developing countries, such activity took two forms. First,
there have been contributions to general activities of interest to these countries, including work on
the General System of Preferences, to the Trust Fund on Investment and Transnational Corporations,
and on Competition Policies and Restrictive Business Practices, etc. The Trust Fund established recently
in UNCTAD had benefited from contributions from developing countries, including India. Secondly,
proceeds used by developing countries from World Bank loans, or those from the Inter-American
Development Bank, Asian Development Bank and the African Development Bank, had led to financing
of technical cooperation. Programmes financed in this manner include the ASECUDA, the Customs
Reform Programme, and the Debt Management Programme. Regarding the rolling three-year plan,
he said that UNCTAD had found the period too lengthy as the beneficiaries understandably found it
difficult to indicate what their particular requirements would be that far ahead. Likewise, donors were
not always in a position to indicate the supply side. Consequently, the focus has been on a one-year
exercise, while allowing for some indications of what the main areas of work would be in the second
and third years. He agreed with the point made by Turkey about the collaboration between bilateral
initiatives and regional initiatives, an area in which the secretariat had much experience and was in
fact having discussions at the moment with the European Cooperation Organization. On the question
raised by Peru, Argentina, and Uganda, about work by the UNCTAD in connection with competition
policies, he saw this as a matter of information exchange and noted the secretariat was in discussion
with potential donors to mobilize resources for seminars and workshops. He understood it was in contact
with the WTO on this matter, which had led to cooperation and, hopefully, its participation in these
meetings. Regarding trade efficiency, it was his understanding that the CTD would be undertaking
exploratory work in this area. It had already requested UNCTAD to provide the General Council with
information regarding UNCTAD's activities towards trade facilitation under its Trade Efficiency
Programme.

52; Regarding the management of technical cooperation, this involved close fusion between regular
work financed from the programme budget and the operational activities that were financed from extra-
budgetary resources, which drew upon analytical work and contributed to intergovernmental deliberations.

The management implication was that the responsibility for the individual programmes and projects
was placed in each of the four divisions of the UNCTAD, together with general, over-arching activities
related to LDCs, which were under the Office of the Special Coordinator. Logistical and administrative
support was provided by the Administrative Service of its Secretariat. As regards the allocation of
administrative costs, he said that each project undertaken earned support costs of 13 per cent of the
delivery of the amount actually carried out. Those resources were allocated to support functions, either
to the Administrative Service centrally or toward the divisions.

53. && The Chairman stressed that a careful evaluation of the managerial structure of the UNCTAD
and the WTO might be in order to assure that focus was maintained towards the activity. He felt that
80 to 90 percent of the budget should be spent on the objective, and not an inordinate amount to support
bureaucracy.

54.&& The representative of ITC agreed with UNCTAD in that it was too early for a comprehensive
evaluation of the Integrated Programme for Africa. He explained that currently, the needs analysis
reports prepared by countries received feedback from the three organizations, and were then returned
to the governments for consideration before the finalization of the project proposals and funding. Thus
far, only one country had reached that stage but others were close, which should result in a broad
implementation phase over the coming months. As regards the three-year rolling medium-term plan,
he said the ITC had launched its own plan and this was a valuable planning tool. The first year laid
out acomprehensive annual operational plan while the next two evaluated output. He noted that seminars
had requested more product-specific approaches, such as addressing the business implications of the
Uruguay Round Agreements. ITC would focus on such areas more this year. In addition, it had
conducted an internal management review last summer which led to helpful recommendations now
being pursued, and an evaluation would take place later in the year.

55.&& The representative of the WTO Secretariat noted the different views of Members regarding
cooperation, and said the WTO was moving in this direction. He recalled three major developments
within the last eighteen months. First, periodic meetings had been initiated among the heads of the
three organisations and provided a formal structure to advance coordination. Second, the Integrated
Programme for Africa. Third, the secretariats had worked on certain preparations for UNCTAD IX.
Regarding Morocco's question on internal management, most WTO divisions were involved with
technical cooperation due to their expertise in certain areas. The Technical Cooperation and Training
Division nevertheless was the primary provider of technical assistance, and it liaised with other divisions.
The Management Committee along with the Deputies and the Director-General allocated resources
by formula, emphasis, or major decisions of a policy nature. With regard to Peru’s request, he said
the working parties on investment and competition policy had not yet been established. However,
the Secretariat would provide technical assistance from the responsible divisions wherever appropriate.
Discussion had taken place on the possible extension of the Integrated Programme for Africa to more
LDCs. Since it was a major endeavour, the three organizations wanted to proceed in a thorough manner.
No activities were implemented without the consent of the three secretariats. He acknowledged the
concerns of Venezuela, and said that the integrity of services to all other developing and transition
economies would be taken seriously.

56. && Regarding the question by India about external evaluation, he referred to New Zealand’s proposal
and said the Secretariat would be included in the process. As for long-term engagement and the provision
for trainers, he noted that in the guidelines for technical cooperation, developing countries would provide
trainers when they had the human resources necessary, as supported by the Training for Trainers
Programme. In regards to the training material, the Secretariat remained open to any suggestions.
In the case of the Integrated Programme for Africa, a task force had been established to review the
training material being used. In reply to Switzerland’s concerns about coordination, he said that the
Technical Cooperation and Training Division was the focal point for coordination among other bodies.

37. &&The Chairman welcomed the enriching discussion and stressed that technical cooperation was
demand-driven; it was therefore necessary for all Members to understand it and the services provided.
He recalled his suggestion at the last CTD meeting that a manual be prepared by the secretariats of
the three institutions that would explain the technical cooperation offered by each institution and how
to receive it. He reminded the Members about the questionnaire sent out regarding technical cooperation,
and cited a second letter urging them to respond. He requested the Secretariat to prepare a manual.

58. && The Chairman recalled that at the last meeting delegations had agreed to return to the annual
review at this meeting. The Secretariat had circulated additional details in WT/COMTD/W/23.

59.&& The Secretariat said the document attempted to address the needs expressed by countries and
presented the different types of activities it had organized. The two main objectives for the assessment
of technical cooperation were derived from the guidelines. First, was to assist in the full integration
of beneficiaries into the multilateral trading system and contribute to their trade expansion. Secondly,
was to strengthen and enhance institutional and human capacities in the public sector; after consultation
with governments, capacity building activities might include the private sector. These objectives were
based on WTO activities including the meetings of the CTD, information gathered through seminars
and workshops, and fact-finding missions. Missions for the Integrated Programme for Africa helped
to determine focal points, although there was some difficulty because the information was not sufficient
to draw comprehensive conclusions. Section 3 of the document included replies and comments based
on the questionnaire. Also included were summaries of information gathered from the Integrated
Programme for Africa and through fact-finding mission that we carried out in Asia and the Asia-Pacific
islands. There were comments on the difficulties encountered in implementing obligations of the TRIPS
Agreement. The document noted areas where cooperation had been carried out with other international
organizations and in defining and applying those programmes. Since the information was incomplete,
general conclusions on technical assistance would be difficult to draw at this time.

60. && The representative of India thanked the Secretariat for the document and asked for clarification
on three points: first, in regards to feedback on data on trade in services; second, he suggested
coordination with ITC to assess the impact of the Technical Cooperation Programme on SMEs; third,
he asked if there was provision in the budget to off-set the charge for basic documents being used for
the course on Dispute Settlement Training for developing countries.

61.&&  The representative of Switzerland welcomed the document, and felt the compilation under
Section 3 and its identification of needs was innovative and valuable. He would like to allow room
for some self-criticism or assessment of areas of improvement and requested it be noted.

62.&& The representative of Egypt thanked the Secretariat for the document, and requested an indication
of success stories; he felt these could be more easily replicated with little cost, such as the Trade Policy
and the Dispute Settlement courses. He also felt it would be useful to have a technical note on how
to request technical cooperation, as it was demand driven.

63. && The Committee took note of the statements made and agreed to revert to these two matters
at the next meeting of the CTD.

(iii) Agenda Item D: Recommendation by the Working Group on Notification Obligations
and Procedures as Endorsed by the Council for Trade in Goods

64.&& The Chairman said that the Chairman of the Council for Trade in Goods, in a letter dated
28 November 1996, had forwarded the recommendation contained in paragraph 79 of document G/L/112
to the CTD for further consideration. It recommended that active consideration be given to the
development of a special programme of assistance to developing country Members, and particularly
to the LDCs, to provide more intensive technical assistance with the possible participation of other
organizations, to focus on the development of systems and structures required to respond to notification
obligations.

(iv) Agenda Item E: Observer Status for Intergovernmental Organizations

65.&&  The Chairman recalled that the General Council, at its meeting on 7 February 1997, had granted
observer status to those intergovernmental organizations, including the IMF and the World Bank, which
had ad hoc observer status. It had invited other WTO bodies to proceed in a similar way. Accordingly,
he proposed that those intergovernmental organizations which had been granted ad hoc observer status
in the CTD be granted observer status. Document WT/COMTD/W/22 listed these organizations.
He further proposed that informal consultations be held on other intergovernmental organizations which
had requested observer status. It was so agreed.

(v) Agenda Item F: Election of Officers for the Committee on Trade and Development

66. && The Chairman recalled that the Chairman of the General Council had held consultations on
the appointment of officers to take charge of the various standing bodies of the WTO in accordance
with the established guidelines for the appointment of officers. At its meeting on 7 February 1997,
the General Council had approved the nomination of Ambassador Baichoo of Mauritius as the Chairman
of the CTD. The Committee confirmed the appointment of Ambassador Baichoo by acclamation.

67.&&  The new Chairman said he would be guided by the principle of transparency and he encouraged
the participation of all delegations, regardless of size, in the decision-making process. He congratulated
the Ambassador Herfkens on her selection as Chairperson of the Subcommittee on LDCs and looked
forward to collaborating closely with her. He expressed his appreciation to Ambassador Benjelloun-
Touimi for his guidance of the CTD and his personal dedication in promoting development issues in
the WTO.
