WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/69
17 June 2008

(08-2835)


Committee on Trade and Development
Sixty-Ninth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 5 MAY 2008

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)

 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398861" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC201398861 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398862" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC201398862 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc201398863" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc201398863 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc201398864" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc201398864 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398865" C.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC201398865 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398866" -	communication from brazil on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC201398866 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398867" -	communication from china on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC201398867 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398868" -	communication from india on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC201398868 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398869" -	communication from pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC201398869 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398870" -	communication from the european communities – responses to questions submitted by brazil, china, india and pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC201398870 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398871" -	communication from the united states on the notification by china of the amendment to the first agreement on trade negotiations among developing member countries of the economic and social commission for asia and the pacific (bangkok agreement) (WT/COMTD/62/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC201398871 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398872" -	communication from china – responses to the questions posed by the united states on the asia-pacific trade agreement (apta) (WT/COMTD/62/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC201398872 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398873" -	generalized system of preferences – notification by norway (WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC201398873 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398874" -	south asian free trade agreement (safta) (WT/COMTD/N/26)	 PAGEREF _TOC201398874 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398875" D.	declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries	 PAGEREF _TOC201398875 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398876" E.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (WT/L/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC201398876 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398877" F.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC201398877 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398878" G.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC201398878 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc201398879" (i)	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2007	 PAGEREF _Toc201398879 \h 11
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc201398880" (ii)	Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/166)	 PAGEREF _Toc201398880 \h 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC201398881" H.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC201398881 \H 12

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 69th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3173/Rev.1 issued on 30 April 2008.  He drew Members' attention to item G of the agenda concerning technical cooperation and training.  While there were two reports reflected under this agenda item, he informed the Committee that only the Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2007 would be considered at the present meeting.  He explained that the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2007 had yet to be issued, and would therefore be considered at the next CTD meeting.  He inquired whether any Member wished to raise any matter under "Other Business".
&& The representative of the European Communities said that her delegation wished to raise a matter under "Other Business" concerning a change in the notification status of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union from Article XXIV of GATT 1994 to the Enabling Clause.  
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, these organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  If there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with an update on a number of matters concerning recent notifications of regional trade agreements (RTAs) under the Enabling Clause, and their consideration in the CTD.  He recalled that the CTD had agreed at its 67th Session on 4 December 2007 to follow the procedures being used by the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA) to consider newly-notified RTAs, in line with the provisions of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.  In this regard, he informed Members that the CTD – in dedicated session – was scheduled to consider two RTAs in October 2008.  These were the Egypt‑Turkey Agreement – the notification of which had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/23 – and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union – the notification of which had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/25.  They were the first two RTAs under the Enabling Clause that would be considered within the framework of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, on the basis of a factual presentation prepared by the Secretariat.
With regard to the Egypt-Turkey Agreement, it was his understanding that the Secretariat's preparation of the factual presentation was proceeding according to schedule.  However, he informed the Committee that the Secretariat had still not received the required data from the member countries of the GCC.  Until the data was received, the Secretariat would not be in a position to prepare the factual presentation of the GCC Customs Union.  He urged the members of the GCC to provide the data to the Secretariat as soon as possible, to ensure that consideration of this RTA remained on schedule and was completed within the one-year period required under the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. 
As for the recently-notified Pakistan-Malaysia Agreement, he said that this agreement had been notified under both the Enabling Clause and Article V of the GATS, with document references WT/COMTD/N/24 and S/C/N/440.  It was expected that in March 2009 the goods component of the Pakistan-Malaysia Agreement would be considered in a dedicated session of the CTD, while the services component of the agreement would be considered in the CRTA.  
&& The Chairman next referred to the notification concerning the Pan-Arab Free Trade Area (PAFTA) Agreement.  Further to the briefing he had provided at the last CTD meeting, he said that the notification had still not been circulated, in view of some missing information.  As he had mentioned at the last meeting, he had been in touch with the Saudi Arabian delegation on this matter.  The notification would be circulated as soon as possible.  He also referred to the procedure being followed by the CRTA for RTAs to which non-WTO Members were parties, noting in particular that the consideration of these RTAs in the context of the Transparency Mechanism was currently on hold. He explained therefore, that the South Asian Free Trade Agreement – the notification of which  was on the agenda for the present Regular Session – would not be considered in a dedicated session of the CTD on the basis of a factual presentation.  The same would apply to the PAFTA Agreement notification, once it was circulated.
-	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.3)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4, respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  As agreed to at the last meeting, he said that he had continued his informal consultations.  These consultations had indicated that more time was required before this item could be taken off the CTD's agenda.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor. 
&& The representative of Pakistan said that in February 2008, the EC had provided her delegation with responses to a second set of questions raised by Pakistan.  She informed the Committee that her delegation had now submitted to the EC its reactions to the responses, and was waiting for a reply from the EC.  In the meantime, she wished to pose a question to the EC at the present meeting concerning one of the criteria for eligibility for the EC's special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance ('GSP-plus') that would be implemented from 1 January 2009.  In particular, she wished to know the date by which potential beneficiary countries needed to have ratified the stipulated number of conventions.  She also inquired whether the EC had given adequate notice to allow interested countries the opportunity to ratify the conventions, and how the EC had made the information known.  She requested that this item remain on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting.
&& The representative of Brazil regretted that the EC had not responded satisfactorily to the questions that had been posed by his delegation.  He noted that Brazil and the EC had been communicating bilaterally on this matter, with the last such bilateral exchange having taken place in January 2008.  His delegation expected the EC to abide by its stated commitment to transparency.  He believed that this included a commitment to providing complete information concerning trade statistics – not only bilaterally, but also on a multilateral basis.  His delegation wished to keep this item on the agenda for the next CTD meeting, as it considered that the issue had not yet been resolved.  
&& The representative of India said that the relevant authorities in India were in the process of examining the information that had been provided by the EC in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  A preliminary consideration, however, indicated that the information did not fully respond to India's questions.  India sought certain clarifications, which would be conveyed to the EC shortly.  He too requested that this item remain on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the EC was aware of the concerns that had been raised on its GSP scheme by some Members, and had been having bilateral meetings and information exchanges with these Members.  In this regard, the EC looked forward to receiving any further requests for trade data from Brazil.  She also noted that an EC-Pakistan bilateral sub-group on trade would meet on 15 and 16 May 2008, and that the GSP scheme was one of the items on the agenda for that meeting.  With regard to the EC's new GSP scheme, which would enter into force on 1 January 2009, she informed the Committee that the EC was currently completing its internal procedures.  A notice would subsequently be issued to importers and exporters to inform them of the new scheme.  The scheme would also be notified to the WTO.  In connection with the new GSP-plus arrangement, she said that interested countries would have to submit a request by 31 October 2008, providing comprehensive information on the ratification and implementation of the required conventions.  After an assessment of the requests, a list of the countries eligible for benefits under the GSP-plus arrangement would be published before the end of 2008.  Her delegation would inform Pakistan bilaterally about the timing and procedures to put forward an application.      
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation had submitted several requests to the EC.  In response to these requests, only partial information had been provided by the EC.  While Brazil would shortly be submitting another bilateral request concerning trade data for 2007, he stressed that in the view of his delegation a bilateral exchange of information was not enough.  A multilateral sharing of information was far more preferable. 
&& The representative of the European Communities, in follow-up to her earlier intervention, said that countries interested in applying for the new GSP-plus arrangement would have until the end of October 2008 to ratify the required conventions.  
&& The Chairman said that he would continue with his informal consultations, and would report back to the CTD at the next meeting.  The present item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.  
It was so agreed.
&& 	COMMUNICATION FROM THE UNITED STATES ON THE NOTIFICATION BY CHINA OF THE AMENDMENT TO THE FIRST AGREEMENT ON TRADE NEGOTIATIONS AMONG DEVELOPING MEMBER COUNTRIES OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMISSION FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC (BANGKOK AGREEMENT) (WT/COMTD/62/ADD.1)
&&	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA – RESPONSES TO THE QUESTIONS POSED BY THE UNITED STATES ON THE ASIA-PACIFIC TRADE AGREEMENT (APTA) (WT/COMTD/62/ADD.2)
&& The Chairman recalled that China, on behalf of the Participating States of the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), had introduced a notification at the 65th Session of the CTD concerning the Amendment to the First Agreement on Trade Negotiations Among Developing Member Countries of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (Bangkok Agreement).  A communication from the United States raising questions on the notification had subsequently been circulated in document WT/COMTD/62/Add.1.  Responses from China to the questions had now also been circulated in document WT/COMTD/62/Add.2.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had two follow-up questions with respect to the coverage of APTA.  She noted that paragraph 3(a) of the Enabling Clause stated that any differential or more favourable treatment provided would be designed to facilitate and promote the trade of developing countries.  However, given that the percentage of trade covered by APTA was relatively low, it was not clear how the agreement satisfied this paragraph.  In particular, her delegation sought clarification on how APTA facilitated and promoted the trade of developing countries when it covered less than 15 per cent of total import value for three of the parties to the agreement, and no more than 38 per cent for any party.  Her delegation also requested confirmation that the agreement's coverage reflected concessions but not necessarily elimination.    
&& The representative of China said that the follow-up questions had just been received by his delegation, and responses could therefore not be provided at the present meeting.  He added that his delegation would appreciate if the US could provide the questions in written form.  He looked forward to the CTD concluding its consideration of the APTA notification as soon as possible.   
&& The Chairman proposed that the US provide China with the follow-up questions in written form.  The item would remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  
It was so agreed.
-	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES – NOTIFICATION BY NORWAY (WT/COMTD/N/6/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman said that a notification concerning Norway's GSP scheme had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.4.  He invited the representative of Norway to introduce the notification.
&& The representative of Norway said that Norway had implemented several changes to its GSP scheme on 1 January 2008.  These changes were the result of a comprehensive government review, initiated with the aim of increasing Norway's imports from developing countries, and in particular from least-developed countries (LDCs) and other low-income countries.  The review was based on a study from an independent consultant, selected after public tender in line with the WTO's Government Procurement Agreement.  As part of the review, a working group – with representatives from relevant ministries and directorates – issued a report in April 2007, containing 15 recommendations for improvement of the GSP scheme.  After a public hearing of this report, including with relevant institutions and civil society organizations, the government endorsed the recommendations.  The parliament then took the necessary decisions as part of the state budget for 2008. 
He explained that a basic consideration of the review was to develop a consistent GSP scheme based on objective criteria for selecting the countries included in the scheme, as well as for differentiating between countries given duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access and those countries given ordinary GSP treatment.  In this regard, it had been decided that the GSP list would be based on the list of recipients of official development assistance (ODA) from the OECD's Development Assistance Committee (DAC).  Based on the DAC list, 11 new countries were included in Norway's GSP scheme from 1 January 2008.  It had also been decided that the preference margin for ordinary GSP beneficiary countries would be increased by 20 percentage points within the WTO minimum access quotas for agricultural products.  Furthermore, the provision of DFQF market access was extended to an increased number of countries.  Previously – since 1 July 2002 – DFQF market access for all goods from all LDCs had been provided as part of Norway's GSP scheme.  From 1 January 2008, however, this provision had been extended to include 14 low-income countries that were not part of the LDC group.  This meant that 64 countries were now being provided with DFQF market access into Norway for all their goods. 
It had also been decided that a country entering into a free trade agreement (FTA) with Norway in accordance with GATT Article XXIV would normally be taken out of Norway's GSP list when the FTA entered into force.  In addition, with a view to simplifying the system, the two safeguard provisions of Norway's GSP scheme had been merged into one.  He added that efforts would be made to assist GSP beneficiary countries, and in particular those countries that were given DFQF market access, in meeting the requirements to qualify for GSP treatment.  Initiatives to provide information would include improved and more accessible internet pages, printed material, and the organization of meetings or seminars in LDCs and other low-income countries.  Norway's Action Plan on Aid for Trade would play a role in trying to increase the use of the possibilities created by DFQF market access.  Further information on Norway's GSP scheme could be found on the website of the Government of Norway. 
&& The representative of Brazil said that the notification by Norway had been circulated quite recently.  His delegation wished to have more time to study the notification, and also have the possibility of coming back to it at the next CTD meeting should any questions arise. 
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee take note of the notification by Norway.  He further proposed that the Secretariat remain in contact with the Brazilian delegation to ascertain whether Brazil would have any questions on the notification.  If so, the present item would appear on the agenda of the next CTD meeting.
It was so agreed.  
-	SOUTH ASIAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT (SAFTA) (WT/COMTD/N/26)
&& The Chairman said that the notification concerning the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) – which could be found in document WT/COMTD/N/26 – had been circulated at the request of India.  He invited the representative of India to introduce the notification. 
&& The representative of India said that, as the current Chair of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), India had notified SAFTA under the Enabling Clause in accordance with the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision establishing a Transparency Mechanism for RTAs – contained in document WT/L/671.  He said that SAFTA was signed on 6 January 2004, and entered into force on 1 January 2006.  The Contracting States of the agreement were Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.  Afghanistan – an LDC – was in the process of becoming a Contracting State.  SAFTA was expected to provide stimulus to the  strengthening of SAARC economies.  The agreement recognized that LDCs in the region needed to be accorded special and differential treatment commensurate with their development needs.  The Trade Liberalization Programme (TLP) under SAFTA went into effect from 1 July 2006 for all Contracting States except Nepal and Sri Lanka, for which it did so from 1 August 2006 and 16 September 2006 respectively.  Article 7 of the agreement provided for a phased TLP for the reduction of tariffs to between zero and 5 per cent within ten years of the entry into force of the agreement.  The TLP would cover all tariff lines except those relating to items kept in the Sensitive List by each Contracting State. 
He went on to say that the objectives of the agreement, as contained in Article 3, were to promote and enhance mutual trade and economic cooperation among Contracting States by, inter alia:  (i) eliminating barriers to trade in, and facilitating the cross-border movement of goods between, the territories of the Contracting States;  (ii) promoting conditions of fair competition in the free trade area, and ensuring equitable benefits to all Contracting States, taking into account their respective levels and pattern of economic development;  (iii) creating effective mechanisms for the implementation and application of the agreement, for its joint administration and for the resolution of disputes;  and (iv) establishing a framework for further regional cooperation to expand and enhance the mutual benefits of the agreement.  He said that India accorded high importance to SAFTA, and believed that SAFTA would provide impetus to regional economic cooperation and give effect to the shared aspirations of a more prosperous South Asia.
&& The Committee took note of the notification concerning SAFTA.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES	
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would continue his informal consultations with Members to get a better idea as to how the Committee could continue to add value in its discussion on commodities.  In this regard, he informed the Committee that some Members had been working to explore ways in which the CTD could contribute to the commodities issue, particularly in light of the outcome of the recently‑concluded UNCTAD XII Conference.  The Coordinator of the African Group had also contacted him to request that the present item remain on the CTD's agenda.  He added that he generally encouraged proposals from Members in this regard, either at the present meeting or after the meeting. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that she wished to signal the interest of her delegation in reviving the commodities agenda item in the CTD.  She observed that many of the assumptions that were originally behind the inclusion of this item on the CTD's agenda might have changed.  With regard to the recent increases in food prices, her delegation had been following with interest the recent meeting in Bern of the United Nations' Chief Executives Board for Coordination.  She believed that it might be useful for the CTD to consider – and raise understanding of – the latest developments in commodity prices. 
&& The Chairman proposed that he continue his informal consultations with a view to concretizing a way forward for the CTD on this matter.  
It was so agreed.  
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The Council had extended the deadline to its July 2008 meeting.  
He recalled that at the last CTD meeting, he had informed the Committee that the proponents had prepared a draft text on the issue of transparency for preferential trade arrangements (PTAs).  This text had undergone revisions based on the comments made by some Members in a number of informal consultations.  His understanding was that another revision of the text was now ready – or close to being ready.  It was his intention to have the proponents' draft text considered informally in an open-ended format as soon as possible.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of China said that transparency was a core principle of the WTO. China attached great importance to transparency, and was taking measures within its capacity to fulfil its responsibilities in this regard.  He informed the Committee that after examining the proposal by Brazil, India and the US on a transparency mechanism for PTAs, China had decided to join as a co‑sponsor.  He expressed hope that the CTD could accelerate its work on this matter and achieve a satisfactory result as soon as possible.  
&& The representative of Brazil welcomed China's announcement to co-sponsor the proposal.  He confirmed that a revised version of the text proposal was currently being finalized by the proponents.  He also welcomed the Chairman's initiative to have the proponents' draft text considered in an informal, open-ended format as soon as possible.  Finally, he encouraged all Members to embrace the legitimate objectives of transparency envisaged by the proposed mechanism, which would apply to every type of preferential scheme apart from RTAs.      
&& The representative of India welcomed China's decision to co-sponsor the proposal for a transparency mechanism for PTAs.  This would broaden the base of co-sponsorship, which already covered some of the largest beneficiaries of GSP schemes, and also included a country which provided one of the largest GSP schemes.  His delegation was confident that this would lend both weight and value to the proposal currently under discussion.  He said that more time and more work – in both formal and informal settings – would be required before the CTD could come to a decision on this matter.  He expressed appreciation for the constructive engagement by Members in the informal consultations that had been called by the Chairman, and remained hopeful of closing the gaps soon.  His delegation welcomed the Chairman's initiative to have the proposal discussed in an open-ended format, and  looked forward to working with Members to establish an appropriate transparency mechanism for PTAs very soon.  
&& The representative of the United States also welcomed China as a co-sponsor of the proposal.  Her delegation looked forward to advancing the work on this matter towards a positive outcome. 
&& The Chairman encouraged the proponents to expedite the revision of the text, so that it could be considered in an open-ended format as soon as possible.  He said that this item would remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  He recalled that the CTD had to date undertaken two of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision.  
&& The representative of India recalled that his delegation had informed the Committee at its 63rd Session that India would introduce, in a phased manner, a scheme for LDCs in fulfilment of the mandate contained in paragraph 47 of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration as it related to DFQF market access for LDCs.  In this regard, he referred to the Prime Minister of India's inaugural address at the India-Africa Forum Summit in New Delhi on 8 April 2008, in which India's Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for LDCs had been announced.  The scheme was available to all LDCs, whether or not they were WTO Members.  The objective of the scheme was to grant tariff preferences on the exports of products originating in LDCs in order to help improve their trading opportunities and to allow them to use trade as a tool for development. 
Tariff concessions would start with a fixed margin of preference from the beginning of the implementation of the scheme, covering 92.5 per cent of LDCs' global exports.  It was envisaged that 85 per cent of total tariff lines at the 6-digit level of the Harmonized System would become duty-free within a five year time frame.  The rules of origin under the scheme were designed to be simple, and preferential safeguards had adequate support for the exporting countries.  Technical assistance would also be provided to maximize the utility of the scheme.  He added that the Government of India's nodal point had already been notified, and that consultations could be held to address specific problems.  Though implemented unilaterally and contemplated before the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference, the scheme was in line with the relevant sections of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.  He added that on 16 April 2008 his delegation had made a presentation on India's scheme to the Ambassadors of the LDC Group.  Copies of that presentation had been made available to delegations at the present meeting.  He concluded by urging developed countries and other developing countries that had not yet announced their DFQF market access schemes for LDCs, to do so in an expeditious manner.  
&& The representative of Lesotho, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that trade had become an important tool for most LDCs in their efforts to attain their development goals, including the reduction of poverty among their citizens.  For the Doha Round to be successfully concluded, the interests of the LDCs needed to be taken on board.  Granting meaningful and realistic market access to products of export interest to LDCs would be the barometer in the move towards this end.  The LDCs, therefore, continued to call upon developed country Members to live up to the commitment made at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference to provide DFQF market access to LDCs as one of the deliverables of the Round.  The LDCs acknowledged the efforts made by some countries to translate commitments into reality, in particular the practical steps being taken to provide enhanced market access to the LDCs.  In this regard, the notification made by Norway at the present meeting was acknowledged with appreciation.  He also expressed appreciation for the information provided by India on its DFTP Scheme for LDCs.  He hoped that this move by India would not only encourage other developing countries to come forward with a complete package, but would also send an appropriate message to the developed countries that it was time that they placed concrete offers on the  negotiating table.  He added that clarity of content and the timing of implementation were pivotal in giving true meaning to the offers made.
The LDCs also wished to urge Members to ensure that there was parallel progress in the simplification of preferential rules of origin.  The intended benefits of DFQF market access would otherwise not be realized.  In this regard, the LDCs were pleased to report that bilateral consultations were continuing with relevant Members on simple and transparent rules of origin to accompany DFQF market access, with the aim of reaching an agreement on modalities to facilitate the implementation of the commitment on rules of origin made at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  It was hoped that other non-tariff barriers would not frustrate the results.  He emphasized that time was of the essence if the provision of DFQF market access was to be meaningful to LDCs.  The value of DFQF market access would otherwise be minimal and not sufficient to translate into the desired benefits, particularly in view of preference erosion and competition from economically stronger countries.  It was on this basis that LDC Trade Ministers – meeting in Maseru, Lesotho, in February 2008 – had urged developed countries to provide at least 97 per cent DFQF market access by the end of the year, and to additionally outline the process by which DFQF market access would be provided on the remaining tariff lines.  He said that in order to attain a mutually beneficial outcome, it was necessary for transparency and predictability to be the driving forces of the process. 
Supporting the intervention by Lesotho, the representative of Benin expressed appreciation for India's initiative to offer enhanced market access to LDCs, and noted that issues concerning rules of origin and the strengthening of LDCs' productive capacities were addressed in the Indian initiative.  His delegation encouraged other WTO Members – developed and developing – to follow India's example.    
&& The representative of Bangladesh supported the intervention by Lesotho, and expressed appreciation for India's announcement of its scheme to provide enhanced market access to LDCs.  He said that DFQF market access was of little use to LDCs if it was not accompanied by simple, transparent and realistic rules of origin.  He encouraged the Indian Government to ensure that the rules of origin in the Indian scheme satisfied these criteria.  With regard to the implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs, he emphasized that time was of the essence.  When the Doha Round would be completed, Members' tariffs would be reduced very quickly.  A long period for the implementation of DFQF market access would, therefore, not be beneficial to LDCs.  He urged India and other delegations to provide DFQF market access to LDCs at the earliest, and without staging.  He also invited other developing countries to follow India's example in providing enhanced DFQF market access to LDCs.  Finally, he requested developed country Members that were yet to implement the Hong Kong Decision to complete their internal procedures as soon as possible to ensure that the DFQF market access provided to LDCs was truly meaningful.   
The representative of Zambia also supported the intervention by Lesotho.  She commended the announcements by India and Norway concerning DFQF market access to LDCs, and encouraged them to adopt rules of origin that would provide effective market access to LDCs.  Her delegation looked forward to further discussions with them in bilateral meetings.
&& The representative of the European Communities expressed appreciation for the steps being taken by India to provide enhanced market access to LDCs.  She called on developed country Members and those developing country Members in a position to do so, to live up to the commitment made at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  She recalled that at the last CTD meeting her delegation had welcomed China's announcement of the provision of DFQF market access to African LDCs.  At that meeting, the EC had also raised a number of questions on China's initiative which – at the suggestion of the Chinese delegation – had been submitted bilaterally to China.  While a response had subsequently been received, the EC nevertheless hoped that there would be further opportunities to obtain clarification on the preferences granted by China to African LDCs.     
The representative of China, recalling the mandate in the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, said that the developed countries should take the lead in the provision of DFQF market access, in particular by expeditiously fulfilling the commitment made at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  He also welcomed India's announcement of its new scheme for LDCs.  He added that China, as a developing country, had made every effort to provide enhanced market access to LDCs.  In particular, DFQF market access was being provided to 41 LDCs, covering 92.5 per cent of export volume to China.  He said that China, within its capacity, was committed to continuing its efforts to assist LDCs.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2007
Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/166)
&& The Chairman recalled that he had mentioned at the beginning of the meeting that the 2007 Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training would not be considered at the present meeting.  He proposed that the Committee move on to consider the Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2007, which had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/166.  He invited the Secretariat to introduce the report.
The Head of the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit (TCAU) said that two major ex-post evaluations had been undertaken in 2007, namely of the Geneva-based trade policy courses and of the WTO Reference Centre Programme, details of which could be found in the report.  Annex 1 of the report listed all the evaluations – onsite and ex-post – that had been undertaken in the course of the year.  It was hoped that the results of an ex-post evaluation of the regional trade policy courses would be contained in next year's report. 
&& The representative of Benin said that there were some encouraging and positive signals in the Audit Report.  The evaluations and comments indicated that the WTO's technical assistance activities were useful and pertinent, and should be continued.  He expressed the full support of his delegation for these activities.  He observed that there had been 19,000 beneficiaries, and noted that both the providers and the beneficiaries of technical assistance had expressed a high rate of satisfaction with the activities.  He also appreciated that the proportion of women participants had increased – from 37 per cent in 2006 to 39 per cent in 2007 – and expressed confidence that the participation rate of women would increase even further in the future.     
The representative of the European Communities said that her delegation had noted the high satisfaction rate of the participants in the WTO's technical assistance activities.  At the same time, her delegation shared some of the concerns raised in the Audit Report.  She cited as examples issues relating to the number of activities, as well as the appropriate number of participants per activity.  As the Audit Report had been circulated only recently, she said that her delegation would appreciate having more time to consider it.  She also suggested that it would be useful to consider the Audit Report in conjunction with the 2007 Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training.  
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation had noted the effectiveness of the WTO's technical assistance activities, but also wished to explore certain issues further.  For example, one concern was that more might be done to implement the recommendations from previous Audit Reports, as suggested in paragraph 78.  He also believed that Members should be kept abreast of the types of developments in technical assistance products that were referred to in  paragraph 77.  He said that his delegation had not yet had a chance to go through the Audit Report in detail, and may therefore come back with further comments at the next CTD meeting. 
&& The Chairman invited the Secretariat to respond to the comments made.
The Head of the TCAU said that Members may wish to have more time to consider the 2007 Audit Report.  He said that he could respond in detail at the next CTD meeting to the comments and questions raised on the report. 
&& The Chairman noted that Members wished to continue their discussion on the 2007 Audit Report at the next CTD meeting, when the 2007 Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training would also be considered.  He proposed that the Committee take note of the interventions made at the present meeting concerning the 2007 Audit Report.
It was so agreed.  
OTHER BUSINESS 
The representative of the European Communities referred to the communication from Saudi Arabia circulated in document WT/REG222/N/1/Corr.1, requesting a change in the notification status of the GCC Customs Union from Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and the Understanding thereon to Paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause.  The EC asked the delegation of Saudi Arabia to elaborate on the reasons for having requested this change.  She said that the EC would also appreciate if the delegation of Saudi Arabia could explain the legal justification of a customs union under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause, and under what basis it considered that a customs union fell within that paragraph.
&& The representative of the United States supported the intervention by the EC.  Her delegation believed that the GCC Customs Union notification raised questions that merited further review.  
&& The representative of Japan expressed support for the intervention by the EC. 
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation also shared some of the concerns raised by the EC.
The representative of Brazil said that his delegation appreciated the request for clarification that had been made by the EC.  He added, however, that it was for Members to notify the agreements they entered into under the provisions they understood to be most appropriate.
&& The Chairman observed that there was no representative of the GCC present in the meeting room to respond.  He proposed, therefore, that the Committee revert to this matter at its next meeting, at which he hoped a GCC representative would be present.
It was so agreed.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________



WT/COMTD/M/69 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/69 	Page  PAGE 13



 

 

 

 



