
Committee on Trade and Development
Seventeenth Session


NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 26 SEPTEMBER 1997
Chairman: H.E. Mr. D. Baichoo (Mauritius)
Adoption of the Agenda

The Seventeenth Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was convened
in Airgram WTO/AIR/652.

The following Agenda was adopted:

Adoption of the Agenda

WTO Technical Cooperation and Training Activities as they relate to Developing

Country Members

(i) Implementation Modalities (WT/COMTD/W/29)

(ii) Manual on Technical Cooperation and Training: Revision
(WT/COMTD/W/26/Rev. 1)

(ili) Three Year Plan for Technical Cooperation: 1997-1999

Review of Participation of Developing Country Members in the Multilateral Trading
System (WT/COMTD/W/31)

High-Level Meeting on Least-Developed Countries
- Progress Report (WT/COMTD/W/28/Add. 1 and Add.2)

Request for Observer Status in the Committee: Islamic Development Bank
Annual Report for 1997

Other Business
- Programme of Work

WTO Technical Cooperation and Training Activities as They Relate to Developing Country

Members
(i) Implementation Modalities

&& The Chairman noted that the Secretariat had prepared a note, in document WT/COMTD/W/29,
dated 25 July, for consideration by the Committee. As mentioned in the document, the draft attempted
to capture elements of the Secretariat's non-paper of February 1997, the informal note by the Swiss
delegation circulated in May, and various comments made by delegations. He recalled that at the
Committee's May meeting, a further period of two weeks had been provided so as to give the opportunity
to Members to comment in writing. He believed that the note presented by the Secretariat achieved
a careful balance among often diverging views. He therefore hoped that the Committee would be in
a position to adopt finally these Implementation Modalities.

4. && The representative of the United States had no objection to the substance of the document.
However, he noted that it had been practice in other WTO bodies to issue documents three weeks in
advance of the meeting. Two weeks was not enough to consider a document in detail. He therefore
suggested that the period of circulation for documents prior to the next meeting be three weeks.

5. && The representative of Morocco suggested that all documents relating to technical cooperation
only be adopted at the Committee's last session of the year in order for delegations to be able to study
them more. He found the document in question difficult to adopt. For example, he disliked the use
of the term “donor Members” which was a notion that should be avoided. In addition, some delegations
had made helpful suggestions to the section on Monitoring, Follow-up and Evaluation and he wished
to know why those suggestions had not been incorporated in the document.

6.&& The representative of Switzerland said that his delegation generally was happy with the document
although certain corrections could be made to its details. Document WT/COMTD/W/29 was dated
25 July, and long consultations had been held on it. The best approach was to adopt the document
and not over-burden the Committee with work at the end of the year as several other exercises needed
to be carried out at that time.

7.&& The representative of Egypt suggested that informal consultations be held to discuss the
Implementation Modalities.

8. && The representative of Pakistan believed that the revised draft of the Implementation Modalities,
was an improvement over the previous version. His delegation also had comments on various paragraphs.
He therefore supported the idea of holding an informal meeting to discuss the document further.

9.&& The representative of the European Communities said that the revised document had improved
the previous version, and his delegation had no difficulty in adopting it. However, if the work on
the paper continued, his delegation had two comments relating to the section on Long-Term Engagement.
First, sub-section (a) stated that: "It is recognised that the delivery of technical cooperation would be greatly enhanced if recipient
countries were to designate an official/office in a government ministry to be the central focal
point for technical cooperation activities with the WTO, and perhaps for all trade-related
technical assistance provided by other institutions.”
He suggested that it was more positive to replace “perhaps” by "preferably" in the penultimate line,
as that was the approach that was being followed in the context of the design of an integrated framework
for the least-developed countries; the rational behind it made sense in this connection too. The second
comment was that it might be useful to consider including under sub-section (c) that the WTO would
assist in the development of a network of local trainers.

10.&&  The representative of India hoped that the process of informal consultations on the document
would be open-ended so that all delegations that so desired could participate, as some might wish to
respond to changes that would be made.

11. && The representative of Switzerland said that his delegation supported open-ended consultations
as suggested by the representative of India due to difficulties that could arise with amendments.

12. && The Chairman said that he would hold further open-ended informal consultations on this matter.

(ii) Manual on Technical Cooperation and Training

13. && The Chairman said that the Committee had before it a revision of the earlier paper which had
been discussed at the 20 May meeting (WT/COMTD/W/26/Rev.1). Delegations had been invited
to submit comments in writing within two weeks of that meeting. The paper had been shortened and
the Secretariat had attempted to take on board comments made. The Manual provided a description
of the technical cooperation and training activities available in the WTO and explained how Members
should go about obtaining such assistance. He suggested that the Committee agree to the text, while
at the same time asking the Secretariat to make any necessary adjustments in the light of the High-Level
Meeting, and proceed to have the paper derestricted as soon as possible so that the Manual, which
was not a legal document, could finally reach the public.

14.&& The representative of the United States noted that the Manual stated that there were 98 WTO
Members which were developing countries. His delegation wished to have it corrected to read that
98 WTO Members had self-selected themselves as developing countries.

15. && The representative of Morocco said that although he saw the usefulness of having a document
such as the Manual ready for the High-Level Meeting on Least-Developed Countries' Trade
Development, his delegation preferred that the document be presented then as a provisional document
to Ministers and delegates. For one, he found it too long, despite attempts to reduce it. He suggested
that some parts could be included in the Annual Report of the Committee and that some details could
be taken out. As it was his delegation which had asked for the document, he wished to inform the
Committee that his delegation was making an effort to ask UNCTAD and ITC for the same type of
documents. The idea was that the three documents would be compatible and comparable so as to enable
delegations to better understand the technical cooperation activities of each organization.

16.&& The representative of India referred to the suggestion made by the representative of the United
States regarding the self-selection of developing countries and said that his delegation needed to see
the language and wished to think about it. His delegation also had problems with the word "integration"
on Page 6 when it referred to the "full integration of beneficiaries into the multilateral trading system” .
He was therefore willing to support the Manual in its provisional form and not as a final document.

17.&& The representative of Egypt did not see a need for the document to be adopted. It could simply
be taken note of. He agreed with the Chair in that the document needed to be made public. It was
necessary that the people in the different ministries in capitals and others who were to benefit from
the WTO technical cooperation activities had access to it. His delegation had no difficulty in maintaining
it as a provisional document.

18.&& The representative of Pakistan agreed to the proposal of making the document public, and that
it be provisional. He referred to the first section on page 7 which stated, in the second paragraph,
that for beneficiaries "for seminars, workshops, training activities and other specialized activities to
be carried out in Geneva, the selection criteria will mostly be established by the WTO Secretariat"
and said that his delegation did not have a problem with this wording as long as the final selection
and nomination of government officials would be left to the governments. Likewise, regarding the
paragraph referring to private sector attendance, he suggested that it be clarified that these representatives
would be invited by the governments concerned. Referring to the paragraph which dealt with acceding
countries on Page 8 he proposed that, as had been done on Page 4 in the paragraph dealing with
developing countries, it would be better to cite the number of developing countries in the process of
accession.

19.&& The representative of the European Communities thought that the Manual would be useful for
countries seeking technical assistance. Concerning the section on cooperation with other international
organizations on Page 20, much more could be said in light of the High-Level Meeting on Least-
Developed Countries’ Trade Development, and it would be necessary to update the information after
that Meeting. Regarding the reference to the establishment of the Subcommittee on Least-Developed
Countries on Pages 4 and 5, he believed that the date was 1995, rather than 1996. Concerning the
title, "Increased need for technical assistance for developing countries” he suggested it be changed
to “Increased need for technical assistance” as it also covered technical assistance for acceding countries
which were not all necessarily regarded as developing countries by all Members.

20.&& The representative of Switzerland said that the document could only be finalized after the High-
Level Meeting had taken place as the Meeting might influence its drafting. He suggested that the
phrasing on Page 21 which stated that “The grants provided by the Members can be administered by
the WTO Secretariat or the donor, and are mostly earmarked for specific activities decided upon between
the donor and the WTO Secretariat and to be carried out within a certain time-frame” be changed to
state that specific activities should be decided according to the guidelines and implementation modalities
as they constituted the framework within which the Committee worked. There was also a need to
mention the decision of the General Council on the issue of the Trust Fund for the High-Level Meeting,
and in that context that consultations on the matter of the 13 per cent overhead had been held.

21. && The representative of Venezuela said his delegation had certain reservations about some of
the statements made and that it would wish to address them during further consultations.

22.&& The Chairman asked the Secretariat to consider the points raised and said that further suggestions
would be taken into consideration in the revised drafting.

(iii) Three Year plan for Technical Cooperation: 1997-1999

23. The Chairman said that the Secretariat had circulated, in document WT/COMTD/W/25/Add.1,
an updated version of the Technical Assistance Programme of Activities for 1997. Following suggestions
made at the last meeting, the Secretariat had improved on the paper and had introduced two new columns,
one called "WTO Funding” and one called "Other Funding", thus separating the sources of funding
from the column which indicated the organizing entity. Members would appreciate that the document
showed an intensification of activities, which underlined the fact that demand-driven assistance by
necessity led to frequent changes and in most cases additions to original plans. For example, the
preparation of the High-Level Meeting and needs assessment missions undertaken in that connection
had led to additional technical assistance for the least-developed countries beyond what was reflected
in the original document. Since much of the first year of the 1997-1999 plan had lapsed, he suggested
that the Committee took note of it at this point. He added that as provided for in the Guidelines and
the Implementation Modalities, the Secretariat would provide the Committee with a Draft Three-Year
Plan covering 1998-2000 for the next meeting.

24. && The representative of Morocco agreed with the suggestions made. His only comment related
to the presentation. He wished to see a separate table for activities which the WTO had initiated so
as to distinguish them from those activities in which WTO had only participated. It would give a clearer
idea of the volume of WTO organized events.

25. && The representative of the European Communities said that the document should be monitored
and updated in a regular fashion. He asked for clarification on why only activities for 1997 were
presented in detail, when this was a Three-Year Plan. There was little information on activities for
the following two years, and he asked whether that indicated that no specific requests for activities
next year and beyond had been submitted?

26.&& The Secretariat noted that there had certainly been requests for technical cooperation for 1998.
He added that the document was an addendum to the previous document, and as such it did not revise
the Secretariat's projected activities in 1998 and 1999, nor did it revise the introductory note.

27.&& The representative of the European Communities said that the original document did not contain
any specific activities for 1998 either. The document only mentioned areas of focus, which was not
the same as requests for action. He was of the view that information about specific requests for activities
in 1998 was still lacking.

28.&& The Secretariat said that the original idea for the Three-Year Plan for Technical Cooperation
was that detailed information be given about the plan and the requests for the current year, but that
for the subsequent two years only an indication of the types of areas that would be attended to was
to be given. As it was difficult to get countries to focus and plan ahead regarding the type of technical
assistance they were likely to request, it was hard to give specific information beyond a three-month
period. The final response would, for most cases, only be available just prior to the event to be held.
Even in the specific annual plan for the current year, many changes took place. Therefore, only a
rough idea as to the activities of the two years furthest in the future of each Three-Year Plan could
be given. Another Three-Year Plan would be presented to the Committee at its next meeting in which
activities for 1998 would be described in greater detail and a rough idea would be provided of the
activities planned for 1999-2000.

29. && The representative of Switzerland noted that the Three-Year Plan showed the tremendous need
to coordinate technical assistance among the international organizations. The current Three-Year Plan
was a good start, and it would subsequently need to be even further improved.

30.&& The representative of Morocco asked why the document had been provided as an Addendum
and not as arevised document. He suggested that working documents be used in the future, and that
document symbols only be given to adopted documents. Regarding the presentation, he suggested
that an additional column be created which would separate WTO technical cooperation activities from
those of other organizations. For those activities in which WTO involvement was limited to the
participation of WTO experts at a meeting, no cost should be mentioned. It was enough to state that
“WTO participated by sending experts”. It would thus be easier to identify the activities which were
primarily initiated by the WTO.

31. && The representative of the Secretariat replied that the document could be presented the way
Members found most convenient. However, he wished to draw the attention to the first page of
Addendum 1 where it was stated that the attached table contained an updated version of the programme
of technical cooperation activities for 1997. It was distributed as an Addendum, and it was stated that
it substituted pages 5-18 of the original document. Secondly, the Secretariat could segregate the WTO
organized technical activities from those organized by others if the Committee so wished. In the current
document, all the activities in which the Secretariat had participated in a year had been presented in
alphabetical and chronological order. It was of course possible to segregate the activities into two
groups, but as far as the Secretariat was concerned, the same amount of work was involved no matter
whether the activity was initiated and organized by the Secretariat or by some other agency.

32.&& The representative of Morocco said that as his delegation did not believe that the same amount
of work was involved no matter whether the activity was initiated and organized by the WTO Secretariat
or by some other organization, his delegation wished to see technical cooperation activities organized
by other organizations accredited as such. He felt that it was fundamental that the WTO technical
assistance be judged by the activities in which the WTO had the main responsibility.

33.&& The representative of Egypt noted that the Three Year plan for Technical Cooperation had
solicited many questions from officials in his capital. He was of view that the intention of the paper
had been to solicit requests and actions. He supported that flexibility be maintained in the work plan
for the two future years as it helped the planning of requests from capitals.

34.&& The representative of Myanmar, speaking on behalf of ASEAN, agreed with the representative
of Morocco that a separation of the activities initiated and organized by the Secretariat from those of
other agencies would give a clearer picture.

35. && The representative of Colombia had no objection to breaking the information into WTO organized
and non-WTO organized activities. However, the document appeared most useful in chronological
presentation as it would allow delegations to know what technical assistance seminars were taking place
world-wide at a certain point in time. With respect to the question from the European Communities
regarding whether any Member had requested technical assistance for 1998, Colombia had requested
WTO assistance in organizing a seminar on anti-dumping and safeguards to be held in Colombia in 1998.

36. && The Chairman said that since much of the first year has lapsed, the comments made would
be taken into consideration for the document to be issued for the November meeting of the Committee.

Cc. Review of the Participation of Developing Country Members in the Multilateral Trading System

37.&& The Chairman said that at its May meeting, the Committee had discussed its programme of
work for the autumn of this year. It had agreed to place on its agenda for today's meeting an item
entitled "Review of the Participation of Developing Countries in World Trade”. The Secretariat had
prepared a Note entitled "Participation of Developing Countries in World Trade: Recent Developments
and Trade of the Least-Developed Countries” contained in document WT/COMTD/W/31 which had
been circulated to Members on 17 September. The Note updated the study which had been prepared
by the Secretariat in 1996 of Major Trends and Underlying Factors in the Participation of Developing
Countries in World Trade over the past twenty years and was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/15.

38. && The representative of the Secretariat said the document was intended to provide a preview of
two other papers that were being prepared by the Secretariat. The first one, the Annual Report, would
contain more detailed information on the trade of developing countries and trade developments over
the past twelve months. The second was documentation that was being prepared for the High-Level
Meeting on Least-Developed Countries’ Trade Development. He drew the attention of delegations
to the Section in paragraphs 18-20 on market access for the least-developed countries. In the coming
weeks detailed information on market access barriers facing exports from least-developed countries
would be produced by the Secretariat.

39. && The representative of India wished to make two points. Relating to paragraph 6 of the paper,
his delegation suggested that the Committee might wish to examine the concern that in 1996 there was
a slowdown in exports of textiles and clothing as that constituted an important export item for some
Members. Relating to paragraph 20, his delegation did not fully agree with the statement that least-
developed countries faced the same market access conditions in developing country markets as other
exporters. Technical assistance and technical cooperation programmes provided by developing countries
aimed at helping least-developed countries to get greater market access to the market of the developing
country providing such assistance.

40. && The representative of the United States said that it was of particular interest to his delegation
to note what appeared to be an improved performance of developing countries in the last few years,
particularly since the entry into force of the Uruguay Round Agreements and it appeared as if developing
countries were breaking new ground in terms of their share of world exports.

41. && The representative of Hong Kong noted that an issue which had attracted concern was the erosion
of margins of preference as a result of a general lowering of tariffs after the Uruguay Round. His
delegation requested the Secretariat to provide supplementary information on the impact of regional
trade agreements on margins of preference. He agreed with India that the area of textiles was an area
to consider further.

42. && The representative of Pakistan was of the opinion that Table 1 was too aggregated. Manufactures
was too broad a category which would disguise intersectional disparities for example with regard to
textiles. He suggested that the table be further disaggregated to reflect the correct picture.

43.&& The representative of the European Communities noted with interest that the share of developing
countries as a whole in world trade had improved. It had been particularly strong in Asia and Latin
America. There were differences among regions, and a region that continued to be a source of concern
was Africa. This showed that it was right for WTO Members to focus on least-developed countries.
Two other points made in the paper which were worth underlining were the contribution the advanced
developing countries could make in improving access to their markets. That was something all Members
should consider in the context of the High-Level Meeting. Second, the paper underscored the importance
of least-developed countries having the right policy mix in place and of them adopting sound
macroeconomic policies.

44.&& The representative of Egypt hoped that the item would remain on the agenda as the paper would
require additional discussion.

45.&& The representative of Uganda said that what clearly came out of the paper was that in spite
of progress and deepening of structural reforms in least-developed countries, there was still a need
for external assistance if the least-developed countries were to take advantage of the new trading
environment. The sources of growth of least-developed countries’ trade still were mainly exports of
primary commodities and not of value-added manufactured goods. That was a fact which needed to
be highlighted.

46. && The representative of Morocco was not of the opinion that the intention should be to revise
the document as the purpose of it was to provide elements to react to. His delegation saw this Agenda
item as a standing item and hoped that updates of the paper would be produced from time to time.
The document was basically a background document and was useful as such.

47. && The Committee took note of the document and the statements made.

D. High-Level Meeting on Least-Developed Countries

- Progress Report

48. && The Chairman noted that the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries had held a meeting
on 16 September 1997 in which progress in the preparations for the High Level Meeting had been
discussed. The Minutes of this meeting had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/LLDC/M/8.
The Secretariat had in the past prepared a number of background documents on the status of preparations,
which had been circulated to Members in documents WT/COMTD/W/28, plus Add.1 and Add. 2.
A document containing information on the NGO Symposium, which had started the previous day and
which was still ongoing had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/LLDC/W/9.

49.&& The Chairperson of the Sub-Committee said that the High-Level Meeting had recently been
discussed in depth at the meetings of the Sub-Committee and in UNCTAD. She said that the opening
plenary would provide an opportunity for countries to announce market access initiatives for least-
developed countries. She was fairly optimistic, both with regard to announcements to be made by
developed and by developing nations in this regard. The meeting would then split into country-specific
roundtables and thematic roundtables. As many needs assessments of sufficient quality to conduct
roundtables had been received, it would be necessary either to have parallel country-specific roundtables
or to attend to some least-developed countries before or after the High-Level Meeting.

50. She said that the final list of countries to be showcased at the High-Level Meeting would be
issued on 10 October. She wished to remind the least-developed countries that it was up to them to
choose the chairman and the additional institutions and donors to be invited to their particular roundtables.
Regarding the thematic roundtables, consultation held in UNCTAD had led to consensus on the themes
to be discussed and on the participants in the roundtables. UNCTAD would take care of the organization
of the roundtables. The Chairs of the two thematic roundtables might be Minister Pronk of the
Netherlands and a least-developed country Minister. UNCTAD was carrying out consultations on those
issues. The thematic roundtables would end up in plenary in the form of the documents embodying
the recommendations to the inter-governmental institutions, to the governments of the least-developed
countries and to the donor community at large. The aim was to endorse those recommendations in
the plenary. The aim was also to endorse the paper on the Integrated Framework. It should be recalled
that consultations had been held on the issue by Mr. Hoda and Mr. Fortin. They would hold further
informal consultations and the document would then be distributed. Finally, a new version of the budget
was expected at any moment as there had been a reluctance of donors to pledge on the base of the
earlier budget. Partly because of the overheads and partly because three tickets per least-developed
country was regarded by some donors as a bit exaggerated. A more modest budget could hopefully
attract new commitments and she encouraged those in a position to do so to pledge as only Sweden
had committed itself so far. Ambassador Lafer, the Chairman of the General Council was still holding
consultations with a view to resolving the political problem of attendance of countries at the High-Level
Meeting. Finally, she advised delegations to spend some time at the NGO conference as their
contribution to the debate on the issues to be discussed at the High-Level Meeting would be useful.

51. && The representative of the European Communities said that in order for bilateral donors to play
a useful role at the High-Level Meeting they would need to have the needs assessments shortly. It
was not realistic to give bilateral donors only from mid-October to consider the needs assessments
which had taken the Agencies much longer to consider. It was understandable that no final list of the
least-developed countries to be featured at country-specific roundtables at the High-Level Meeting existed.
However, there was a need to get the needs assessments as quickly as possible in order for the bilateral
community to contribute. Second, a new paper on the budget was also needed in order to examine
to what extent gaps could be filled. Third, a better integration of least-developed countries into the
world trading system was a priority to which the European Communities was committed and the European
Communities intended to circulate a paper on the issue. The paper would include a comprehensive
three-prong approach. The first element was more generous market access to the European Communities’
market. The second was the importance of economic reform in the least-developed countries themselves
in order to help overcome supply-side constraints and in order to attract foreign direct investment.
The third element was a more effective use of technical assistance.

52. He explained the recent move by the European Communities on market access. The European
Communities was by far the largest market for exports from least-developed countries and it already
gave generous market access conditions for products from least-developed countries. However, it wished
to go further. On 20 June, the Council of Ministers of the European Union adopted the principle that
the least-developed countries which were non-ACP countries be granted market access conditions to
the European Communities’ market equivalent to those of the Lomé partners. The Council of Ministers
of the European Union had also backed a simplification of rules of origin and a possible cumulation
of origin for least-developed countries. His delegation also wished to take the opportunity to reiterate
a call on all developed and the most advanced among the developing countries to make a contribution
to improve access to their markets for products from least-developed countries as well.

53. He went on to say that the second element of the European Communities’ approach was that
an active participation of least-developed countries themselves was expected, including in follow-up
of any activity that would be agreed, as well as efforts to put the right domestic policies in place in
line with the requirements of the global economy in order to attract foreign direct investment. The
third element of the European Communities’ approach was technical assistance. Technical assistance
would be a central theme of the High-Level Meeting on Least-Developed Countries. His delegation
supported the aim to get amore efficient disbursement and delivery of technical assistance. In developed
countries there was a need to renew public support for development policies. The best way to do
so was to show that development policies could be effective, and that the countries in need also made
efforts. Those were the elements of the paper which he hoped would be circulated soon and that had
been drafted at the Community level with a view to the High-Level Meeting on Least-Developed
Countries.

54.&& The Chairperson of the Sub-Committee said that the needs assessments of the least-developed
countries would be circulated after 10 October. However, these papers were owned by the least-
developed countries themselves, and the least-developed countries were free to approach those donors
they considered relevant with their needs assessment. There was a difference between what the
Secretariats that organized the High-Level Meeting could do and what the least-developed countries
themselves, who owned these papers, could do. Some of the information problems could probably
be resolved that way. Immediately after the preparatory inter-agency meetings, the Sub-Committee
on Least-Developed Countries would hold a meeting where the outcome of the inter-agency deliberations
would be reported.

55.&& The representative of Egypt hoped that informal consultations would be intensified in the coming
few weeks as his delegation saw some loose ends which required additional consultations. Those were
for example; the method by which the country-specific roundtables would take place and the follow-up
mechanism.

56.&& The representative of Bangladesh thanked the European Communities for the significant
announcement of the opening up to non-ACP least-developed countries of market access in terms of
the Lomé Convention. If he had understood the representative of the European Communities right,
the facilities would be dependent on certain conditions being met in the sense that right domestic reforms
and right domestic policies needed to be followed. He hoped that the paper coming from the European
Communities in this connection would be specific and lay out the exact initiatives, areas and policies
that would be expected of the least-developed countries. It was his delegation's experience that the
policy reforms in some least-developed countries had not always been properly understood in the least-
developed country context. He therefore asked that the policy papers be simplified, detailed and time-
bound and that they state explicitly what the requirements would be. Finally he hoped that other
countries would follow the initiative of the European Communities in coming up with improved market
access offers in favour of least-developed countries.

57.&& The representative of Uganda took note of the statement made by the European Communities.
It was necessary that the needs assessments be published as soon as possible, so that bilateral donors
would be able to see how they could fit in. His delegation had no problem with its needs assessment
being distributed to donors and bilateral partners. He wished to stress the point that had been raised
by Tanzania in the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries regarding participation. The least-
developed countries would most likely be represented at ministerial level and it was the hope of his
delegation that the attendance from other participants would be at a high level too.

58. && The representative of Hong Kong, China asked whether the subject of market access for the
products of least-developed countries would be on the agenda before the roundtables or whether market
access would only be treated during the roundtables. His delegation hoped that it would be before,
as Members should be able, under that Agenda Item, not only to announce autonomous market access
offers but also to comment in general terms on the subject of market access for least-developed countries,
and the systemic WTO and trade policy developments which might be affecting market access. The
Agenda should be flexible enough to accommodate Members who might wish to make comments along
this lines.

59.&& The representative of Morocco did not share the understanding of Hong Kong, China. His
delegation's understanding was that the market access component of the High-Level Meeting would
occur before the roundtables and that nothing but practical measures in favour of least-developed countries
was to be discussed. As far as systemic issues were concerned, they had been discussed in the
preparations of the Plan of Action and the limits of such discussions had become clear at that time.
If practical results were wanted from a two-day meeting, no discussions relating to systemic issues
or generalities should be entered into as those issues required time. For those reasons, his delegation
thought that the understanding was not to have any discussion beyond announcements of practical
measures. Bound market access for least-developed countries would have been ideal, but from experience
gained at the Singapore Ministerial Conference it was clear that the WTO was not yet ready for that.

60. && The representative of the Secretariat said that from conversations it had had with several
delegations it felt that there was no need to issue a new budget covering only two delegates per least-
developed country. It should be possible to finance the original budget as it stood. Regarding
documentation, it was the aim to issue documents as soon as possible. It was the understanding of
the Secretariat that it had been asked to produce, at the High-Level Meeting, an integrated response
by six agencies to the needs expressed by least-developed countries. The Secretariat did not envisage
having to organize extensive roundtables actively involving bilateral donors. Rather it envisaged an
exercise of co-ordinating the activities of six agencies with the needs of least-developed countries.
There would hopefully be a multiplier effect spreading from the exercise, but there was unfortunately
not enough time at the High-Level Meeting itself to broaden the exercise further. Informal consultations
would be continuing on various issues related to the High-Level Meeting. The Secretariat’ s appreciation
was that the preparations were proceeding exceedingly well and that the High-Level Meeting would
be a success.

61. && The Committee took note of the statements made.

E. Request for Observer Status in the Committee: Islamic Development Bank

62.&& The Chairman noted that in a letter dated 20 July 1997 addressed to him in his capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development, the President of the Islamic Development
Bank had requested observer status in the Committee for Trade and Development. The Chairman said
that he had replied that, in line with the procedure for granting observer status to international
intergovernmental organizations in WTO bodies, the Islamic Development Bank had been added to
the list of international intergovernmental organizations applying for observership status in this
Committee. He had placed this request on the agenda of today's meeting in the hope that he might
be in a position to propose that the Committee took action on this issue. He regretted that he was
not in a position to do so. His consultations were continuing. Therefore, he suggested that the
Committee revert to this point at one of its future meetings.

63.&& The representative of Pakistan said that his delegation had hoped that this would be a
straightforward case which would meet the agreement of Members. In his delegation’ s view, the Islamic
Development Bank squarely met the criteria laid down by the WTO for acquiring observer status by
international intergovernmental organizations. His delegation had a number of reasons for saying so.
First, the Islamic Development Bank was a development financing institution with the primary objective
of promoting the social and economic development of its member countries. In pursuit of this objective
it had focused its activities on trade promotion among its member countries. Moreover, the Islamic
Development Bank had a global character as it comprised 52 Members from Africa, Asia, the
Middle East, Central Asia and Latin America. The volume of its trade financing was around a billion
dollars, and trade financing was a basic instrument of trade promotion. In light of this, his delegation
did not see any reason for an objection to the Islamic Development Bank being granted observer status
as it met the criteria of being trade related. It was an organization which was directly engaged in
promoting international trade. His delegation hoped that Members would judge the request purely
on its merits. In the current list of observers there were similar organizations which had already been
granted observer status. He questioned why the Islamic Development Bank should get a different
treatment.

64. && The representative of Egypt shared the opinions expressed by Pakistan, and supported strongly
that observership be granted to the Islamic Development Bank. His delegation also wished to express
concern about the delay in the process and hoped that the issue would be resolved soon.

65. && The representative of Turkey said his country had been holding the Chair of the standing
Committee for Economic Cooperation of the Islamic Conference for the last 20 years and that it, in
that capacity, had great experience in dealing with the Islamic Development Bank. His delegation
shared the views expressed by the delegation of Pakistan, as well as the concerns expressed relating
to the procedures which seemed to prolong the process.

66. && The representative of Bangladesh said that his delegation was pleased to support strongly the
Islamic Development Bank being granted Observer Status in the WTO Committee on Trade and
Development. His delegation was of the opinion that this request deserved urgent and sympathetic
consideration by Members of the Committee on Trade and Development on the ground of merit, some
of which he wished to mention. Both the Committee on Trade and Development and the Islamic
Development Bank shared a common area of work relating to trade and development. The Islamic
Development Bank was a multilateral loan-giving financial institution which extended soft term
development loans to its members under transparent and competitive rules and conditionalities. Its
loans benefited Member countries, some of whom like Bangladesh were least-developed. The Islamic
Development Bank financed directly export-enhancing and multilaterally trade increasing activities
in its member states and it provided technical assistance of sizeable volume to its members to built
capacity in a wide area of trade-related economic actions including for human resource development
and trade diversification. In its operational pursuit it has been maintaining productive, informal liaison
with a number of multilateral organizations like UNCTAD, UNDPand ITC, and its current membership
of 52 cut across Asia, Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia. Most of these member states were
also Members of the WTO. Considering the above, his delegation urged the delegations present at
that day's session of the Committee on Trade and Development to consider positively the extension
of immediate observer status to the Islamic Development Bank. Such a decision by the Committee
on Trade and Development would be in its interest and would strengthen multilateral trade.

67. && The representative of Kuwait supported the statements made by the representatives of Pakistan
and Egypt.

68. && The representative of Morocco, said that as his country held the Chairmanship at Head of State
Level of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, his delegation was in favour of the Committee
on Trade and Development granting observer status to the Islamic Development Bank. The Islamic
Development Bank had presented a good file and anyone who wished to read about its activities and
understand why it was legitimate that the Islamic Development Bank acquire observer status could
read the file. However, his delegation understood that the question of observer status had to be resolved
at the level of the General Council and he hoped that this was the only reason for not already granting
the Islamic Development Bank observer status.

69. && The representative of Myanmar speaking on behalf of ASEAN, said that ASEAN was of the
view that the Islamic Development Bank should be granted observer status as soon as possible for the
same reasons as given by Pakistan.

70.&& The Chairman said that consultations on this issue would continue in cooperation with the
Chairman of the General Council.

F. Annual Report for 1997

71. && The Chairman noted that the General Council would undertake an annual overview of WTO
activities at its last meeting of the year, which was scheduled tentatively for 10 December. For the
purpose of this overview, the General Council would need a report for 1997 from the Committee on
Trade and Development. The form that this report should take had been indicated in the General
Council's Decision on reporting procedures in document WT/L/105: it should be brief, factual in
nature, and provide an indication of the actions and decisions taken by the Committee during the year.
With a view to establishing the Committee's Annual Report for 1997, he suggested that the Committee
request the Secretariat to prepare a draft for the Committee's review and adoption at its November
meeting. In order for Members to be in a position to have a useful discussion at the November meeting,
the Secretariat should be requested to submit its draft to Members well in advance of the next meeting,
which was scheduled for 17 November.

72.&& The representative of Morocco suggested that if the aim was to adopt the report at the November
meeting, the Chair should announce informal meetings of the Committee on Trade and Development
to discuss the report as it otherwise would be difficult to adopt.

73.&& The Chairman asked the Secretariat to circulate the document as soon as possible and said he
would undertake consultations on the issue.

7A.&& The Committee took note of the statements made.

G. Other Business

- Programme of work

75. && The Chairman said that following statements made at Committee meetings earlier this year
and informal consultations which he had carried out since the Committee's last meeting in May, he
intended to include in the Committee's agenda for its November meeting the following item taken directly
from the Committee's terms of reference: "Review of the Application of Special Provisions in the
Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of Developing Country
Members, in Particular Least-Developed Country Members". In this context, he recalled that the
Committee had carried out a major review of the subject last year. Documents WT/COMTD/W/16, 
plus Add.1 and Add.2, and WT/COMTD/W/17 contained this review. In light of his informal
consultations, he requested the Secretariat to prepare a document as background for the Committee’ s
discussions on this issue in November. The document would contain an updated review of the application
of the special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in
favour of developing country Members, in particular least-developed country Members, building on
the information contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/16, plus Add.1 and Add.2, and
WT/COMTD/W/17 of 1996. He added that following his informal consultations, he understood that
some countries might wish to raise in this context the issue of identifying the possible steps for
operationalization of those provisions which were of a general nature.
