RESTRICTED
WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/11
22 November 1996
ORGANIZATION

(96-4975)

Committee on Trade and Development
Eleventh Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 4 OCTOBER 1996

&& Chairman: Mr. Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)

A. Adoption of the Agenda
1. The Committee adopted the following agenda:

A. Adoption of the Agenda

B. Implementation of Uruguay Round Provisions in Favour of Developing Country
Members

C. Provision of Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation

D. Review of the Participation of Developing Country Members in the Multilateral Trading

System, including the Review of the Impact of the Results of the Uruguay Round on
Developing Country Members

E. Other Business
- The Committee's Report to the General Council

2. && The Committee agreed that international organizations present at this session be invited once
more in an observer capacity to its Twelfth Session.

B. Implementation of Uruguay Round Provisions in Favour of Developing Country Members

&& The Chairman recalled the Committee's discussion on this item at it's two previous meetings,
and drew the attention to document WT/COMTD/W/16 and Add.1 which contained responses from
the Chairpersons of WTO Bodies. Additional information, in particular that received from the
Chairperson of the Council on Trade in Services was now available and would be issued as Add. 2.

4. The Chairman also recalled that, as a part of the preparatory process for Singapore and as
an input to the Committee's discussion on the implementation of Uruguay Round results in favour of
developing countries, he had circulated an informal note containing suggestions on matters to be included
in the Committee's report to the General Council, intended to assist the Committee in its consideration
of the matter.

5. && The representative of Canada wondered how these suggestions would be incorporated into the
Committee's report to the General Council and what other aspects would be covered in the report.
He also wondered what the Chairman's intentions were in regard to the Draft Plan of Action for the
Least-Developed Countries, which delegations had received earlier at the meeting. 

6. && The Chairman said that he planned to circulate the draft report to Members on 7 October, which
would incorporate the elements contained in his informal note. He suggested that the Committee forward
the draft Plan of Action as an annex to the Committee's report to the General Council, for transmission
to the Ministers in Singapore.

7.&& The representative of India said that, while he generally agreed with the Chairman's informal
note, he would nevertheless like to propose an addition. Recalling the extensive debate that had taken
place in the Council for Trade in Goods on the implementation of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing
(ATC), he proposed to add the words "except in the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing as demonstrated
in the Goods Council debate", to the paragraph which indicated that the implementation of the provisions
in favour of developing countries had in general been moving ahead. He furthermore proposed the
addition of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing in the footnote to the paragraph referring to various
areas in the WTO where means had yet to be elaborated to give an operational content to the special
provisions in favour of developing countries. As regard the section on future work and recommendations,
he proposed that the following words be added: "Examine the impact of requests for introducing new
trade-related issues by developed country members on provisions in favour of developing and
least-developed countries."

8.&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation considered the
Chairman's suggestions as a broad outline on which the report would be based. While he agreed that
documents before the Committee, including WTO/COMTD/W/15 and 16 did not give the full picture,
it was important to pass the message that there had been progress. Referring to the suggestions proposed
by the representative of India, he said that the role of the CTD was to look at provisions in favour
of developing and least-developed countries. Reviewing an agreement such as the ATC was better
left to the Textiles Monitoring Body and the Council for Trade in Goods. He agreed that more precise
information was needed on the application of provisions; he cautioned however against drawing
conclusions on the level of implementation on the basis of domestic legislation, since implementation
of such provisions was often on a best-endeavour basis and did not need to be reflected in domestic
legislation. He also cautioned that the impression should be avoided that there had been any failure
on the part of members. He said that the purpose of the report was to give information on the provisions
in favour of developing countries, not to express concern on any lack of their use nor to encourage
their use. It was up to each Member to decide what action to take. The trade policy review seemed
acase in point: least-developed countries were allowed to seek exemption from the TPRM for 7 years.
However, encouraging use of this provision would deprive the 51 least-developed countries not yet
subject to the TPRM the benefits of such a review. It was not within the Committee's mandate to
work towards the full application of the provisions; instead, the Committee needed to disseminate
the information.

9.&& The representative of Colombia said that the Chairman's informal note lacked precision on
the difficulties and problems faced by developing countries. The efforts made by developing countries
to adapt legislative and administrative structures should be recognized and reflected in the Ministerial
declaration. The Committee should be entrusted with a detailed analysis of difficulties faced by
developing countries. There often seemed to be a lack of understanding of the provisions relating to
the time frames for the implementation of the Uruguay Round Agreements, both on the part of
governments and of the private sector. The Committee had arole to play in familiarising WTO Members
with the problems actually encountered at the level of implementation.

10. && The Chairman said that the underlying reasons for the review presently underway was to
encourage greater integration of developing and least-developed countries into the world economy.
For many least-developed countries, the act of joining the WTO was one of faith. It was important
that the Committee on Trade and Development not only make information available but also encouraged
full use of the system. He also cautioned that this Committee should not attempt to cut across the work
of other Committees and should avoid going into detailed requirements. His informal note was intended
as the basis on which recommendations to the General Council could be formulated. As time was
short, he urged delegations to submit their views in writing. He intended to continue his consultations
with delegations with a view to adopting the report to the General Council at its next meeting.

11.&& The Committee took note of the statements made.

C. Provision of Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation

12. && The Chairman said that document WT/COMTD/W/18 incorporated the views expressed at
various stages of the Committee's discussions as well as written comments sent by delegates.

13. && The representative of Egypt expressed his appreciation for the Chairman's efforts to move the
guidelines closer to acceptance in the Committee. The document had taken care of some of the concerns
including some conveyed in writing to the Chairman. However, recalling that the Marrakesh Declaration
related to technical cooperation for developing countries, he said that his delegation continued to have
difficulties with the guidelines referring to economies in transition. These countries had access to funds
from sources such as the EBRD. Furthermore, technical assistance was in response to demand and
this might be difficult to reconcile with the objective of keeping a geographical balance. He wondered
how the exchange of information with donor and recipient governments would take place: whether
this would be done through notification or otherwise, for example through an exchange of experiences
in the course of a discussion. He wondered which non-governmental organizations were intended as
sources of funding for WTO technical assistance trust funds. He cautioned that some organizations
had their own agendas.

14.&& The Chairman said that the formulation of guidelines as well as keeping under review in the
CTD of how they were implemented would increase transparency. In response to the representative
of Egypt, he clarified that the Ford Foundation was an example of a non-governmental organization
intended in the draft guidelines.

15,&& The representative of Canada said that this version of the draft guidelines had gone a stage
further in achieving coherence and consistency with the WTO mandate. He suggested that the section
on objectives and principles specify that the guidelines were intended to result in the more active
participation in the WTO of developing and least-developed countries. In the section on modes of
delivery he suggested an editorial change to the first indent so that it would read "extending assistance
on as broad and as cost-effective a basis as possible”. He agreed with the representative of Egypt that
the section on bilateral development assistance in trade-related matters should clarify the modalities
of information exchange between donor and recipient governments as well as any role of the WTO.
His delegation would welcome some elaboration on what constituted appropriate evaluation criteria
in the section on management.

16. && The Chairman clarified that the guidelines pertaining to international coordination had been
drawn up with a view to avoiding duplication between the different agencies and in a spirit of coherence.
To draw up very precise evaluation criteria ran the risk of being counter-productive. In any case,
technical assistance activities would be carried out by the secretariat under the general guidance of
this Committee. He was hopeful that through such cooperation it should be possible to arrive at
pragmatic criteria.

17. && The representative of Hungary said that the future membership of the WTO would be substantially
different from what it was now. These were guidelines that would operate in the future. In the light
of the substantial differences in the levels of development of the economies in transition, their full
integration was in the common interest of all WTO Members. Access for some of these countries
to WTO technical assistance should not be questioned.

18.&& The representative of the European Communities said that the objective of technical cooperation
was to assist governments in their efforts to integrate fully in the multilateral trading system. Such
integration would lead to economic growth. Turning to specific points in the draft, he said that the
cost and management aspects of internships as a mode of delivery needed more reflection and should
not be specified at this stage. He suggested that in the section on funding the indent on regular budget
should state further "within the limits specifically assigned by members" and the indent on extra
budgetary contributions should specify that these were voluntary funds.

19.&& The representative of the United States said that the draft was a useful document. Economies
in transition should have access to WTO technical cooperation. He was of the view that the guidelines
applied across the board to all WTO programmes of technical assistance, not just those within the purview
of the CTD.

20.&& The representative of Switzerland pointed out that the draft guidelines provided for a review
and he had refrained from suggesting changes because he was of the view that it would be more useful
to look at the draft in the light of actual experience. He agreed that internships in the WTO constituted
anew mode of delivery and while there was still no basis for evaluation, their possibility should be
retained. His delegation had always stressed the importance of elaborating evaluation criteria at the
outset. He agreed that the purpose of technical assistance was to further integrate countries into the
multilateral trading system. He pointed out that economies in transition had received and continued
to receive technical assistance. It was not for the CTD to discuss whether this should or should not
be so. Rather, the Committee should stick to its mandate to establish guidelines which would be
applicable to WTO technical assistance programmes. It was up to any donor country to specify whether
or not funding be used to finance technical assistance programmes in such countries.

21. && The representative of Egypt said that he could accept any formulation that was in line with
the Marrakesh Decision on technical cooperation for developing countries. He queried the
appropriateness of WTO technical cooperation being extended to countries aspiring to OECD
membership. He agreed that the objective of technical assistance was the further integration into the
multilateral system. He also agreed that funding would be within the limits specifically assigned by
members.

22. && The representative of India expressed his support for the guidelines.
23 && The representative of El Salvador requested that the text be made available in the Spanish
language. She recalled that her delegation had suggested the possibility of internships in the WTO
Secretariat. The experience of interns would be useful in capitals.

24. && The representative of Singapore suggested that the document specify at the outset that technical
assistance was for developing countries but could be extended to economies in transition in that category.
He suggested that the objective of keeping a geographical balance should be conditioned by the phrase
"where requests are made". He also suggested that the phrase "where relevant" be added in the
paragraph on non-governmental organizations, to accommodate the concern expressed in that respect.

25. &&  The representative of Colombia said that the document did not focus enough on technical
assistance in the area of dispute settlement and suggested that it reflect the importance of relevant
information and improved capabilities in that area, with a view to avoiding dependence on hired trained
counsel. He shared Egypt's caution on sources of funding with respect to NGOs: many NGOs were
interested for instance in funding projects related to the environment. In that context, he suggested
that the guidelines provide for the analysis and evaluation of potential contributors.

26. && The Chairman recalled that the Understanding on Dispute Settlement ensured technical assistance
in the area of dispute settlement. With regard to the concerns expressed in relation to NGOs as a possible
sources of funding, he recalled that the guidelines gave the CTD a supervisory role which would include
matters such as this. He intended to sent a new draft of the guidelines to delegations at an early stage.
He was hopeful that the guidelines could be adopted at a next meeting of the CTD and that such
guidelines would contribute to helping recipient countries receiving the maximum benefit from WTO
technical assistance.

27. &&The Committee took note of the statements made.

D. Review of Participation of Developing Country Members in the Multilateral Trading System
including the Review of the Impact of the Results of the Uruguay Round on Developing
Country Members

28. && The Chairman recalled that the Committee had an exchange of views at its two previous meetings
on the basis of a study prepared by the Secretariat, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/15. The
study was intended to constitute the basis for addressing one of the three issues the Committee had
selected for its priority work programme in 1996. Based on this study, he suggested that the Committee
start identifying specific inputs for the preparatory process for the Ministerial Conference. In the
Committee's discussions, attention had been drawn by delegations to the link between fluctuations in
world interest rates and exchange rates on volumes and values of developing countries exports, as well
as to the impact of outstanding debts on trade performance. Delegations had raised the issue of the
negative effects of tariff escalation, combined with declining commodity prices, on the export
performance of developing countries. Matters relating to domestic savings, foreign investment and
development had also been raised. He also recalled that the Committee on Trade and Development
and the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries were required by their terms of reference to
consider measures and initiatives to assist developing and least-developed countries in the expansion
of their trade and investment opportunities. Discussions in both Committees had been held on the
basis of a Secretariat's document outlining recent initiatives in these areas. In this context, the
significance of investment for economic development and for the integration of developing countries
into the global economy had been raised, more than once. It seemed therefore that initiating an educative
process on these issues, for instance on existing investment rules, should be considered carefully.
The merits of such an approach appeared to be recognized, judging by the work undertaken on this
matter by other international instances, fro example UNCTAD. A possible forum for discussion in
the WTO could be the Committee on Trade and Development. He suggested that, for example and
as a first stage, one could consider taking up a review of existing bilateral or plurilateral investment
programmes, in order to explore their nature and the mechanisms and results achieved from a
development perspective. The problems involved were complex and needed to be studied from different
angles. This would ensure that the complementary nature of the work undertaken in WTO and in other
fora, such as UNCTAD would be maximized. UNCTAD and WTO could examine the issue from
different view points. He emphasized that any involvement in an educative and analytical process on
investment did not constitute the start of a process of negotiation on a multilateral investment agreement
in the WTO. Delegations should go slowly and not jump fences. This would form an additional argument
in favour of selecting the Committee on Trade and Development as the appropriate forum within the
WTO for carrying out such an educative process, as the CTD was not negotiating forum.

29.&& The representative of Canada said he was uncertain about the reason for the Chairman's
statement. It had not addressed exhaustively the issues raised by delegations, such as the importance
for developing countries of the development of the services sector, which had been raised by his
delegation. The Chairman's statement relating to the investment issue and the link he had made to
the CTD was of particular interest. His delegation supported the idea to launch work on investment
in the WTO. Such work should include a review of existing agreements, economic analyses and an
examination of the rules on investment in regional trade agreements. While he recognized that the
CTD's terms of reference required it to take a horizontal look at all issues, he could not agree at this
stage that the CTD was the appropriate body to discuss investment issues. He recalled that the investment
issue was currently being discussed in the forum of the Heads of Delegations and that it should, at
least for the time being, more appropriately remain there.

30. && The representative of India said that his delegation's view as regards the investment issues was
on record and that he could not, at this stage, accept the Chairman's suggestion. He would refer the
Chairman's statement to his authorities.

31.&& The Chairman clarified that the terms of reference of the CTD required it to consider measures
and initiatives to assist developing country Members, and in particular the least-developed country
Members, in the expansion of their trade and investment opportunities, including support for their
measures of trade liberalization. It was his intention at this stage to get reactions from delegations.
Investment was a key issue under discussion in the forum of the Heads of Delegations. At an appropriate
time, discussions in the CTD could be an input into the work of the WTO.

32. &&The representative of Tanzania said that he hesitated to support the suggestion that the CTD
take up the issue of investment within its terms of reference. He agreed with the representative of
Canada that this matter should, for the moment, rest with the Heads of Delegations.

33; &&The representative of Egypt said that the Chairman's proposal needed more study. He recalled
his delegation’ s objection to include investment on the WTO's agenda. Moreover, an educational process
on investment was better carried out in UNCTAD.

34.&&  The representative of the European Communities said that investment was an issue which
concerned both developed and developing countries and consequently needed a larger perspective than
that of the CTD. While he could imagine that there might be circumstances in which discussions in
the CTD could be useful, he did not share the view that the CTD was the appropriate forum to address
the issue of investment.

35.&& The representative of the United States said that no specific consensus existed on the
appropriateness of discussing issues of investment in the CTD. Neither did such a consensus exist
on how the WTO would, post-Singapore, deal with investment related issues. He was however concerned
that a number of delegations who in the forum of the Heads of Delegations were in favour of discussing
investment did not wish to do so in the CTD. It was clear that the CTD could not be the forum for
negotiations on investment. He could however appreciate the usefulness of discussions outside a
negotiating framework, for instance those of an analytical nature, in the CTD. He was of the view
that the door should not be closed to the possibility of discussing investment in the CTD, along the
lines of the Chairman's suggestion. It would be premature to rule out the possibility of discussing
an integral element in the development process. It was clear that any discussion on investment in the
CTD would not preempt strategic decisions on the role and place of investment on the future agenda
of the WTO. His comments were of a preliminary nature and he would appreciate a further elaboration
of the Chairman's suggestions.

36. && The Chairman said that his intention had been to draw the attention to the CTD's area of
competence, pursuant to its terms of reference, independently of decisions taken elsewhere. He drew
a parallel with the way in which regional trade agreements were handled in the WTO. To consider
the role of RTAs in the development process was unrelated to negotiations of individual RTAs or to
their conformity with multilateral obligations.

37. && The representative of Switzerland said that while discussion on an important subject such as
investment should not be ruled out on a prima facie basis, he was of the view that to introduce issues
which were currently under discussion elsewhere would be an unwise diversion from the useful work
carried on in the CTD. He could well see that, at some stage, the CTD could usefully consider
investment issues from a development perspective.

38. && The representative of Venezuela referred to the perspective put forward by the Chairman and
agreed that it was within the CTD's mandate to consider the total spectrum of WTO issues. He
questioned the utility of analytical work on development issues if investment was excluded.
Notwithstanding the fact that the Heads of Delegations still had to decide whether investment should
be on the WTO agenda, and given the importance of investment for development, he was of the view
that useful analytical work on investment could be undertaken in the CTD.

39.&& The representative of Canada cautioned that the distinction between the Chairman's suggestion
and the work currently undertaken in the Heads of Delegations process should not be blurred. He
agreed that the CTD was a forum which could consider the implications of all WTO issues for the
development process.

40.&& The representative of the European Communities supported the view put forward by the
representative of Switzerland to let the matter rest for now with the Heads of Delegations and to revert
to it, as appropriate, at a later stage.

41. &&The representative of Singapore agreed with the view expressed by the representative of the
United States that it would be premature to exclude any discussion of investment in the CTD. Investment
was within the CTD mandate and in that context, he drew attention to paragraph 5 of document
WT/COMTD/W/15 which noted the importance of private capital flows for economic growth and the
very small part of it which went to least-developed countries. He suggested that the CTD should focus
its discussion on the role of investment in the further integration of developing and least-developed
countries into the world economy, rather than to link it up with the Heads of Delegations’ process.

42. && The Committee took note of the statements made.

43. && The Chairman then turned to the draft Comprehensive and Integrated WTO Plan of Action
for the Least-Developed Countries and drew attention to the need to ensure that least-developed countries
secured a share of international trade commensurate with their economic development and their effective
participation in the world trading system. On two occasions, their concerns were reflected in formal
instruments containing elements in favour of the group of least-developed countries: in the 1979 Enabling
Clause, and in the 1994 Decision on Measure in Favour of the Least-developed Countries. In addition,
specific supportive measures in favour of the least-developed countries had been included in many
Uruguay Round agreements. The CTD and the Sub Committee on LLDC had, throughout 1996, given
special consideration to their peripheral position in the world economy and in the multilateral trading
system. Under each of the priority areas which were singled out for examination within the Committee,
attention was to be given to the difficulties of the LLDCs. He recalled that the Secretariat had produced
a document outlining recent international initiatives launched in favour of LLDC’'s to facilitate the
expansion of their trade and investment opportunities. In addition, the study by the Secretariat contained
in document WT/COMTD/W/15 which had been discussed earlier in this meeting, though not exclusively
geared towards the LLDCs, gave interesting insights into the factors which might have a bearing on
their economic performance, in particular their trade performance. The CTD and the Sub Committee
on LLDCs had also been informed by the Heads of international organizations about their activities
relating to least-developed countries. There was no doubt that efforts should not only be coordinated
but should be tailored to the need of countries. Despite such efforts, little headway had been made
in the integration of the least-developed countries into the world economy. At the G7 summit in Lyon,
the WTO Director-General had drawn attention to the need to implement expeditiously the Marrakesh
Ministerial Decision in Favour of LLDCs. The Plan of Action before the Committee incorporated the
main elements of the Director-General's proposal. As a result of a series of informal consultations,
he had identified other areas where positive action could be taken. Some initiatives in the plan were
ready to be launched, others called for further refining and discussion in the WTO. The draft Plan
of Action was a testimony to the firm commitment of WTO Members to translate into action the
commitment to promote trade-related activities in the economic development of least-developed countries.

44.&& The representative of Tanzania expressed great satisfaction for the Chairman's commitment
which had resulted in this Plan of Action. The New York Ministerial meeting on least-developed
countries, held shortly before, had called for such a plan of action to be submitted to the Singapore
Ministerial. He recognized that the proposed plan had incorporated all suggestions made in the WTO
as well as in other fora. However, he could not agree with the suggestion in the draft Plan of Action,
that the least-developed countries had failed to take advantage of the opportunities provided to attract
foreign investment. Least-developed countries did not need encouragement, but rather needed assistance.
There were fundamental reasons why foreign investment was not flowing to least-developed countries
and this had little to do with their failure to use opportunities to encourage FDI. He wondered why
a high percentage of FDI flows was attracted by China and by east European countries and why so
little went to least-developed countries despite comparable regimes for foreign investment in LLDC's.
Supply side constraints and inadequate infrastructure constituted part of the problem. While an efficient
service sector was a precondition for development, development banks would not come forward until
efficient communications existed. There was no simple linkage between trade and investment. There
were other links such as levels of aid and levels of indebtedness. In his view the UN Programme of
Action for LLDCs provided a balanced picture of what should be done by the LLDCs and what should
be done by the international community. The Mid-term review of this programme clearly showed how
much had been done by LLDCs and how much less by the international community. A WTO draft
Plan of Action should be similarly balanced. The draft Plan of Action did not focus sufficiently on
supply-side constraints. It was imperative that such fundamental constraints had to be tackled before
market access. He was heartened by the provision in the draft Plan of Action for country-programmes.
He wanted an assurance that country programmes would deal with issues highlighted in the programme
of action relating to developing, strengthening and diversifying production and export bases. He also
emphasized the importance of defining WTO's area of competence as broadly as possible as many
requirements arising from WTO agreements could be interpreted as falling outside the competence
of WTO. He suggested that it would have been more appropriate in the Plan of Action’ s section dealing
with supply-side constraints to refer to the need to facilitate the implementation of commitment in the
TRIPs agreements which had provisions for least-developed countries rather than the SPS agreement.
He also suggested that it would be more appropriate to provide for joint participation by the public
and private sectors in training courses. He wondered whether this draft Plan of Action was the
programme of action promised by the Director-General of the WTO.

45.&& The representative of the United States said that the draft Plan of Action had a great deal of
content and presented something on which members could focus their attention. He nevertheless
anticipated some problems for his delegation with the section on market access.

46.&& The representative of the European Communities and Switzerland expressed their delegation’ s
appreciation for the document and awaited an indication from the Chairman on what he hoped to do
next.

47. &&The representative of Japan thanked the Chairman for his efforts to submit a Plan of Action
and said as a preliminary comment that his delegation might also have problems on the section on market
access.

48. && The Chairman said that the draft Plan of Action before the Committee was the only plan of
action in the WTO. He invited delegations to submit their initial comments in writing on the basis
of which he intended to conduct informal consultations. He noted the caution expressed by some
representatives with respect to the initiatives on market access and pointed out that such initiatives were
to be considered as a positive list of options, some of which did not need to be implemented immediately.
The plan was a commitment to action. He encouraged delegations to finalize a substantial Plan of
Action in time for the Singapore Ministerial. This would be an important first step in efforts to increase
coherence and efficiency in international actions in favour of least-developed countries. In that context
he recalled that at their recent Quad meeting in Vancouver, representatives from Canada, the European
Communities, Japan and the United States had recommended that a Ministerial meeting be held. The
Committee might wish to consider recommending a high-level meeting next year, under WTO aegis,
grouping aid agencies, multilateral financial institutions and LLDC's, with a view to building an
integrated approach to the trade-related aspects of LLDCs' economic development. He welcomed views
from delegations on the question as to whether the CTD in its report to the General Council should
propose that such a high-level meeting be organized in coordination with relevant international
organizations.

49.&& The Committee took note of the statements made.
E. Other Business
50.&& The Chairman said that a first draft of the Committee's report to the General Council would
be sent to delegations shortly. He intended to hold a series of consultations with a view to facilitating
adoption of the report by the Committee at its next meeting, scheduled for 15 October.
