WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/60
21 December 2006

(06-6123)


Committee on Trade and Development
Sixtieth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 3 NOVEMBER 2006

Chairman:  Mr. Faizel Ismail (South Africa) 


 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC154397890" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC154397890 \H 1
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC154397891" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC154397891 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc154397892" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc154397892 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc154397893" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc154397893 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC154397894" C.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC154397894 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc154397895" (i)	Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance Activities – Final Report (WT/COMTD/W/152)	 PAGEREF _Toc154397895 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc154397896" (ii)	Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance Activities – Management Response (WT/COMTD/W/153)	 PAGEREF _Toc154397896 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc154397897" (iii)	Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/151 and WT/COMTD/W/151/Corr.1)	 PAGEREF _Toc154397897 \h 16
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc154397898" (iv)	Training and Technical Assistance: Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities – 1 January to 30 June 2006 (WT/COMTD/W/154)	 PAGEREF _Toc154397898 \h 22
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC154397899" D.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC154397899 \H 22


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 60th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/2906/Rev.1 issued on 30 October 2006.  He recalled that he had announced at the 59th Session on 4 October 2006 that the 60th Session would focus on issues relating to technical cooperation and training.  
The Committee adopted the agenda.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to these requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.  
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
&& The Chairman said that there were four documents for consideration by the CTD under agenda Item C.  These were the Final Report of the Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade‑Related Technical Assistance (TRTA) Activities, the Management Response to the Strategic Review, the 2007 Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan), and the Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities for the period 1 January to 30 June 2006.  He said that he would like the CTD to first consider the two documents relating to the Strategic Review together, after which it could move on to consider the 2007 TA Plan, and finally the Semi‑Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities for the period 1 January to 30 June 2006.
Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance Activities – Final Report (WT/COMTD/W/152)
Strategic Review of WTO-Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance Activities – Management Response (WT/COMTD/W/153)
&& The Chairman recalled that the CTD had adopted the Terms of the Reference (TOR) of the Strategic Review of WTO-Provided TRTA Activities at its 53rd Session on 11 May 2005.  He said that the Committee at that meeting had also requested his predecessor, Ambassador Senadhira of Sri Lanka, to carry out consultations with the objective of forming a Steering Committee, as stipulated in the TOR.  At the 55th Session of the CTD on 28 November 2005, Ambassador Senadhira reported that his consultations had led to the establishment of a six-member Steering Committee composed of three representatives of recipient Members of WTO-provided TRTA, and three representatives of donor Members.  Ambassador Senadhira also reported on the process that led to the Steering Committee's decision to select an Indian/Argentinean/Canadian consortium composed of the Consumer Unity & Trust Society (CUTS), the Latin American School of Social Sciences (FLACSO) and the North-South Institute (NSI) to carry out the Strategic Review.  Further details on the selection process were provided by Ambassador Senadhira at the 56th Session of the CTD on 3 March 2006.  
He said that he was pleased to see that the Final Report of the Strategic Review of WTO‑Provided Trade-Related Technical Assistance had been concluded, and was also pleased to inform the CTD that two of the members of the Review Team, who contributed to the preparation of the Final Report, were in the meeting room for the discussion on the Strategic Review.  He introduced Ambassador Supperamaniam, the former Malaysian Ambassador to the WTO, and Ms. Anne Weston, the Vice-President and Research Coordinator at the NSI, and indicated that their presence gave Members the opportunity to raise any questions on the Final Report.  He said that he would first ask the Ambassador of Sri Lanka, who was the Chairman of the Steering Committee for the Strategic Review, to say a few introductory words, after which the Deputy Director-General (DDG) responsible for development issues would make some remarks.  The floor would then be opened for discussion.
&& Ambassador Senadhira said that the present meeting signalled the end of a long process which began with the CTD's adoption of the TOR of the Strategic Review on 11 May 2005.  He recalled that he had been entrusted to set up, organize and chair the work of a six-member Steering Committee that was to monitor the effective management of the Strategic Review.  The Steering Committee was composed of three representatives of the recipient Members of WTO TRTA and three representatives of donor Members – Argentina, Belgium, Canada/Japan (as alternates), Rwanda, Sweden and Sri Lanka.
He said that the Steering Committee had since its establishment held eight meetings, each of which considered pertinent issues related to the Strategic Review.  The first four meetings were largely devoted to issues emanating from the tender, while the other meetings addressed methodological, organizational and management issues – for example, questions relating to the work plan and field visits.  He said that throughout the period of work, the Steering Committee members had demonstrated devotion and responsibility, and had willingly participated – and usefully contributed – to the formulation of the opinions and positions which the Steering Committee took on as outputs of the Review Team.  In this regard, he thanked his colleagues in the Steering Committee, and also thanked the members of the Review Team for the high-quality Final Report. 
With reference to the information on the schedule of the Strategic Review which he had provided to the CTD in November 2005, he said that the work had by and large been carried out as agreed.  The preliminary findings and recommendations had been received and discussed at the beginning of May 2006, and the draft report had been received in June 2006.  The monitoring work had been carried out without jeopardizing the independence of the Review Team.  He added that both the Steering Committee and the Review Team had received all required assistance from the Secretariat, and he therefore thanked the Secretariat, and in particular the DDG responsible for development issues, for the contribution to the success of the exercise.  He said that the Final Report circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/152 did not stand alone, but had been submitted to Members together with the Management Response – circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/153 – which contained the Secretariat's views on the feasibility of the implementation of the Report's recommendations and the application of the lessons learned.  He added that he believed Members' comments on the Strategic Review would be taken into account by the Secretariat and would contribute to an improved planning, delivery and impact of WTO-provided TRTA activities in future years.
He explained that the Steering Committee had worked closely with the Review Team, and was aware that there were limitations to the methodology that had been adopted.  This was partly due to constraints which stemmed from the TOR, for example the limited time that was available for the Strategic Review or the limited number of countries visited by the consultants.  He said that the Steering Committee did not believe that these limitations diluted the importance, the objectivity or the relevance of the findings and the recommendations.  Rather, the Review had managed to capture the relevant aspects of the problems encountered  in  capacity building in the field of trade policy.  He said that the Steering Committee strongly believed that the CTD should not turn the discussion into an evaluation of the methodology adopted by the consultants, but focus instead on the findings and the recommendations.  To facilitate this process, he said that he would highlight some of the key observations contained in the section of the Final Report dealing with findings, lessons learned and recommendations. 
He said that there was widespread agreement that the WTO Secretariat had a strong comparative advantage in knowledge and information about the WTO rules and procedures, and was less biased than many other official agencies involved in TRTA.  The WTO was highly neutral in its advice, which sometimes acted as a constraint, and also had less capacity to provide technical assistance and training on the development dimension of trade rules, on the political aspects of  negotiations and on analytical techniques.  It appeared, therefore, that there was scope for greater collaboration with specialized and regional agencies, for training and capacity building on trade and development, political skills for negotiation and analytical skills. Strengthened partnerships would complement the WTO's expertise and would allow for the outsourcing of some training activities.  He explained that some partners were better able to address policy issues confronting national ministries, for example preferential trading arrangements, which went beyond a WTO-specific focus. 
When working with partners, he said that it was recommended that the WTO play a supportive role, delegating more of the responsibility for courses.  It had been observed that while the WTO had developed a variety of tools to assist needs assessment and planning – for example Trade Policy Reviews (TPRs), the  WTO/OECD TRTA database and internships – this remained a weak area which needed to be further strengthened.  The WTO should also be aware of the institutional weaknesses limiting countries' capacities to assess their national needs, and work with governments to address this problem.  Other recommendations concerned the need to draw more on case study material and research from within the WTO, as well as from outside, and to move from a WTO-centric content to a more comprehensive approach addressing the broad range of trade policy issues facing many developing country trade ministries.  A proper selection of participants was also key to fulfilling specific and product-related objectives, and it was recommended that the WTO work with governments to improve the selection process.  Furthermore, it was suggested that the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) should establish benchmarks for identifying participants for all courses and work closely with governments to screen participants.  The need to adopt an institutional rather than an individual focus had also been identified, as well as the need to enhance the skills and knowledge not only of trade officials, but also of representatives of  other agencies and stakeholder groups working with them.  He explained that the Final Report recognized that various changes had been implemented to increase the amount of auditing and evaluation, but efforts had been limited by resource constraints.  There was, however, a strong need to improve auditing and evaluation, including longer term ex-post evaluation, and the need for funds to allow the Secretariat to undertake regular ex-post and thematic evaluations had been identified.  He added that the Final Report saw follow-up activities as exceptions rather than the norm, and that there was a general sense that more could be done in this regard.  Finally, he mentioned a recommendation concerning the need to develop a follow-up strategy, including through the facilitation of networking between participants and trainers, and the distribution of updated information on course subjects.

&& The Deputy Director-General recalled that Members had agreed in 2005 that it would be useful for WTO's TRTA to be subjected to a periodic external review.  She welcomed the term "Strategic Review" for the exercise that had just been undertaken, as it indicated that Members did not want to limit the exercise to a static process.  She assured Members that WTO Management had taken the exercise very seriously, as it provided an important contribution to the discussion on the way to conceive and deliver TRTA in the most appropriate manner.  She said that the Management Response was laid out in document WT/COMTD/W/153.  She explained that the Management had chosen to respond along the broad themes of the Strategic Review, rather than to respond on a point by point basis.  Given the strategic nature of the exercise that had been undertaken, it was deemed preferable to respond in this manner, though the Management was willing to discuss any specific issue that Members might wish to raise.
She said that in broad terms the Final Report indicated that the WTO's TRTA activities were well appreciated.  The Final Report contained a number of recommendations that the Management found useful, and could be considered in the context of the WTO's current mandate.  Some of these were already in the process of being implemented, while others would require more reflection, or would take more time to be implemented.  The Final Report also contained a number of additional recommendations on which Members would have to take a decision before the Secretariat could take any initiative, for example those concerning the neutrality of the Secretariat when providing technical assistance.  She said that the Management had also taken note of the two scenarios proposed in the Final Report, namely the "incremental change" scenario and the "fundamental rethink" scenario, but while the distinction could serve as a framework in which to conduct future discussion, the Management Response considered that the outcome would likely be a combination of the two scenarios.
The DDG said that the Management had considered the recommendations of the Final Report in terms of how they could be used to improve the conception, planning and implementation of WTO‑provided TRTA.  It was, however, also felt necessary to highlight those recommendations which the Management was not fully convinced about.  The Management Response, therefore, indicated where it was felt that the Final Report could have been even more useful had the analysis been pushed further.  She stressed, however, that the Management remained open, and was willing to work with Members to implement those recommendations that were agreed to for the benefit of developing countries and in particular LDCs.  This would be an exercise that would likely take some time, but the structure that had been put in place for the discussion of TRTA issues – in particular the informal consultation process  – as well as the Secretariat's internal discussions, would greatly help.
She said that this led her to say a few words about the 2007 TA Plan.  In particular, she pointed out that a number of recommendations from the Final Report had been incorporated into the Plan. The 2007 TA Plan, as with previous plans since 2004, reflected a real desire to constantly improve WTO-provided TRTA.  At the same time, it was important to keep up a certain continuity, as it was not possible nor desirable to introduce major changes too frequently.  She remarked that in certain ways this was similar to the "incremental change" scenario proposed in the Final Report, for example the emphasis placed on electronic training (e-training) or the Secretariat's continued efforts to forge partnerships for the delivery of TRTA.  She said that the Director of the ITTC would introduce the 2007 TA Plan in more detail later in the meeting, and would also bring to the attention of Members concerns relating to the financing of TRTA.  
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the African Group, said that the African Group wished to emphasize the importance of the Strategic Review, in particular as members of the Group were among the primary beneficiaries of technical assistance aimed at building human and institutional capacity for the promotion of trade.  He said that the members of the Group considered that if the conclusions and recommendations resulting from the Strategic Review were examined with all due attention and approved by the WTO Membership as a whole, they would be able to give the direction sought for the TRTA provided by the WTO and its partner institutions.  The African Group, therefore, stressed its interest in this task and informed the CTD that the African Permanent Missions in Geneva would appreciate having a little more time to become better acquainted with the documentation relating to the Strategic Review.  He explained that the members of the African Group had shared the documents with the relevant departments involved in TRTA in their respective capitals, so as to obtain feedback on the views and recommendations put forward, drawing on the experiences of each country.  He added that the Group wished for a meeting to be organized at which the members of the Review Team could present the results of their work.
&& The representative of Egypt said that he supported the intervention made by Benin on behalf of the African Group.  He said that the Report contained some valuable information, and it was necessary for Members to take some time to consider it.  He suggested that the most useful first step would be for the Review Team to present the findings of the Report, after which Members could consider over time the future direction of WTO-provided TRTA.   
&& The representative of Rwanda said that he supported the interventions made by Benin on behalf of the African Group and by Egypt.  He said that pages 78 to 90 of the Report contained a section presenting the findings, the lessons learned and the recommendations of the Strategic Review.  This section was followed by a section devoted to conclusions and future scenarios, in which two scenarios were proposed – one relating to "incremental change" and the second to a "fundamental rethink".  These were important issues for Members to consider, and he, therefore, believed that it would be useful to hear from the Review Team on its findings.  He said that his delegation welcomed the initiative of the Secretariat to incorporate some of the practical recommendations from the Final Report into the 2007 TA Plan, but pointed out that other recommendations were policy-oriented and would require further discussion by Members.  Given the importance of the Report, he said that Members should consider it over time in order to decide on the future orientation of WTO-provided TRTA.  He added that it would be useful if an additional meeting were held to allow the Review Team to present its findings to Members.  
&& The representative of the Philippines said that he had noted the comments of other delegations concerning the need for more discussion and analysis of the findings of the Final Report.  He, however, also noted that in a broad sense the Final Report was helpful in forming a strategic and holistic perspective, and that it was comprehensive and timely.  The Report also provided Members with the opportunity to engage in debate on issues where there were divergences of views among the Membership, and on issues that could incline TRTA activities towards advocacy of a certain view regarding trade policy.  He said that the Philippines was a firm advocate of policy space and flexibility and the new approaches to developmental economic thought and would not expect TRTA to further those views in an advocacy context.  He explained that certain comments and conclusions in the Report could be construed as unnecessarily criticizing WTO Management on the basis of acting within its mandate, particularly on the neutrality and philosophical leanings of the Secretariat.  He explained that these would need to be taken in the context of the historical and institutional character of the Secretariat and the WTO itself, and such critiques could be better measured if there were quantitative yardsticks or objective criteria.  With regard to the Management Response, he said that the Philippines believed it was grounded in realities routinely faced by the institution, and that the Management was generally receptive to the bulk of the ideas and suggestions put forward in the Report.  More importantly, the Management Response was sober and did not find it necessary to engage on issues raised in the Report that could require further debate or guidance from Members.  He, however, noted that the issue of the mandate concerning neutrality and liberalization was better referred to the Membership as a whole, given evolving thoughts on globalization and the importance of the developmental dimension in trade policy as a complement to the poverty alleviation goals of trade liberalization.
He said that he wished to comment further on the possible future direction of TRTA based on scenarios presented in the Final Report and on the comments from the WTO Management.  In this regard, he said that his delegation essentially shared the view that the way forward was likely to be a combination of the "incremental change" and the "fundamental rethink" scenarios.  His delegation also believed that an early emphasis should be placed on drawing from independent research material, as well as on material from the WTO's Economic Research and Statistics Division, with a view to equipping recipients not only with technical knowledge of WTO rules, but also with the proficiency to use the rules, through the use of case studies from around the world, and taking account of national circumstances to craft, implement and manage trade policy.  He added that it would perhaps also be useful for the institution to develop mechanisms through which the proficiency of the recipients could be monitored, in particular since some recipients would continue to need technical assistance on basic WTO rules while others would be more advanced and would be ready to apply what they had learned to more complex trade policy situations.  His delegation was also of the view that TRTA should involve more non-WTO experts who could provide interactive assistance to recipients based on  individual circumstances.  As a final comment, he said that his delegation endorsed the call for more predictable and longer-term funding for WTO TRTA, including through the regular budget.  He elaborated that the level of funding was what determined whether more or less, and what kind of, TRTA could be provided, and this was the responsibility of all Members, both developing and developed.  Members could, however, feel comfortable with leaving the re-instrumentation and management of TRTA, for the most part, to the WTO Management, provided that it was receptive and accountable to the Members. The Membership would, on the other hand, have to acknowledge its full responsibility for ensuring the financial sustainability of TRTA.  
&& The representative of the Solomon Islands said that his delegation and several other Members from the Pacific region had noted that the Final Report gave a positive rating of TRTA activities provided by the WTO itself, as well as in cooperation with partner agencies such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the World Bank.  He said that his delegation wished to take this opportunity to comment on the WTO's TRTA programme in terms of its efficiency, management and outreach.  In line with the identified "areas of improvement" proposed through the review exercise, his delegation agreed that among the keys to improving the quality and sustainability of WTO‑led TRTA was the need for greater technical assistance to beneficiary countries to allow them to understand their rights, implement their obligations and improve domestic capacity to reap benefits from the multilateral trading system.  He said that the review exercise had identified the importance of academic partnership programmes, the Netherlands Trainee Programme (NTP) and the mission internship programmes as instrumental in enhancing ownership for the beneficiaries.  His delegation called for expanding these programmes to include more Members, especially the most vulnerable, in particular where large gaps in institutional capacity placed them at a very serious disadvantage.  In this regard, his delegation would shortly undertake consultations with the Secretariat on how these programmes could be expanded in the Pacific region.  He said that paragraph 38 of the Doha Declaration stated that priority would be accorded to small, vulnerable and transition economies, as well as to Members and Observers without representation in Geneva, but currently only 16 per cent of the Asian and Pacific countries benefited from the overall WTO TRTA activities, a figure that should be expanded to benefit the small and vulnerable economies of the Pacific region.  He, in particular, called for more assistance to expand the exports of these countries.  He added that his delegation was in favour of a more extensive needs assessment exercise with greater country ownership to identify trade-related capacity needs at the institutional level.  This would ensure a more effective delivery of WTO-provided TRTA.
&& The representative of Canada said that he appreciated what had been suggested by other delegations on the need for more time to consider the Final Report.  His delegation believed that the WTO played a crucial role in TRTA, but that it was important that the assistance provided by the WTO be of the highest quality, be driven and owned by recipients, and be harmonized with the actions of others.  He said that the institutions that had undertaken the Strategic Review were well established and credible, and that the Final Report offered valuable suggestions.  His delegation urged Members to focus on the recommendations of the Report, and was encouraged that the Secretariat had already taken steps to incorporate some of the recommendations into the 2007 TA Plan.  He observed that many of the weaknesses that the Strategic Review had found were similar to what had been found in reviews of technical assistance by other agencies.  While the Report underscored the unique expertise of the WTO, he pointed out that it also highlighted the challenge of incorporating a development dimension into the WTO's TRTA activities.  He said that his delegation was of the view that the WTO's TRTA programmes had generally become more strategic and focused over the years.  However, the emphasis of TRTA had changed over the past decade, from supporting the implementation of trade rules to using trade as a tool for economic development.  While the WTO's TRTA had responded to this shift in emphasis, he believed that there was a need to go further.  His delegation proposed in the short term to take on board those recommendations that could be relatively easily accommodated, while considering over a longer period some of the policy-oriented recommendations.  His delegation, for example, believed that there was merit in the WTO retaining neutrality in the provision of technical assistance.
&& The representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that Members would need to consider and deliberate on some of the recommendations before agreeing to their adoption or implementation.  He said that it was imperative that the LDCs, with their weak and vulnerable trade structures, receive sufficient support to help them integrate into global trade in a meaningful way.  He noted that LDCs had to date benefited from the various technical assistance programmes offered by the WTO, and thanked the Secretariat and the donor countries.  However, while recognizing the usefulness of the training programmes offered by the WTO, he explained that the LDC Group believed that the WTO could work to tailor the existing programmes and develop new ones that would focus more on the needs of the LDCs.  He added that the academic support programme, which could be identified as a significant initiative to enhance capacity, constituted only 3 per cent of the total activities, and suggested that the WTO should consider increasing the activities under this category. 
He said that the documentation under consideration indicated that the majority of the programmes – almost 60 per cent – were focused on WTO Agreements and related rules issues.  While it was true that the WTO was a rules-based organization and that its major agenda was to promote a rules-based multilateral trading system, he said that it was necessary for Members to appreciate that, for the LDCs who were trying hard to cope with the fast-changing global trade scenario, it was more important to establish a foothold in world trade.  The Secretariat, while continuing with the training on WTO rules, should, therefore, give due attention to programmes that would actually help the LDCs in expanding their exports.  He also said that the amount of money the WTO spent on technical assistance in the areas of agriculture and non-agricultural market access – two key areas of interest for LDCs – was less than 10 per cent of the total WTO TRTA.  The LDCs, therefore, asked the Secretariat to consider that point and rebalance its training programmes accordingly. 
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that reports such as the Strategic Review were useful, as they focused attention on what was being done, and what was lacking.  If the analysis was faulty or inadequate, however, the prescriptions based on them would also be suspect or inadequate.  He pointed to page 27 of the Final Report, which indicated that TRTA and capacity building would be used interchangeably, and said that this lack of distinction missed a fundamental change in the thinking in this area.  The two concepts were fundamentally different, though there could be synergy between them.  Technical assistance was similar to the software, while capacity building was the hardware.  In particular, capacity building was more lasting, and fundamentally enhanced the capacity of the country concerned.  It would be a pity if no distinction were drawn between the two.  
He continued by saying that it was the lessons that the Strategic Review drew from the country cases that were of greatest concern.  In this regard, he referred to the comments by the representative of Sri Lanka in which it was suggested that the Committee focus on the findings and recommendations of the Final Report rather than on the methodology.  He reminded Members that the methodology strongly affected the findings, and therefore the recommendations.  Speaking only about the case of Bangladesh, he said that hurried conclusions seemed to have been drawn from the programmes and local conditions based on some fleeting interviews.  Members had not been provided with any basis to judge what percentage of those interviewed supported the hypothesis of the interviewer or the views expressed in the case study.  Without factual and systematic analysis, Members were also not aware whether there was any personal bias of the interviewer.  On the other hand, the need for greater country-specific content of the WTO programmes was so well-known that a country visit was not necessary to come to this conclusion.  He also informed the Committee that Bangladesh was not an Integrated Framework (IF) country, as was incorrectly stated on page 55 of the Report.  He concluded, therefore, that there was need for greater preparation of the country visit to Bangladesh.  He added that he was unable to comment on the other country cases.
He said that the LDCs needed assistance to develop and strengthen their trade policies, to improve their supply capacities and their trade infrastructure, and to find markets for their products.  The LDCs deeply appreciated the WTO technical assistance to the LDCs, which could not be provided by any other organization.  However, while the current programmes would help LDCs to understand the rules, it was necessary for WTO programmes to go beyond this to enable LDCs to create an environment to export more.  This should be the fundamental aim of the technical assistance and capacity building programmes of the WTO.  He said that the technical assistance and capacity building provided to the LDCs should be developed in a way that ensured a long-term and lasting positive impact on the trade figures of the LDCs.  The LDCs believed that the focus of such assistance should be thought through, perhaps through the preparation of a vision statement, which the current Review was unable to deliver.  In the ultimate analysis, the LDCs greatly valued the opportunities the WTO provided, and it was in recognition of the value of TRTA that the LDCs constantly sought to make the facilities offered to them more targeted and relevant to their needs.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that his delegation wished to thank the donor countries for the provision of TRTA, but urged them to do more.  His delegation was of the view that TRTA should move towards building longer term sustainable capacity, by focusing not only on individuals but also on institutions that would endure over time.  As a preliminary remark on the Final Report, he said that it contained many interesting and forward-looking recommendations.  However, his delegation believed that there should be more flexibility to take into consideration national circumstances when designing technical assistance programmes.  In this regard, he supported the intervention made by Benin on behalf of the African Group and emphasized the need for consultation with national stakeholders before his delegation would be in a position to comment in a more detailed manner on the future direction of WTO TRTA.   
The representative of Argentina said that his delegation had not had time to study the Final Report in detail, but would provide some preliminary comments.  He said that this was the first time such an exercise had been undertaken in the WTO, and that, while the methodology followed and the results obtained could be improved, the exercise had on the whole been a useful one.  He observed that a number of the recommendations had already been incorporated into the 2007 TA Plan, and his delegation was, therefore, satisfied that WTO TRTA was moving in the right direction.  He agreed with other delegations on the need for an additional meeting to discuss the conclusions and recommendations of the Final Report.  With regard to the criticisms that were found in the Final Report, the view of his delegation was that these should be taken positively with a view to improving the effectiveness of WTO TRTA, though his delegation was on the whole pleased with the technical assistance that had been provided by the WTO over the years.  He said that some of the recommendations in the Final Report were relatively easy to implement, while others relating to policy issues and the need for more funding would require further discussion.  He said that Members should see the Final Report as a source to draw on in designing TRTA programmes in the future, and that further thought should be given to the precise role that WTO should play in the broader field of TRTA.    
&& The representative of the European Communities said that he would not speak in any detail on the Final Report, since he had gathered from the interventions by other delegations that there would be further opportunities to discuss its findings and recommendations, but would make some preliminary comments.  He said that he was pleased to note that the Final Report confirmed the general impression of his delegation that the quality of WTO TRTA was high.  He observed that the Final Report and the discussion at the present meeting had touched on the issue of whether WTO TRTA should include policy advice to developing countries, assistance to develop export capacity and assistance in a broader development context.  While he did not question that such advice and assistance was required, he said that he was not convinced that the WTO should provide it.  The view of his delegation was that WTO TRTA should continue to focus on its areas of comparative advantage, and that the neutrality of the Secretariat was a strength rather than a weakness.  He agreed with other delegations that the recommendations in the Final Report could be divided into practical ones that could be implemented in the short term and policy-related ones that would require more in-depth discussion.  With regard to the practical recommendations, his delegation had noted with satisfaction that the Secretariat had already incorporated some of them in the 2007 TA Plan.  He said that, like other delegations, he would welcome the opportunity to hear the Review Team present its findings.
On the issue of needs assessments, he said that his delegation agreed with the Final Report on the importance of these assessments for effective and sustainable assistance.  He was, therefore, concerned that the interviews conducted by the Review Team indicated a significant lack of awareness of existing needs assessments.  He emphasized that it was necessary to see what could be done to ensure that needs assessments were used as an effective operational tool to support good quality technical assistance.  He said that it was indicated on page 56 of the Final Report that WTO TRTA continued to be largely supply driven, which was a concern to his delegation given the amount of work that had been undertaken by Members to make TRTA demand-driven and needs-based.  His delegation was of the view that further discussion on this issue was necessary, and input from beneficiaries would be particularly welcome.  He also noted that the Final Report did not touch on the issue of management and efficiency, and that his delegation would have wished to see more on the financial aspects of TRTA and value for money.  His delegation also welcomed and appreciated the Management Response. 
&& The representative of Switzerland said that the Final Report provided useful recommendations, notably on ways to better tailor training courses to local and regional contexts.  The Report also confirmed the strong comparative advantage of the WTO Secretariat in knowledge and information about the WTO system.  He said that neutrality was an important characteristic of the TRTA provided by the WTO, and was a strength.  While there were many organizations that provided advice to developing countries on negotiating positions and policy issues, his delegation did not believe that this should be the role of the WTO.  The TRTA of the WTO should be focused and build on its unique expertise.  He added that his delegation tended to agree with most of the points in the Management Response.  In particular, his delegation would have welcomed more analysis on the Geneva-based long-term policy courses, as well as the Regional Trade Policy Courses (RTPCs), which seemed to be among the most effective technical assistance provided by the WTO.  While outsourcing would be interesting to explore, he believed that care should be taken with the selection of external partners in order to ensure that the neutrality character was respected. 

He said that his delegation fully recognized the efforts that  had been made to improve the quality of WTO TRTA but, nevertheless, believed that WTO TRTA was too dispersed, had too many products and conducted too many activities – around 500 per year which were of too short duration.  This made it difficult to assess the impact of the activities, to adopt technical assistance to local contexts, to have proper needs assessments and to ensure an adequate selection of participants.  His delegation wanted the WTO to focus on what it did best, such as the long-term courses in Geneva and in the regions, while continuing the partnerships with other institutions and academic circles.  He added that while his delegation had reservations with regard to national activities, "trade clinics" seemed to be an interesting instrument that needed to be continued.  On the issue of the implementation of WTO Agreements, he said that the Final Report seemed to imply that the focus on implementation was not adequate.  However, his delegation believed, on the contrary, that the WTO was uniquely placed to explain to Members how to adapt national laws and regulations to comply with the Agreements.  This was not to say that enhancing export capacity was not important, but only that the WTO was perhaps not the most appropriate agency to provide this kind of assistance.  On the issue of follow-up, he said his delegation understood that there was a need for Members to discuss some issues, but suggested that the process be kept relatively short.
&& The representative of New Zealand said that her delegation welcomed the conclusion of the Strategic Review and looked forward to the CTD moving forward in a coherent manner to provide guidance on which of the recommendations should be pursued.  Her delegation had found many useful and positive aspects to the Final Report, particularly in relation to the practicalities of designing and delivering effective TRTA, and hoped that these could be drawn upon to strengthen current practices, in particular those which had not already been taken into account in the 2007 TA Plan and were within the mandate and competence of the WTO to address.  Her delegation was in particular thinking of issues relating to needs assessments, participant selection, development of partnerships, and the quality of programmes and trainers.  She said that her delegation was a little disappointed not to find the assessments it had hoped for on the efficiency of some existing practices, in particular in relation to monitoring and evaluation, as well as performance indicators and targets, which had been highlighted in the TOR.  She suggested that these could be identified and prioritized for follow-up in separate processes.  For example, issues relating to evaluation could be considered taking into account recent work by the OECD on the effectiveness of TRTA.  
She said that the policy-oriented recommendations in the Final Report should be subjected to a detailed consideration by Members.  On the issue raised in the Final Report on the neutrality of the WTO, she said that her delegation, like others, believed that WTO TRTA needed to be neutral.  Her delegation would have appreciated if the Final Report had dealt with the question of how to capitalize on this neutrality, rather than simply concluding that neutrality was a disadvantage.  Her delegation was also not convinced that the ITTC should develop into a broader policy forum dealing with issues other than the negotiations and implementation.  Rather, the TRTA provided by the WTO should stick to the areas in which the organization had a strong comparative advantage.  She added that the Final Report had identified the WTO's comparative advantage as including a knowledge and information of the WTO system of rules and procedures.  Her delegation agreed with the recommendation on page 79 of the Final Report that WTO TRTA should move up the trade system knowledge value chain with, for instance, courses on the latest jurisprudence, and "trade clinics" responding to specific queries. She said that an increase and an improvement in activities in the WTO's areas of comparative advantage would be preferable to broadening the scope of the activities.  Her delegation had also not found in the Final Report an evaluation of where the delivery of the WTO's re-focused TRTA would fit in the spectrum of TRTA more generally.  In this regard, it was not clear to her delegation whether the Final Report had taken into account other recent reviews, such as that on Aid for Trade.  Finally, she said that an informal meeting to further discuss the conclusions and recommendation of the Final Report would be a useful way for Members to move forward in considering the future direction of WTO TRTA, and that her delegation looked forward to actively participating in the process.  
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had been participating actively over several years in the dialogue between donors, recipients and the Secretariat on how to improve the effectiveness of TRTA.  Her delegation was willing to continue the dialogue, and was encouraged to see how the Secretariat had evolved in its approach to TRTA based on the dialogue.  Her delegation was also appreciative of the Management Response and the Secretariat's initiative to incorporate some of the recommendations of the Final Report in the 2007 TA Plan.  She agreed that the recommendations in the Final Report could be divided into practical ones and those of a policy nature which would require further thought and discussion by Members.  She, however, stressed that her delegation – and perhaps other delegations – did not necessarily agree with all the recommendations in the Final Report, which was also why it was necessary for Members to continue the dialogue on TRTA.  With regard to the way the Final Report presented some of the recommendations, it was sometimes unclear as to how many people interviewed had actually provided the basis for those recommendations.  On the nature of the courses organized by the Secretariat, some thought could be given to making them more practical so as to improve the analytical capacity and negotiating capacity of the participants.  Her delegation was concerned that the needs assessment process was not being used to the extent it should.  While the Secretariat could consider incorporating more content on national and regional experiences in the courses it organized, it was important to give enough thought to the structure of the courses to allow various views to be presented.  The Secretariat itself should maintain its neutrality.  Furthermore, the Secretariat should continue to undertake activities in which it had a comparative advantage.  In this regard, Members should carefully examine the question of the extent to which the WTO should be involved in activities to increase supply side capacity.  The ongoing discussion on Aid For Trade was an opportunity for Members to consider the role of the WTO's technical assistance in a broader perspective.  
&& The representative of Australia said her delegation believed that some of the practical recommendations in the Final Report were useful, for example those recommendations relating to an improvement in course content by using case studies and simulations, more "hands-on" and interactive training as opposed to theoretical lectures, expanding pre-training by preparing and providing lists of readings in advance of the activity, and improving the training skills of Secretariat staff.  On the issue of expansion of partnerships, her delegation agreed that there was a need to move away from the "hub-and-spokes" model towards a more regionally located model.  She elaborated that in Australia's experience in aid activities, tailored training that used local expertise and used a "train the trainer" model was generally preferable to centrally-administered and generic training courses.  Her delegation felt that interaction with the academic, research and policy community was one of the strengths of the WTO's TRTA programme, and was pleased to note that the textbook co-funded by Australia and the WTO, titled "Managing the Challenges of WTO Participation", was cited in the Final Report as an example of how TRTA could leverage research activities into wider training and outreach activities.  She said that her delegation was also collaborating on a new publication concerning WTO, trade and poverty, which was expected to be released in 2008.  Her delegation was pleased to see that many of the practical recommendations from the Final Report had been incorporated into the 2007 TA Plan, and was particularly encouraged to note the Plan's emphasis on quality and a focus on a participatory, tailored and targeted approach to the delivery of TRTA activities.  She continued by saying that her delegation had reservations on some of the policy‑oriented recommendations in the Final Report.  She observed that the Final Report identified neutrality as both an asset and a constraint but, while there was a whole range of providers of TRTA that could offer different perspectives to beneficiaries, and while it might be possible to have members of delegations provide their perspectives during training courses, neutrality was essential for the Secretariat.  Her delegation was in favour of moving forward with the practical recommendations in the Final Report, but did not see a need to re-visit the WTO's mandate on TRTA or its core operating principles.

&& The representative of Norway said that his delegation welcomed the Strategic Review as the first independent review undertaken of WTO TRTA activities.  He said that reviews were of great value in making TRTA as efficient and as useful as possible, and that his delegation would work with all partners in making the best use of the present one, and would also support additional reviews at a later stage, when the time was right.  He observed that the Final Report contained much food for thought and had led to a good discussion at the present meeting.  On the distinction that had been made by several speakers between practical recommendations and those of a policy nature, he said that his delegation agreed with many of the former but would need more time to reflect on the latter.  He noted that one of the  findings of the Final Report was that TRTA would become more efficient with improved needs assessments.  In that regard, he said that his delegation supported the proposal of "in-country" needs assessments, and believed that well-performed analyses of needs assessments at country level were crucial to ensure relevance and efficiency in the WTO's technical assistance. 
He said that his delegation would have appreciated a more thorough treatment of the gender perspective in the Final Report, an observation that was also valid for the 2007 TA Plan.  He explained that increased information about gender differences could lead to a greater awareness of the gender dimension of trade liberalization and the WTO Agreements, and more and improved statistics in this respect were therefore important.  On suggested future scenarios for WTO TRTA, he noted that the Final Report presented two clear-cut scenarios.  His delegation was, however, not convinced that the choice would be that clear-cut, and concurred with the DDG that a blend of the two scenarios would have to be developed. His delegation also shared the view of others that the WTO could not provide certain types of assistance due to its neutrality, which it was important that it maintain.  He said that a more comprehensive approach to TRTA would call for increased and closer contacts and cooperation with other organizations and institutions, in addition to addressing major issues like funding, capacity limitations within the ITTC, the division of labour between organizations, and the Aid for Trade process.  He added that the representative of Switzerland had a valid concern on the dispersion of activities.  On Aid for Trade, he said that developments had occurred very fast over the last year, and references to this initiative were therefore missing from the Final Report.  He stressed that this was not a criticism of the Review Team, as the TOR were prepared before the Aid for Trade process had started to accelerate. 
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the Review Team had been asked to provide an outside perspective on how to improve WTO-provided TRTA, and this was appreciated by her delegation.  She also emphasized that her delegation was satisfied with the quality of the TRTA provided by the WTO, and that in Pakistan's case TRTA was demand-driven.  She added that national activities were very useful to Pakistan, as they brought together stakeholders that did not qualify to participate in other training activities.  With regard to electronic courses, she said that these could complement training activities, but that they should not be offered as substitutes.  Her delegation also felt that while outsourcing could be useful in some cases, it was the domain of the Secretariat to offer training in the core WTO areas, though in a neutral fashion.  She expressed her disappointment that, while Pakistan had been consulted electronically in the preparation of the Final Report, she had not seen this mentioned anywhere.  Finally, she agreed with other delegations that there was a need to hear more from the Review Team on their findings and conclusions.  
&& The representative of Costa Rica said that his delegation would need more time to digest the information provided in the Final Report.  He noted that the Secretariat had already incorporated some of the recommendations from the Final Report, and in this regard informed the Committee that Costa Rica had experienced good coordination with the Secretariat in having material circulated sufficiently in advance of an activity to allow the participants to read and digest the information before the commencement of the activity itself.  However, his delegation did not necessarily agree with all the recommendations from the Final Report, and therefore considered that further discussion and debate on the recommendations would be required by Members.  He emphasized that Costa Rica had benefited from both regional and national activities, and that the national activities had been demand-driven.  He agreed that the WTO's TRTA should focus on its areas of comparative advantage, but also pointed out that TRTA had to evolve to take into account Members' needs.  He indicated that his delegation had particular concerns on the Final Report's treatment of issues relating to liberalization and the Secretariat's neutrality, and that the view of his delegation was that the WTO and the Secretariat should not stray from these two fundamental principles.  On the issue of the way forward in the WTO's TRTA, he believed that the "incremental change" and the "fundamental rethink" scenarios provided in the Final Report would have to be considered in conjunction.  He also indicated that it would be necessary for Members to take into account the Aid for Trade initiative when discussing the way forward for WTO-provided TRTA.   
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that he agreed that there was a need for Members to have a further discussion on the Strategic Review.  He said that in his view there were three types of recommendations that emanated from the Final Report.  The first category concerned those recommendations in the practical and operational area, which the Secretariat had already taken into account and had tried to incorporate, to the extent possible, into the 2007 TA Plan.  The second category comprised those recommendations that required policy guidelines from the Members.  The third category related to areas where the Secretariat was already doing some work, but in which Members could encourage the Secretariat to do more.  He noted that more predictable, longer-term funding was required for WTO-provided TRTA, as part of the regular budget as well as from extra‑budgetary sources.  Additional funding would also be required if it was decided that the monitoring and evaluation of WTO-provided TRTA should be undertaken on a regular basis.  He added that he was satisfied that the Strategic Review had been undertaken very rapidly, and below the allocated budget.
He said that the Final Report recognized that the WTO had a strong comparative advantage in WTO-related training activities.  However, the question of the relevance of some activities arose, particularly with regard to the longer-term courses in Geneva and in the various regions.  He explained that Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs) were now prevalent in all regions, and the longer‑term courses should take this into account and include more input, from outside sources, on this phenomenon.  He also said that WTO activities currently lacked a strong emphasis on the development side.  On the observation in the Final Report relating to the neutrality of the Secretariat, he said that, in his view, this should be seen as a compliment to the Secretariat, and not a criticism.  That being said, he remarked that neutrality could act as a constraint in some situations, especially in context of the longer-term courses.  Once again, therefore, the need for outside sources – perhaps even representatives from WTO delegations – was highlighted.  He continued by saying that a needs assessment was the foundation for effective technical cooperation activities.  However, needs assessment was a difficult and weak area in WTO TRTA, and it was necessary for Members to consider what could be done.  On the question of value for money in WTO activities, he said that the greatest value was achieved in national activities, which were typically demand-driven.  Expenditure on national activities was also relatively limited, and he therefore suggested that these activities should not be abandoned.  He expressed his appreciation to the Review Team, which had provided Members with a useful outside view of WTO TRTA.  
&& The Chairman said that he wished to make a number of points relating to the discussion that had taken place on the Strategic Review.  He said firstly that Members were dealing with a "moving target", since issues relating to TRTA had evolved over the past decade, and continued to evolve.  He noted in particular that, in discussing TRTA, it was necessary for Members to now include the issue of Aid for Trade.  He said that the discussion by Members at the present meeting indicated that more TRTA was required, and of a better quality, in order to allow beneficiaries to participate in "rule‑making" and not simply accept "rule-taking".  The discussion had also highlighted the need  for sustainable institutional capacity within beneficiary countries.  He referred to an observation that had been made in the Final Report that WTO-provided TRTA was only a small portion of total TRTA, and said that it was important to keep in mind that TRTA was provided by many sources, and that the WTO's budget for TRTA was relatively small compared to the total amount of funds available for this purpose.  He continued by saying that, in his view, the Strategic Review should be seen as an attempt to increase the effectiveness of TRTA.  In this regard, he noted that the TOR for the Strategic Review mentioned that the Review was expected to be "forward-looking and result in what outside experts could offer by the identification and analysis of new priorities and/or modalities for TRTA;  formulation of recommendations and lessons learned for future improvements;  and suggestions of creative ways to maximize TRTA benefits".  He observed that while some delegations had commented on the methodology used in the Report and the fact that the Report did not cover all the points mentioned in the TOR, the Report had on the whole been received very positively.  He, however, believed that it was necessary for Members to discuss further the conclusions and recommendations from the Report, and suggested that it would be useful if the members of the Review Team were given the opportunity to present the Report in more detail.  He proposed that Members meet shortly in an informal setting for this purpose, and suggested that the informal meeting would also benefit from the participation of a number of discussants.  In this regard, he said that he would consult with the Review Team, the Steering Committee and the Secretariat to find a suitable date.  
&& The Vice-President and Research Coordinator at the NSI said that the Review Team was grateful for the cooperation of the DDG and members of the Secretariat, as well as of members of the Steering Committee, donors, representatives from other agencies and all those individuals which had been consulted in the field.  She explained that the Team had initially been concerned that the Management Response, by focusing on some of the relatively smaller issues, would not encourage the strategic debate that the Team was hoping for.  She was, however, pleased that the discussion at the present meeting, as well as the intervention by the DDG, had highlighted some of the key elements of the debate.  She said that the Team welcomed the positive response on many points from the Management, and appreciated the fact that the Secretariat was already making an attempt to incorporate some of these into its work.  However, it was important to recognize that WTO-provided TRTA and the work of the ITTC stood at a crossroads.  This was not only because of the need to now incorporate Aid for Trade and the Enhanced IF in discussions on TRTA, but also because of the increasing range of demands from developing countries and the increasing number of TRTA suppliers.  The Review Team, therefore, believed that it was important to take more important steps than what had been laid out in the Management Response and what had been incorporated in the 2007 TA Plan.  She explained that several people that had been interviewed during the preparation of the Final Report had commented that the courses organized by the WTO were too oriented towards the status quo, and that the trainers did not encourage enough debate.  The Report, therefore, proposed strengthening the mission of the ITTC and making it more autonomous from the rest of the Secretariat, in particular to allow the ITTC to go beyond the neutrality constraint of regular WTO activities and to respond more appropriately to the needs of beneficiaries.  She said that she also wished to highlight the view of the Review Team of the usefulness of a more programmatic approach to TRTA activities.  In particular, it was felt that there was a need for the WTO to develop, along with its partners, an overarching programme of TRTA, thereby helping to provide coherence among the approximately 500 TRTA activities that were carried out each year.  
&& The representative of the United States said that she believed it was important to hear a more detailed presentation on the Final Report by the members of the Review Team.  At the same time, she felt it was necessary for Members to consider the conclusions and recommendation of the Final Report in a gradual and deliberate manner, and that it would not be possible for Members to come up with a  response in the short term to all the recommendations.     
&& The Chairman said that he agreed with the US representative on the need for a gradual process to consider the conclusions and recommendation of the Final Report.  He clarified that the proposal he had made earlier was for Members to start on the process, and that, in his view, the first step was for the members of the Review Team to present in some detail the findings of the Final Report.     
&& The representative of Argentina said that it was necessary for Members to start considering the conclusions and recommendations of the Report.  He suggested that, subject to the availability of funds, it would be useful to have two separate meetings.  The Review Team could present its findings at the first meeting, while the second meeting would allow Members to have an in-depth discussion amongst themselves. 
&& The Chairman said that, as he had outlined earlier, he would call an informal meeting to allow the Review Team to present its findings.  Members could then consider how to move forward with their discussion.  He suggested that the Committee take note of all interventions made under this agenda item.  
It was so agreed. 
Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/151 and WT/COMTD/W/151/Corr.1)
&& The Chairman said that the 2007 TA Plan had been circulated in  document WT/COMTD/W/151 and a corrigendum, in English only, had been issued in WT/COMTD/W/151/Corr.1.  He said that he would ask the Secretariat to present the Plan, after which the floor would be opened for questions and comments.
&& The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation said that the 2007 TA Plan followed the pattern that had been used since 2004 and, as in previous years, took into account the ITTC's experiences, feedback from beneficiaries, donors and members of the Secretariat in operational divisions, and the analysis undertaken by the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit.  The present year was, however, also different, because the material from the Final Report of the Strategic Review was available.  The Plan acknowledged many of the recommendations from the Strategic Review, and several practical recommendations had been incorporated in the Plan.  As in previous years, the Plan was designed in such a way as to give more attention to those areas to which Members attached the most importance.  This was not a static process, and the ITTC would continue to work closely with Members in order to allow their needs and concerns to be reflected.  
He drew the attention of Members to document CRP(06)32, which set out the budget that had been foreseen in the 2007 TA Plan.  The document showed that the regular budget component continued to be around the level of CHF 5.2 million.  The Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF) component was at CHF 24 million, which was a figure that had been used for the last few years, and an additional amount of CHF 1.9 million was foreseen for other trust funds, in particular for trainee programmes and internships.  While the figures were not very different from previous years, what was different in 2006 was the very tight financial situation at the end of the year.  According to the rules that Members had set, one quarter of the amount of the DDAGTF was meant to be available on 1 January of each year of implementation, and that this would likely not be the case this time around.  Therefore, while it might be possible to implement with currently available resources – estimated at between CHF 3 to 4 million – a number of activities planned for the early part of 2007, other activities in the course of the year would not be able to take place unless new resources were made available.  He agreed with the point that had been made earlier by some delegations on the need for secure, predictable financing for TRTA activities, and echoed that plea from the Secretariat standpoint.  In closing, he appealed to Members to make contributions to the DDAGTF as early as possible in order to permit the Secretariat to get the Plan underway as quickly as possible after its adoption.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the African Group, said that the 2007 TA Plan covered a wide range of activities aimed at building human and institutional capacity in the field of trade.  The efficient implementation of the Plan in the most comprehensive manner possible would no doubt contribute to improving the integration of the African countries into the multilateral trading system.  He said that the 2007 TA Plan had been prepared in a context marked by the suspension of the Doha negotiations.  The African Group, however, remained convinced that the implementation of the Plan would be most useful to its members and would prepare them better to face the challenges of the negotiations.  The African Group also appreciated the fact that its members figured among the most important beneficiaries of WTO TRTA activities, and wished to reiterate that these activities were highly important to the African countries and were expected to produce benefits for the promotion of their trade.  In this regard, he said that the African Group wished to benefit from a little more time to examine the different sections of the 2007 TA Plan.  He assured Members that the Group was aware of the process and the various deadlines associated with the approval of the Plan, and said that the Group would be available for consultations after the present meeting.  The Group proposed to return to this matter at the next formal session of the CTD, after also receiving comments from the capitals, in order to make a substantive contribution to improving and finalizing the Plan.
&& The representative of Mexico said that her delegation agreed with paragraph 5 of the 2007 TA Plan, in which the assumption was made by the Secretariat that the suspension of the Doha negotiations would not affect Members' needs and requirements for training and technical assistance.  She said that her delegation was appreciative of the key features of the TA Plan as set out in paragraph 11.  However, she expressed the wish that the eighth bullet point in paragraph 11, in which the simplicity and flexibility of the TA Plan was emphasized, also include a mention of the needs of other developing country Members not specifically listed.  She also remarked that there seemed to be no mention in paragraph 35 or elsewhere of trade policy courses planned in 2007 in Spanish, and requested clarification on this. 
&& The representative of Colombia said that his delegation supported the request made by Mexico for the needs of other developing countries not explicitly mentioned in paragraph 11 of the 2007 TA Plan to be taken into account. He also inquired what initiatives had been taken by the ITTC to coordinate its activities with those of the Trade Policy Review Division (TPRD), in particular on the issue of needs assessments.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation believed the 2007 TA Plan was a good one. He said that Members had been informed by the Secretariat that improvements had been made in the design and delivery of the TA Plan over the years, for example improvements in the correlation with needs assessments and in the integration of performance indicators into the delivery of the programme.  In this regard, he wanted to know in more concrete terms whether these improvements were capable of being measured or whether this was more an appreciation of the Secretariat.  More specifically, he wanted to know whether the Secretariat had any internal targets for, say, the percentage of national activities that were firmly based on needs assessments or derived from a needs assessment, or the number of activities that had performance indicators built in.  On RTPCs, he said that he was struck by the way the follow-up to RTPCs in the Caribbean appeared to be taking a slightly different form to the follow-up in other regions, and wished to know the reason for this.  He also sought clarification from the Secretariat on paragraph 164 of the 2007 TA Plan concerning the WTO's role in activities relating to the Integrated Framework (IF) for Least‑Developed Countries.  In particular, while it was his understanding that the WTO's participation in IF activities should come from the regular budget and not from any trust fund, a different impression was given in the text of that paragraph.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was satisfied with the 2007 TA Plan, and believed that the steady work that had been undertaken to refine some of the tools and programmes relating to TRTA were brought out in the Plan.  One example related to the concept of e‑training.  She said that her delegation was among those that had started pushing a number of years ago for e-training, and she was pleased to see that e-training was now beginning to be part of the WTO's TRTA activities in a very appropriate way.  While e-training could not replace more standard types of training, it could serve as a very important complement.  In particular, she believed that e‑training could be useful to ensure follow-up and feedback, and to allow ongoing dialogue between course participants.  She said that her delegation, like others, felt that the needs assessment component had to be emphasized, and that it was critical that countries look at needs assessments when  requesting activities.  In this regard, her delegation would welcome a report on how many countries had actually done needs assessments and what was the status of these assessments.  She believed that this could help Members identify some of the challenges that were being faced, and how they could be dealt with.  She added that another important point that Members had to consider was how to ensure that the appropriate officials got to the appropriate programmes, and she was pleased to see the discussion in the 2007 TA on some of the things that might be done in that regard.  She said that it was very important to have the 2007 TA Plan adopted as quickly as possible, as Members would subsequently need time to consider their contributions to the WTO's TRTA activities as part of a broader budgetary process. 
&& The Chairman suggested that the Secretariat respond to the questions and comments that had been raised thus far, after which the floor would be opened again.
&& The Director of the ITTC said that four Geneva-based trade policy courses were held every year, three of which were in English, and the fourth was in French or Spanish in alternate years.  There was no Spanish course scheduled for 2007, but there would be one in 2008.  In relation to the RTPC for Caribbean countries, he clarified that what was in the 2007 TA Plan was not what was usually referred to as "phase 2" of the RTPC process, where the Secretariat assisted a partner university with its own plans and projects.  He explained that, in consultation with the Caribbean countries, it had been decided to hold activities that would be most beneficial for the specific circumstances of these countries, and would focus on follow-up and advanced levels of training.  In particular, two shorter consolidation courses would be organized for those who had previously participated in RTPCs.  On the issue of needs assessments, he said that the TPRs had been identified as one potentially valuable source of information on developing countries' needs in the area of technical assistance.  The ITTC was working closely with the TPRD on each TPR carried out for a developing country.  In particular, an ITTC staff member was associated with the TPR process for every developing country, so that as the analysis was done of the trade policy regime in the country concerned, staff members from the ITTC and the TPRD could identify more clearly than was possible in the past what conclusions could be drawn from the TPR in terms of technical assistance needs.  In response to the point raised by the EC on the funding of IF-related activities, he confirmed that these should be from the regular budget.  On the question as to whether the Secretariat was able to measure improvements in the use of needs assessments, he said that at the present this was not the case, but this was something the Secretariat could possibly work on, should Members believe this would be useful.  He elaborated that while the ITTC did try to look at communications received from governments, most of these communications did not make specific reference to a form of needs assessment on which they were basing the requests.  It could be assumed that whatever was requested was a need, but the question was to what extent that need was a priority.  He invited a representative of the ITTC to provide an update on the status of needs assessments. 
&& The representative of the ITTC said that about 30 needs assessments had been launched, of which between five and ten had been concluded and submitted to the Secretariat.  He said that the TPR process was a useful structure in which to undertake needs assessments, but added that while countries had been encouraged to incorporate needs assessments into their TPRs, many felt that the TPR process was not sufficiently frequent to make it a systematic tool to identify needs.  He suggested that Members could consider during informal consultations how to strengthen procedures to improve the needs assessment process.
&& The representative of Norway said that his delegation was a firm supporter of the technical assistance and training programme of the WTO, and would continue to support and participate in the programme, including through contributions to the DDAGTF.  He added that it should be kept in mind that the WTO was only one of many organizations and institutions that offered TRTA, and coordination with other organizations was therefore vital.  He said that paragraph 5 of the TA Plan rightly pointed out that it would be appropriate to relate the action of the Secretariat to the eventual outcome of the discussion on Aid for Trade, and to the operationalization of the Enhanced IF.  His delegation welcomed the 2007 TA Plan and commended the Secretariat for having incorporated several key recommendations from the Final Report of the Strategic Review into the Plan.  He added that the recommendations found in the reports of the Task Force on Aid for Trade and the Task Force on an Enhanced IF should also be taken into account, including the reports' strong support for harmonization, coherence and integration of trade into national poverty reduction strategy plans.  His delegation was of the opinion that the importance of needs assessments could not be overemphasized, and had noted with satisfaction that throughout the Plan the beneficiary countries' needs were in focus in terms of scope, issues and the academic level of training.  The needs assessment issue posed important challenges to the ITTC when designing the offered courses and programmes, as well as to the beneficiary countries when selecting the right candidates.  He said that his delegation supported the establishment of an ITTC webpage providing information about TRTA, as well as the strengthening of the use of e-training, since both actions were positive and cost effective.  He also pointed out that, both under the current IF as well as the Enhanced IF, WTO activities would relate to the design and implementation of IF activities.  He, therefore, underlined once again the importance of coordinating the work in order to achieve synergies and added value, an observation which also applied to the work of the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme (JITAP).
&& The representative of Egypt said that he wished to highlight the link between the Final Report of the Strategic Review and the 2007 TA Plan, particularly in the areas of needs assessments, and was interested to know how the recommendations of the Final Report would be incorporated into future WTO-provided TRTA activities.  He said that it would be useful for Members to have a status report on needs assessments, in which could be incorporated the experiences of beneficiary countries and various agencies involved in the process.  In this regard, his delegation believed that the "Guidelines for Conducting Needs Assessments for Technical Assistance and Training" in document JOB(04)/113, dated 30 August 2004, should be updated.  He said that his delegation attached great importance in ensuring that there was a follow-up to each technical assistance activity, and that the follow-up was linked to evaluation.  He explained that through an appropriate follow-up mechanism it would be possible to measure the effectiveness of a technical assistance activity and to evaluate the benefits of the activity.  
&& The representative of Pakistan said that she had noted the discussion that had taken place on the issue of needs assessments.  In the case of Pakistan, she said that the Ministry of Commerce served as a coordinating body, and identified topics which were subsequently communicated to the Secretariat.  Topics in previous years had included dispute settlement and agriculture, and it was likely that services statistics would be a topic in 2007.  
&& The representative of Brazil said it appeared that there was a two-way relationship between TPRs and needs assessments, since TPRs were a source for needs assessments, but needs assessments were also inserted in the TPRs.  He asked for some clarification on this relationship.  He added that the TPRs also helped other agencies in carrying out technical assistance.  For example, the World Bank had recently carried out an in-depth study of the Brazilian economy, which drew on the information provided in the last TPR on Brazil.  He also asked whether there were any plans to update the WTO/OECD database on TRTA, in particular in light of one of the recommendations of the Task Force on Aid for Trade.  Finally, he inquired whether Members' discussion on improving WTO‑provided TRTA could in some way be related to the recommendations of the Task Force on Aid for Trade.
&& The representative of Malaysia said that national activities were extremely useful, as they could be tailored to fit the particular needs of countries.  In the experience of her delegation, the programme for a national activity was finalized after much consultation with the Secretariat.  The success of a national activity depended, therefore, in large part on the active participation and commitment of the beneficiary country.  On the issue of needs assessment and evaluation, she said that this was also in the hands of beneficiaries, as it was their responsibility to respond to the effectiveness of an activity and ensure that it met their needs.  She emphasized, however, that it was important to keep the needs assessment format simple and easy to apply, and that it was necessary to look into the issue of an appropriate methodology to use.  She said that the 2007 TA Plan was acceptable to her delegation, and expressed Malaysia's interest in hosting a regional seminar in 2007. 
&& The representative of Barbados said that it was a combination of feedback and foresight that had led to activities being identified in 2007 for the Caribbean region that would consolidate the capacity that had been built over the last few years.  She noted that in paragraph 45 of the 2007 TA Plan it was stated that the RTPCs would be re-introduced in the Caribbean region after a period of consolidation.  In this regard, she inquired what the Secretariat understood to be the length of the period of consolidation and, recognizing that it may not simply be determined by the Secretariat, asked what would be the process for determining readiness for re-introduction, and what would be the indicators that would determine readiness.
&& The representative of the United States said that it was important to recognize that the Final Report of the Strategic Review contained both practical recommendations that were relatively easy to implement, and policy-oriented recommendations which Members would have to consider in more detail.  A number of the practical recommendations had already been incorporated in the 2007 TA Plan, while the recommendations of a policy nature would have to be considered by Members at a later stage.  Future discussions on TRTA could also treat issues relating to Aid for Trade and the IF process, as well as the WTO/OECD TRTA database, but she believed that for now it was important for the CTD to formally adopt the 2007 TA Plan.  
&& The representative of Morocco said that paragraph 59 of the 2007 TA Plan listed the various Geneva-based thematic courses scheduled for 2007, three of which were in English and one in Spanish.  He inquired why there were no such courses in French scheduled for 2007, and whether it would be possible to consider having courses of this nature planned in each language on an annual basis.  On the issue of national activities, he drew the attention of the Committee to paragraph 76, which listed a number of considerations and criteria for the implementation of national activities.  In this regard, he said that these considerations and criteria should not prove to be an obstacle to the specific requests of Members, since individual Members were presumably aware of what their specific needs were.   
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation appreciated that many of the practical recommendations from the Final Report of the Strategic Review had been incorporated into the 2007 TA Plan.  His delegation believed that the 2007 TA Plan was a good one, and wished to move the process forward.  He also supported those delegations that had called for improving the framework for evaluating technical assistance activities.

&& The representative of Egypt, in clarifying his earlier intervention, said that his delegation wished to take full advantage of the conclusions and recommendations contained in the Final Report of the Strategic Review.  He said that the Review Team's presentation of its findings would raise some important issues to be taken into consideration in the future provision of TRTA by the WTO.
&& The Director of the ITTC said that the Secretariat had begun discussions internally on how to implement the recommendations of the Task Force on Aid for Trade relating to the WTO/OECD TRTA database, and would also be initiating discussions with the OECD.  The database, as it stood now, provided information on activities that had taken already place.  It was less effective as a tool for planning, which was an issue also related to coherence and coordination with other organizations.  He agreed that there existed a two-way relationship between TPRs and needs assessments, and that if other organizations made use of TPRs in formulating their technical assistance activities, this provided an added value to the TPRs.  From the point of view of the ITTC, however, the main interest was in the needs assessments that came out of the TPR process.  On the question from Barbados on what was the length of the "period of consolidation" envisaged before returning to RTPCs in the Caribbean region, at this stage it was difficult to say, though a period of one or two years had been discussed.  The thinking had been for the 2007 activities to be implemented, after which the ITTC would consult with the countries concerned to determine whether they wished to return to the RTPCs or continue with a different format.  On the issue of the language of instruction for specialized courses, there were many more English-speaking candidates than candidates for French or Spanish courses – hence the greater number of English-language courses – and that the present cycle of courses had been in place for some years.  Finally, he said that, while paragraph 76 listed a number of considerations and criteria for the implementation of national activities, these activities would continue to be undertaken as part of a demand-driven process.  
&& The Chairman said that it was necessary to adopt a dynamic approach when discussing TRTA, as the topic was continuously evolving.  It was also necessary to consider the issue of TRTA in the light of coherence and coordination between agencies and donors, since only a very small part of TRTA was actually implemented by the WTO.  He said that the TPRs were a rich source of information which should be used in the consideration of TRTA needs.  He noted that a number of the practical recommendations from the Final Report of the Strategic Review had been incorporated into the 2007 TA Plan, which he saw as a positive step for WTO-provided TRTA.  On the question of how to go forward in discussing TRTA and the recommendations of the Final Report, he said that Members had many issues to consider, and it would be best to consider them as part of a gradual process.  A continued discussion on TRTA in coming years would allow the TA Plan to evolve to better reflect the needs of beneficiaries.  With regard to the 2007 Plan, he said that the feedback from Members seemed broadly positive, and only the African Group had requested more time to study it.  He also noted that some Members had highlighted the need to adopt the 2007 Plan as soon as possible, and therefore said that he wished to make a proposal.  In particular, he proposed that the 2007 Plan be adopted on a conditional basis at the present meeting, with the understanding that the item concerning the Plan would also be on the agenda for the next CTD meeting in order to allow Members to make any additional comments and consider formally adopting the Plan.
&& The representative of Benin, on behalf of the African Group, said that the Group did not object to the Secretariat moving forward with the process relating to the 2007 TA Plan.  The African Group also supported the Chairman's proposal to place an item concerning the Plan on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting.  He said that if African delegations received comments from their capitals on the TA Plan, these would be shared with the Secretariat. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation endorsed the Chairman's proposal to adopt the 2007 TA Plan conditionally at the present meeting.  He added that any comments received from African delegations, as well as the discussion that had taken place on the Strategic Review, could be incorporated, since the discussion on TRTA was an ongoing process.  At the same time, he said that Members should recognize the fact that the Secretariat had to start the process relating to the Plan as soon as possible.
&& The representative of Argentina said that he sought some clarification as to what would happen if a proposal came from a Member before the next CTD meeting which had some financial implications for the 2007 TA Plan.   
&& The representative of the United States said that the query raised by the representative of Argentina also had implications for the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration (CBFA), in particular since the TA Plan would have to be submitted to the CBFA after adoption by the CTD.  
&& The Chairman said that his understanding was that the African Group had not indicated any strong objections to the 2007 TA Plan as it had been presented to the CTD, and that Members at the present meeting had broadly welcomed the Plan.  He, therefore, suggested that the CTD adopt the 2007 TA Plan on a conditional basis at the present meeting, and that Members consider the Plan once again at the next CTD meeting with a view to formally adopting it.    
It was so agreed. 
 Training and Technical Assistance: Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities – 1 January to 30 June 2006 (WT/COMTD/W/154)
&& The Director of the ITTC said that the Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/154, covered the period from 1 January to 30 June 2006.  He said that paragraphs 4 to 7 of the Semi-Annual Review gave a broad overview of the implementation of TRTA in that period.  Two specific elements of the programme – electronic training and the Standards and Trade Development Facility (STDF) – were then analyzed in more depth.  This was in line with the requests that had been made by Members to have a more qualitative reporting of TRTA activities.  He said that the implementation rate of activities was about 90 per cent, up from 85 per cent in 2005, and approximately CHF 22 million of the budgeted CHF 24 million would be spent by the end of the 2006.  However, given that much of the available resources would be spent, concerns about obtaining new resources to implement activities in 2007 became more immediate.      
The Committee took note of the Semi-Annual Review of the Implementation of Activities.
OTHER BUSINESS   
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.

ANNEX
										CRP(06)32
										3 November 2006
WTO Technical Assistance and Training Plan
WT/COMTD/W/151
Swiss Francs


Chapter 
Regular Budget 
DDAGTF 
Other Trust Funds 
Total 
A

General WTO-related Technical Assistance and Training





(a)
Trade Policy Courses
 2,206,800 
  5,231,102 
-
7,437,902 

(b)
Introduction Courses
381,400 
 

381,400 

(c)
Geneva-based Thematic courses
345,000 
 

345,000 

(d)
Regional and Sub-regional Short Trade Policy Courses
 
2,287,200 

2,287,200 



Total
 2,933,200 
7,518,302 
-
10,451,502 








B

Specialised & Advanced Training & Technical Assistance




(a)
Geneva-based Specialised Courses
165,000 
 

165,000 

(b)
National Technical Assistance Activities
 1,218,000 
2,032,000 

3,250,000 

(c)
Regional Seminars
-
6,968,800 
-
6,968,800 

(d)
Advanced Training Programme for senior government officials
 
 876,000 

876,000 

(e)
Intensive Course on Trade Negotiations Skills
 
 668,000 

668,000 

(f)
Outreach Activities for Parliamentarians and Civil Society
 
 358,400 

358,400 



Total
 1,383,000 
10,903,200 
-
12,286,200 








C

Academic Support for Training and Capacity-building:  an integrated approach



(a)
Regional trade Policy Courses
 
 See A.a.ii 

   - 

(b)
Follow-up to RTPCs (Phase II)
 
 520,000 

520,000 

(c)
Workshops for University Professors
185,000 
 411,200 

596,200 

(d)
Doctoral Studies
 
 129,600 

129,600 

(e)
Visiting Academics
 
-

- 

(f)
Research Collaboration (ERSD)
 
 250,000 

250,000 

(g)
Document Dissemination Programme for Universities
  65,000 
 

65,000 



Total
250,000 
  1,310,800 
-
1,560,800 








D

Support Training & Technical Assistance Facilities





(a)
Geneva-based Topic-specific Symposia
 
 1,680,010 

1,680,010 

(b)
WTO Introduction Days
-
 

-

(c)
Other forms of Geneva-based support
536,600
 

536,600 

(d)
Trainee programmes and Internships
 
 
 1,650,000 
1,650,000 



Total
536,600 
1,680,010 
 1,650,000 
3,866,610 
E

E-learning programme







Total
  73,500 
 179,300 
- 
   252,800 








F

Other Programmes and Support Activities with Funding Requirements



(a)
Staffing: L-Posts and other Short-Term Contracts
-
  4,204,800 
-
4,204,800 

(b) 
Programme activities
-
 270,000 
 20,000 
   290,000 



Total
-
  4,474,800 
 20,000 
4,494,800 







G

Overheads
-
  3,388,634 
   217,100 
3,605,734 







H

Cost Sharing

 (5,455,046)

 (5,455,046)










Grand Total
 5,176,300 
24,000,000 
 1,887,100 
31,063,400 
__________
 In English only.
 The document was circulated during the meeting, and is reproduced in the Annex to this Note.

WT/COMTD/M/60 Page  PAGE 22



	WT/COMTD/M/60 	Page  PAGE 21



 

 

 

 

		WT/COMTD/M/60		
		Page  PAGE 23		




