 
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 28 JUNE 2019
Chairman: H.E. Mr. Chad Blackman (Barbados) 

A.	adoption of the agenda	2
B.	observers	2
(I)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	2
(II)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting,  the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	2
C.	TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING	3
(I)	Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training 2018 
(WT/COMTD/W/245)	3
D.	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)	5
(I)	 Committee on Trade and Development Mandate: Focal Point for Consideration and Coordination of Work on Development in the WTO – Proposal from Barbados, Belize, China,  Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)	5
(II)	Operationalization of the CTD's Mandate: A Proposal to Deliver Outcomes based on the  MC8 Mandate – Proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192) 	5
E.	SPECIAL AND DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT PROVISIONS IN WTO AGREEMENTS  AND DECISIONS – NOTE BY THE SECRETARIAT (WT/COMTD/W/239)	7
F.	notifications under the enabling clause	9
(I)	Notifications received pursuant to Enabling Clause (Paragraph 4(a))	9
(a) 	Generalized System of Preferences - Notification by the United States (WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.10)	10
(II)	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements - Status Report on the Committee’s Work	11
(a)	Status of the preparation of factual presentations - Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/246)	11
(III)	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union - Communication  from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	11
(IV)	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between  India and Korea (Goods)	12
G.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	12
(I)	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements – Status Report on the Committee's Work	12
(a) Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/247)	12
H.	REVIEW of STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	13
I.	WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE	14
J.	DATE OF THE NEXT MEETING	14
K.	OTHER BUSINESS	14

	•	adoption of the agenda
&& The Chairman said that he wished to note for the record that the 109th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) had originally been scheduled to be held on 19 June 2019. This was the date he had announced at the last meeting. However, for various reasons, it had not been possible to hold the meeting on 19 June. In a communication dated 21 May 2019, he had informed Members of the change in the date of the 109th Session to 28 June 2019. He went on to say that the draft agenda for the 109th Session was contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/17/Rev.1, circulated on 18 June 2019.

&& The representative of the European Union said that she wished to provide some information under "Other Business" regarding a proposal that her delegation was preparing.
The agenda was adopted as amended.

	•	observers 
(I)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the InterArab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
(II)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations had been previously expressed. He indicated that, if there were no changes in positions on the requests for observer status, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting.
It was so agreed.
	•	TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING 
(I)	Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training 2018 (WT/COMTD/W/245)
&& The Chairman said that under the present agenda item, the Committee would consider the Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2018, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/245. He invited a representative of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) to introduce the report.


&& The representative of the ITTC noted that the English and French versions of the annual report had been circulated prior to the meeting, while the Spanish version would be circulated shortly. He went on to say that the report had the same structure as the previous year's report, and contained three principal sections. The first section presented the main developments in technical assistance (TA) in 2018 compared to the previous year. Another section addressed the implementation of the TA Plan and the main features of the TA provided in 2018, while a third section was related to the evaluation of performance in 2018. As part of his summary of the main developments in 2018, he said that while the resources available to finance TA seemed to have stabilized, the overall resources available remained lower than actual expenses. This meant that the Secretariat had to regularly tap into its financial reserves. Further progress during the year in the implementation of the 28 recommendations formulated in the external evaluation of the WTO's TA conducted in 2016 meant that, by the end of the year, 71% of the recommendations had been implemented and the others were in progress. In line with the implementation of results-based management (RBM) for TA in 2018, he pointed to some elements of progress, including with regard to the simplification of TA workflows, and the development of a new TA management system. As in previous years, the reporting rate on TA activities was close to 100%. He also noted that the Secretariat had continued to enrich the substantive content of its TA offer. For example, five new online courses were released, and the holistic approach to subjects like public health, ecommerce, standards and competition was deepened.   
Turning to the implementation of the TA Plan, he said that the Secretariat undertook 307 TA activities, which was an increase of 18% relative to the previous year. Overall, 22,800 participants were trained during the year – an increase of 25% compared to 2017. This was mainly a result of the 65% growth of the participation in face-to-face activities, as participation in online courses was stable. However, despite this growth, total TA expenses were 5% lower than in 2017, as a result of tight resource management and the postponement of an internship programme. In 2018, 36% of the 307 activities had a general scope, while the other activities were spread across specific Agreements or subjects. Subject-specific regional seminars were conducted in all regions. In line with the TA Plan, Africa and least developed countries (LDCs) remained a priority in 2018. Africa had also returned to first place in terms of the number of TA activities hosted. The overall proportion of women grew above the 2012-2017 average to reach 47%. In terms of language distribution, 58% of TA was offered in English, 17% in French and 19% in Spanish, and the balance in more than one language. A small increase in the number of global activities with interpretation was noted during the year. With regard to the evaluation of performance, the proportion of targets met reached its highest level since 2015. Targets were met in 76% of cases, while the proportion was 57% on average during the 2015-2017 period. Key Result 1 registered the highest level of performance, with targets met in 83% of cases. This was followed by Key Result 4, where targets were met in 80% of cases. In the case of Key Result 2 and Key Result 3, the targets were met in 50% of the cases. He concluded his intervention by showing some developments concerning the TA-related components of the WTO website, in particular with regard to the TA dashboards, and explained that information relating to TA activities was updated in real time. 


&& The representative of the European Union thanked the Secretariat for the report, though regretted that the Spanish version had not been circulated prior to the meeting. She hoped that, next time around, the report would be made available to Members in all three languages before the meeting. She went on to note that the majority of the recommendations formulated in the external evaluation of the WTO's TA had already been implemented, or were in the process of being implemented. Participation in the multilateral trading system (MTS) was important for all Members, and TA was a critical element in this regard. LDCs needed to remain the priority for TA activities. She welcomed the increase in the number of participants in TA activities, and indicated her delegation's wish to continue to see efforts to ensure a greater effectiveness and impact of the activities. 


&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, welcomed the report, and expressed appreciation for the priority given to LDCs in the WTO's TA. He noted the significant level of LDC participation in regional TA activities in Africa and Asia, as well as the growth in participation in online courses. The benefits that LDCs were deriving from the internship programmes were additionally highlighted. He also noted, however, that LDCs accounted for only 28% of the requests for national activities in 2018, compared to 31% in 2017. He believed that this decline was explained by the difficulties faced by LDCs in covering the local costs associated with the organization of national activities. He outlined how the situation was particularly pronounced for African LDCs, and indicated that it was in this context that the LDC Group wished to reiterate the request made previously for the WTO to consider covering the local costs associated with the organization of national activities in LDCs. He observed that practically all other intergovernmental organizations were able to cover the local costs of activities in LDCs, and even the Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF) did so. He invited the Secretariat provide some elements of clarification on this concern of LDCs.  


&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation for the report. She noted that 22,800 participants were trained overall during 2018, which was an increase of 25% relative to 2017. This was mainly due to the 65% growth of the participation in face-to-face activities, given that participation in online courses had remained stable. She welcomed the evolution in the RBM system and the simultaneous simplification and streamlined effects it had created – including with regard to the launch of a new TA management system. Effective and substantive training content remained a priority, and her delegation was pleased to see the implementation of a new elearning cloud-based platform. She noted that five new online courses had been released, and that the holistic approach to subjects like public health, e-commerce, standards and competition had deepened. She also noted that efforts were made in a number of areas such as standards, non-agricultural market access, services, trade-related intellectual property rights (TRIPS), and government procurement, in order to respond to the actual needs of beneficiaries and promote the implementation of the WTO Agreements. After highlighting that e-learning had the potential to reach many more participants than in-person training, she noted the overall trend of growth for TA activities in LDCs, and the increase in participation and submission of documents. The report showed an overall trend pointing towards growth, as the total substantive documents submitted was higher in 2017 than in 2015. Participants from LDCs accounted for 30% of the participants in Geneva-based courses in 2018, and three of the 43 global activities were specifically designed for LDCs. Her delegation was encouraged by these statistics, and wished to see LDC participation increase.


&& The representative of Colombia appreciated the efforts of the Secretariat in implementing the various TA activities in 2018, and in taking into account the recommendations and requests of Members. She recognized in particular the significant progress made in the context of online courses. She also noted that the budget for TA activities had not changed since 2014, while the number of training requests was growing each year. In this context, she stressed the importance of making efficient use of resources, and also encouraged donors to maintain or increase their contributions, since TA activities were having a direct and positive impact on Members' participation in the MTS. Appreciation was expressed for the three national activities that were held in Colombia in 2018, as well as for the onsite evaluation of TA conducted by the Secretariat. She observed that the evaluation had allowed authorities in her capital to also conduct their own assessments of the TA received, and to identify areas for future training activities. 


&& The representative of Nigeria welcomed the report and noted with satisfaction the increase in both face-to-face and online TA activities across various subject areas. He stressed the importance of TA for his country, and for the African region, and hoped that Africa would continue to be given priority attention in the activities offered by the Secretariat. 
&& The representative of Zimbabwe expressed appreciation for the WTO's TA activities, which she said were becoming increasingly demand-driven and results-oriented. She also indicated that her delegation shared the concerns raised in the intervention by Chad regarding the financial constraints faced by some countries to cover the local costs associated with the organization of national TA activities. 
&& The representative of Mozambique commended the Secretariat for its performance in the delivery of TA activities in 2018. She indicated her delegation's support for the request by the LDC Group for the Secretariat to consider ways to cover the local costs associated with the organization of national activities in LDCs. She urged donors to continue to provide resources for TA activities in developing countries and LDCs.
&& The representative of the ITTC said that the Secretariat had taken note of Members' comments, in particular the renewed call by the LDC Group to find ways to cover the local costs associated with the organization of national TA activities in LDCs. He said that the Secretariat was still reflecting on the request, and would keep Members informed. 
 The Director of the ITTC indicated that she wished to make some comments on the request by the LDC Group for the Secretariat to cover the local costs of national activities held in LDCs. She noted that, since Members had agreed in the past to the principle of shared responsibility on the issue of funding the costs of national TA activities, a collective decision would need to be taken by Members if this practice were to change. She also recalled that national activities were funded from the regular budget, and that this was being done in the context of a zero growth budget. If the Secretariat were to draw upon the resources allocated to TA activities, then certain activities would have to be given up. Members would need to discuss which TA activities could be abandoned in favour of funding local costs related to the organization of national activities in LDCs. Meanwhile, the Secretariat was exploring ways to assist LDCs to cover local costs, including by collaborating with other institutions when organizing national TA activities. In addition, the Secretariat had held informal discussions with some donors on this matter, although further discussions were still needed. Since many of the donors that contributed to the Global Trust Fund were also bilateral donors to some LDCs and other developing countries, the Secretariat was trying to see whether some linkages could be developed, so as to take advantage of the resources available through bilateral programmes. 
&& The representative of Chad stressed the importance to LDCs of local cost coverage for national activities. He noted once again that other international organizations were able to cover the local costs of activities, and expressed his hope that this could also be the case for the WTO.
&& The representative of Burkina Faso highlighted the benefits of TA activities for his country. He supported the intervention by Chad regarding the importance of local cost coverage for national activities in LDCs, and also noted that this might provide an incentive for LDCs in other areas, including with regard to meeting their notification requirements. 
&& The Committee took note of the Annual Performance Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2018, and of all interventions. 
	•	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)
(I)		Committee on Trade and Development Mandate: Focal Point for Consideration and Coordination of Work on Development in the WTO – Proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208) 
(II)	Operationalization of the CTD's Mandate: A Proposal to Deliver Outcomes based on the MC8 Mandate – Proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
&& The Chairman said that, at the Eighth WTO Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. Two submissions containing proposals for work under the MC8 mandate were included on the agenda of the present meeting. The first submission – by Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208, was for the CTD to report on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies. The second submission – by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group, was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. This submission contained three proposals. In the order they were presented in the document, the first proposal was for the Secretariat to continue to update its report on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. The second proposal was for the CTD to report on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies, while the third proposal was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to regional trade agreements (RTAs) to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. He noted that the two submissions had remained on the CTD's agenda for several years, and at the last meeting, a number of the proponents had requested that the submissions appear on the agenda for the present meeting as well. As had been done in past meetings, he suggested that the Committee once again take up the two submissions together.
&& The representative of India said that the two submissions, when taken together, contained three proposals. The first proposal, which was for the Secretariat to continue to update its report on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, was discussed and agreed to at the 87th Session. Accordingly, the Secretariat had prepared an update in June 2013, and subsequent updates were prepared in 2016 and 2018. India expected that the Secretariat would continue to prepare and circulate these reports every two years. Turning to the second proposal, which was for the CTD to report on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies, she said that this proposal was in line with the terms of reference (TORs) of the CTD, as well as with the MC8 mandate. Referring to the CTD's annual report to the General Council for 1996, as contained in document WT/COMTD/9, she noted that the CTD had agreed that year to review the implementation of provisions in favour of developing countries on the basis of contributions from Members and from the WTO bodies responsible for monitoring the implementation of the Uruguay Round commitments. To assist in this exercise, the Chairman had invited the Chairpersons of other WTO bodies to submit information on how provisions in favour of developing countries had been dealt with in their respective Committees. On the basis of these responses, the Secretariat had prepared background documentation presenting the replies received in an analytical format. She went on to say that the proponents urged the Committee to restart that practice, and ensure that the CTD acted as a focal point for development work. As for the third proposal – which was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly – she said that this would help ensure a timely consideration of RTAs, and the full realization of the responsibilities assigned to the CTD. In closing, she requested that the items concerning the two submissions be maintained on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of China expressed support for the statement by India, and indicated that his intervention related to both documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/208. He stressed the usefulness of the Secretariat report on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, and requested that the report continue to be updated in the future. He also noted that the CTD should be expected to serve as a focal point for development work in the WTO. Furthermore, as mentioned by India, the Committee had performed this role in the past, which was also in alignment with the CTD's TORs and the MC8 mandate. Finally, he said that there was a systemic and specific need to discuss the proposal for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements. He requested that the items concerning the two submissions be maintained on the agenda for the next meeting.
&& The representative of Ecuador expressed support for the statements by India and China. She said that the proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/208 aimed to ensure that the CTD fulfilled its TORs, including by operationalizing the MC8 mandate. She also reiterated her delegation's interest in pursuing informal consultations with other Members on the proposals.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation had repeatedly stated that there was no consensus on the substance of the remaining proposals, nor for the submissions to remain on the agenda as standing items, as if there was unfinished business to address. She pointed out that, at several meetings, the Chairman had had to actively solicit acknowledgment of the items from the proponents. While the proponents were free to add these items to the agenda of a future meeting, the United States did not agree to these as standing items. Her delegation saw no basis from the CTD's rules of procedure that would justify these items remaining on the agenda, without required action by the proponents. She called on the proponents to cease using the time of the Committee on these items.
&& The representative of the European Union indicated that she would repeat elements of her statements from previous CTD meetings. She said that her delegation's understanding of the MC8 mandate was that the CTD should further explore the positive link between trade and development. This needed to be based on constructive exchanges on clearly identified topics, in line with the instruction from MC8 to carry out focused work. She emphasized that the European Union had engaged constructively on the proposals submitted in the context of the MC8 mandate that had previously been agreed to by the Committee. However, the remaining proposals did not respond to the requirement to carry out focused work. Moreover, her delegation was not aware of any efforts by the proponents in the last few years to take into consideration comments from other Members or to engage with them. Regarding the proposal for the CTD to report on the development work of other WTO bodies, her delegation was of the view that this would give the CTD an oversight function for all aspects of the WTO's work. The proposal went against the mandate to act as a focal point on development issues and carry out focused work. Members needed to discuss what this focused work should be, and not re-open the CTD's mandate. Turning to the proposal for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly, she said that this needed to form part of a wider discussion in the context of paragraph 28 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration. She indicated her delegation's readiness to engage in constructive discussions with a view to clarifying issues relating to notifications, and expressed support for the possibility of joint meetings of the CTD and the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA). She urged the proponents to engage with other Members in order to try and address the concerns that had been raised. She also observed that, while it was the prerogative of the proponents to continue to request the items on the agenda, a repetition of the same positions at every meeting did not help make good use of the Committee's time. 
&& The Chairman encouraged continued engagement among Members in order to try and make progress on the proposals. He also indicated that he would assess the possibility of holding informal consultations before the next meeting in order to try to help advance work on this matter.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
	•	SPECIAL AND DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT PROVISIONS IN WTO AGREEMENTS AND DECISIONS – NOTE BY THE SECRETARIAT (WT/COMTD/W/239)
&& The Chairman recalled that the updated report by the Secretariat on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/239, had already been considered at the last meeting. The same document appeared on the agenda of the present meeting at the request of Ecuador. Before opening the floor, he indicated that he wished to remind Members of the context in which the updated report had been prepared. In this regard, he recalled that, at the 97th Session in November 2015, the Committee had agreed to a proposal by Ecuador, which was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1. The proposal was for the Secretariat to update its report on the implementation of S&D provisions in WTO Agreements and Decisions at least once every two years. In addition, as part of the proposal, it had been agreed that, following the circulation of the second report by the Secretariat, the Committee would review the report and the discussions that had taken place to date in order to determine whether it was worth continuing to produce this type of document. He went on to say that, after the proposal was agreed to, the Secretariat had prepared a first update of the report, which was circulated in September 2016 in document WT/COMTD/W/219. The report contained in WT/COMTD/W/239, which was circulated in October 2018, was therefore the second update since the proposal had been agreed to. Given that the second update had been circulated, and had been considered at the last CTD meeting, he wished to draw Members’ attention to the need for the Committee to determine whether it was worth continuing to produce this type of document, as per the proposal by Ecuador. He hoped that Members were in a position to make that determination at the present meeting, as this would provide clarity on the Committee’s future work on this matter. In opening the floor, he requested that Members indicate whether they would be able to agree for this document to be updated at least once every two years.



&& The representative of Ecuador thanked the Secretariat for preparing the updated paper, which her delegation believed was of value to Members. She invited the Committee to agree to update the document at least once every two years, as per the proposal by Ecuador contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1.



&& The representative of Hong Kong, China said that, at the last meeting, many positive comments had been made on the updated Secretariat paper. She believed that the document provided a useful basis for the review of the implementation of S&D provisions in various WTO bodies, and could also be useful in the context of the Monitoring Mechanism (MM) on S&D. As an example, she noted that it was indicated in the document that some provisions had not been invoked since the entry into force of the concerned Agreements, or in some cases transition periods had not been extended. She wondered in this regard whether some provisions were difficult or complicated to use, and even when used, whether they had really contributed to a better integration into the MTS. She also wondered whether it would be beneficial for the relevant WTO Committees to review the utilization of the concerned provisions. She observed that written answers to such questions could form the basis for a written submission in the MM. In closing, she explained that she had provided an example to illustrate the usefulness of the updated Secretariat report, and how the report could focus attention and discussion on S&D provisions. Her delegation commended the Secretariat's efforts in producing the report, and supported the preparation of further updates in the future.
&& The representative of India expressed support for the comments by Ecuador and Hong Kong, China. She believed that the Secretariat report was a useful reference document, which provided a comprehensive compilation of the S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. Her delegation was of the view that the document needed to be updated at least once every two years, so as to incorporate developments and decisions taken. Each updated report should appear on the agenda of the CTD for discussions and further exchanges of views. 


&& The representative of Norway said that his delegation supported the preparation of continued updates to the Secretariat report. He also indicated support for the intervention by Hong Kong, China.
&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, welcomed the updated report by the Secretariat. He noted that the report provided a listing of the S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, and also allowed for an appreciation of their implementation and their effectiveness, including for LDCs. He pointed to a number of Ministerial Decisions which were crucial to LDCs, including those relating to duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs, the waiver for services and service suppliers from LDCs, and preferential rules of origin in favour of LDCs. The operationalization of other S&D provisions was also important for LDCs, including those contained in the TRIPS Agreement. In closing, he said that the LDCs wished to see a positive impact of S&D provisions on the ground. The report could be used as a reference to evaluate impact, and where necessary make recommendations or identify TA needs.


&& The representative of Australia supported the proposal for the Secretariat to update the report at least once every two years. He said that the report provided a useful basis for discussions on S&D in general, and should serve as an important reference for Members as they proceeded to design appropriate and targeted S&D in current and future WTO negotiations.


&& The representative of the Russian Federation stressed the usefulness of the Secretariat report, which he indicated was well structured, and provided a valuable source of information for practical and analytical purposes. He expressed his delegation's support for the preparation of continued updates of the report. 
&& The representative of the European Union welcomed the Secretariat report, and said that it was important for the report to continue to be updated in the future.  She also indicated that she wished to reiterate the comments made by her delegation at the last meeting.  In this regard, she said that additional information on the actual use of S&D provisions could be added in the respective tables under the "Comment" column, in particular with regard to which Members had used individual provisions and when. Such information, which could cover the past five years, would greatly enhance transparency. 


&& The representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia supported the proposal for the Secretariat report to be updated at least once every two years. His delegation believed that this was an essential aspect of the CTD's work. He also indicated that each successive update should be reflected on the CTD agenda, so that a discussion could take place on the basis of the report. 


&& The representative of Colombia thanked the Secretariat for the updated report, and for having presented the report at the last meeting. She believed that the information contained in the report provided a strong basis for discussion in the CTD, as well as in the MM. Her delegation supported the proposal for the report to continue to be updated in the future, and also wished for the Secretariat to continue to present each update to the Committee. She additionally expressed support for the idea to expand on the information contained in the "Comment" column, so that experiences and specific cases of the use of S&D provisions could be provided.
&& The representative of Japan welcomed the Secretariat report, and supported the proposal for the report to continue to be updated in the future. She indicated that the report was a good reference, and could also serve as a basis for the preparation of a written submission in the MM.


&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation did not object to the Secretariat report being updated every two years. The expectation of her delegation was that the report would be updated consistent with, and with no deviation from, prior practice. She noted that interest had been expressed in some interventions to expand on elements of the report. In this regard, she invited any Member wishing to pursue such an interest to submit a written proposal for consideration by the Committee. She reiterated that her delegation had no objection to the report being updated every two years, as long as the updates were prepared consistent with prior practice.


&& The representative of Canada expressed appreciation to the Secretariat for having prepared the updated report. She recognized the usefulness of the document, and supported the proposal for the report to be updated at least once every two years.


&& The representative of China thanked the Secretariat for the updated report, and for the presentation of the report made at the last meeting. His delegation supported the proposal for the Secretariat to update the report at least once every two years, as well as the suggestion to reflect each update on the CTD agenda.


&& The Chairman observed that Members seemed to be supportive of the idea for the Secretariat report to continue to be updated in the future. He invited the Committee to agree for the report to be updated at least once every two years. 


&& The Committee agreed that the Secretariat report would be updated at least once every two years. 
	•	notifications under the enabling clause
(I)	Notifications received pursuant to Enabling Clause (Paragraph 4(a))
&& The Chairman said that there was one new notification to be considered by the Committee at the present meeting. This was a notification by the United States concerning its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme. However, before turning to this notification, he said that he wished to provide the Committee with a few updates on matters related to notifications received under the Enabling Clause. He started by informing the Committee about a number of new notifications concerning preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) or RTAs under the Enabling Clause that had been submitted for circulation after the agenda for the present meeting was issued. With regard to PTAs, a notification had been received from the Russian Federation concerning its GSP scheme. As for RTAs, the new notifications concerned firstly the agreement between Morocco and the United Arab Emirates. In addition, a notification of changes to the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA) had been submitted by India, on behalf of the APTA parties. These notifications would be circulated as soon as possible. 
He continued by indicating that he wished to say a few words on the matter of the notifications submitted in November 2018 by Uruguay, on behalf of the members of the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA). He recalled that the Committee had been informed at the 107th Session on 21 November 2018 that several notifications – a total of 223 – had been submitted by Uruguay to the Secretariat on 1 November 2018, and a further 35 notifications had been submitted on 20 November 2018. All the notifications had been submitted as modifications to the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo (TM80). The first batch of notifications concerned agreements concluded under the TM80 over the period 1980 to 2016, while the second concerned the instruments concluded under the TM80 in 2017. At the last CTD meeting, the Committee was informed that the Chairman and the Secretariat had been in touch with the LAIA members. The Secretariat had sought clarification on a number of points relating to the notifications submitted, and discussions had been held on possible ways to circulate the notifications. The LAIA members had indicated that they would need to consider these points, and had requested that the circulation of the notifications be suspended until further notice. He went on to say that he had recently been in touch with Uruguay, and it was his understanding that there were no updates as yet that the LAIA members could provide to the Committee. He indicated that he would maintain contact with Uruguay on this matter, and expressed his hope that the notifications could be circulated soon.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update.
(a) 	Generalized System of Preferences - Notification by the United States (WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.10)
&& The Chairman said that the notification by the United States concerning its GSP scheme had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.10. He invited the United States to introduce the notification.


&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was pleased to provide an update on the implementation of the United States' GSP programme. She recalled that the previous update had been submitted in February 2016. She went on to say that the present notification provided the most recent information on the operation of the GSP programme. The programme had firstly been extended, and was scheduled to expire on 31 December 2020. In addition, the document summarized the findings of the annual reviews of the programme conducted since 2016, and also described changes to the beneficiaries of the programme.
&& The representative of India said that the United States had terminated India's designation as a beneficiary developing country of the GSP scheme effective 5 June 2019. Paragraph 4 of Presidential Proclamation 9902 of 31 May 2019 stated that the United States had decided to terminate India's designation as a GSP beneficiary because India had not assured the United States that India would provide equitable and reasonable access to its markets. Furthermore, paragraph 9 of the same Presidential Proclamation stated the determination to remove India from the list of developing country WTO Members exempt from application of the safeguard measures on crystalline silicon photovoltaic (CSPV) products and large residential washers. She went on to say that the termination of India's designation as a GSP beneficiary was a clear violation of paragraph 5 of the Enabling Clause, which said that: "The developed countries do not expect reciprocity for commitments made by them in trade negotiations to reduce or remove tariffs and other barriers to the trade of developing countries, i.e., the developed countries do not expect the developing countries, in the course of trade negotiations, to make contributions which are inconsistent with their individual development, financial and trade needs. Developed contracting parties shall therefore not seek, neither shall less-developed contracting parties be required to make, concessions that are inconsistent with the latter’s development, financial and trade needs." She indicated that the reason given for the termination of India's designation as a GSP beneficiary was not consistent with the provisions of the Enabling Clause. The removal of India from the list of developing country WTO Members exempt from the application of the safeguard measures on CSPV products and large residential washers was not tenable either.


&& The representative of the Russian Federation said that his delegation wished to obtain some information for analytical purposes. In this regard, he asked what was the volume of trade covered under the GSP programme of the United States, and which were the top five beneficiaries.


&& The representative of the United States indicated that she presently did not have the information requested by the representative of the Russian Federation, but that she would provide it to him when she received it. In response to India's intervention, she said that the United States' GSP programme included eligibility criteria. In order for a country to benefit from the programme, it was necessary to continue to meet the eligibility criteria.


&& The Committee took note of the notification by the United States, and of all interventions. 
(II)	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements - Status 	Report on the Committee’s Work
(a)	Status of the preparation of factual presentations - Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/246)  


&& The Chairman said that his report on the status of the preparation of factual presentations had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/246. It contained 16 separate entries relating to the status of preparation of factual presentations. He noted that the factual presentation on the agreement between Ecuador and El Salvador would be circulated shortly. With regard to the ASEAN-Korea agreement, he informed Members that, after his report had been finalized, comments on the draft factual presentation had been received from Philippines. These were in addition to the comments received from the Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand and Viet Nam which were mentioned in his report. Comments were still awaited from other parties to the agreement. More generally, for several other agreements, the Secretariat was still awaiting the submission of the full set of data, or the comments on the draft factual presentations. He urged all the parties to these agreements to provide the data and information as soon as possible. He also indicated that he wished to explore the possibility of meeting informally with the relevant parties before the next formal CTD meeting, in order to discuss what could be done to help expedite the provision of the required data and information. Finally, he said that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following CRTA procedures, a factual presentation on PICTA would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. He urged the parties to PICTA to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications had been completed. 
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's report. 
(III)	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union - Communication from China, 	Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)



&& The Chairman said that the present sub-item concerned the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union notification. The subitem also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India, which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175. The sub-item was requested by China and India at the last meeting. 
&& The representative of India said that her intervention related to both the present sub-item, as well as to the next sub-item. She said that document WT/COMTD/W/175 raised systemic concerns relating to the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. These concerns also applied to some other RTAs. In this context, some Members had expressed the view that the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 were outside the scope of the CTD and needed to be discussed in the Negotiating Group on Rules. In India's view, the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider issues arising from RTAs with a dual notification. In doing so, the CTD could consult with other WTO bodies, as per paragraph 3 of its TORs. The non-resolution of the matters raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 was the main reason why the consideration of RTAs with a dual notification were pending for such a long time. Her delegation requested that both the present sub-item and the next sub-item be maintained on the CTD's agenda.


&& The representative of the European Union indicated that her intervention related to the present sub-item, as well as to the next sub-item. She said that, in the case of the GCC Customs Union, the agreement should be considered in the CRTA, or otherwise in both the CTD and the CRTA. She made reference in this regard to the consideration of the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR). She also said that, while developing countries could notify an RTA covering preferential tariffs on goods on the basis of the Enabling Clause rather than under GATT Article XXIV, such a choice did not exist for a customs union, which involved not only the reduction of duties, but also the modification of external tariffs. In addition, the Enabling Clause did not provide cover for preferential non-tariff barriers. She urged the GCC parties to fulfil their obligations and proceed with the mandated review of the agreement in a timely manner. Turning to the ASEAN-Korea and IndiaKorea agreements, she noted that no improvements had been recorded. She said that she wished to reiterate the importance of clarifying the legal and procedural questions arising from an agreement being notified by each party under different legal provisions. In that respect, she invited the parties to these agreements to make additional efforts to find an acceptable solution for all Members involved in this matter. She regretted that no progress was made concerning the review of the goods aspects of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement, whereas the services aspects had already been reviewed in the CRTA. 


&& The representative of China said that his intervention related to document WT/COMTD/W/175. His delegation believed that it was for the CTD to address the dual notification issue. In that respect, he requested that the present sub-item be maintained on the agenda for the next meeting.


&& The representative of the United States said that document WT/COMTD/W/175 – which was dated 30 September 2010 – should have long ago been removed from the CTD agenda. Her delegation also questioned why Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and other GCC parties continued to allow the Committee to use its time on matters specific to the GCC Customs Union. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
(IV)	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and 	Korea (Goods)
&& The Chairman said that the present sub-item concerned the notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea. The sub-item was requested by India at the last CTD meeting.


&& The representative of the European Union said that her intervention under the previous subitem also related to the present sub-item.


&& The representative of the United States expressed her delegation's disappointment that while India had requested the inclusion of the present sub-item on the agenda, India was not prepared to engage substantively on this issue in the CTD. She urged India to submit the required data, after nearly a decade, so that the Committee could move forward on this matter.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
	•	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements
(I)	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements – 	Status Report on the Committee's Work
(a) Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/247)  
&& The Chairman said that his report on the status of the preparation of factual presentations was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/247. In summarizing the information contained in the report, he informed the Committee that there were currently five PTAs that had been notified since the establishment of the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for PTAs for which the Secretariat had still not received the full set of data or information required for the preparation of the factual presentations. These were the PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation, Chinese Taipei and Thailand. He urged these Members to provide all the required data and information as soon as possible. He also indicated that he wished to explore the possibility of meeting informally with these Members before the next formal meeting, in order to discuss what could be done to help expedite the provision of the required data and information. He reminded Members implementing PTAs of their notification obligations with respect to changes in the implementation of the PTA. In particular, such changes – including any legal changes – needed to be notified to the CTD. Finally, with regard to the new notification concerning the Russian Federation's GSP scheme that he had referred to earlier, he indicated that it would be circulated as soon as possible using the template for the notification of PTAs under the PTA TM.


&& The representative of Russian Federation said that the GSP scheme of the Russian Federation fell under both paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause and the PTA TM. He welcomed the fact that the notification would be circulated shortly using the new symbols for notifications and subsequent documentation that the Committee had agreed to at its 108th Session. Turning to some details of the GSP scheme, he said that 153 countries were included as beneficiaries. He explained that the scheme that would be shortly notified was a new one, and was distinct from the previous GSP scheme that was notified in 2013. His delegation was considering how to proceed on this matter – in particular since no factual presentation was prepared on the previous scheme – and had been in contact with the Secretariat. He went on to say that, according to a recent report by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the Russian Federation was among the top eleven WTO Members in terms of fulfilment of notification requirements. During the last six months, his delegation had submitted a significant amount of information to the WTO's Integrated Database (IDB), which would help in the preparation of the factual presentation. He noted that there was no requirement for factual presentations to be prepared in the case of PTAs that were notified before the entry into force of the PTA TM, while PTAs notified after the entry into force of the Mechanism were subject to the preparation of factual presentations. Although he believed that this raised some questions, he nevertheless indicated his delegation's willingness to fulfil its obligations.


&& The representative of the United States encouraged the concerned Members to provide the full set of data and information that would allow the Secretariat to complete the drafting of the outstanding factual presentations. She noted from the Chairman's report that the Secretariat had been waiting for such information for between six to nine years, depending on the particular PTA. This lack of transparency only further contributed to the perception of a decreasing relevance of the WTO to some stakeholders. She once again urged the concerned Members to provide the required data as soon as possible.


&& The representative of the European Union welcomed the Chairman's report, which provided the state of play in the preparation of factual presentations. She wished to hear from the Members that had not yet submitted the required data and information as to why there were such significant delays. 
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's report, and of the interventions.
	•	REVIEW of STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES


&& The Chairman said that an item concerning DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered. He indicated that, before opening the floor, he wished to take the opportunity to touch on the issue of the Secretariat report on Members’ DFQF market access for LDCs, which was mandated by the Bali DFQF Decision to be prepared for the CTD’s annual DFQF review. As outlined by his predecessor in the Chair at the last CTD meeting, divergent views continued to exist among some Members on the scope and coverage of this report. For two years, it had not been possible for the Secretariat to circulate the report for the CTD’s annual DFQF review. The Committee’s 2019 annual review was scheduled to be held at the next meeting of the Regular Session, in November. He hoped that a Secretariat report could be prepared for the upcoming annual review. To that end, he intended to build on the efforts of his predecessors, in particular by reaching out informally to Members, with the purpose of exploring what possibilities might exist to unblock the situation with regard to the Secretariat report.


&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that DFQF market access remained essential to help LDCs better integrate into the MTS. He thanked the developed and developing Members that provided LDCs with DFQF market access, and called on other Members to provide such market access to LDCs. He also stressed the importance of technical assistance to make the best possible use of the preferences granted.
&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation for the efforts of the Chairman and his predecessors to try and find a solution that was acceptable to all Members. She indicated that her delegation wished to see the report issued, and could continue to accept the compromise that it had previously accepted. 


&& The representative of the European Union said that she wished to express her delegation's strong attachment to the commitment to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. She noted that, in 2018, while the European Union’s agricultural imports from LDCs had decreased by 5.5%, imports of industrial products had increased by 12.7% to reach USD 37 billion. This meant that the European Union's imports from LDCs had increased by 10.4% between 2017 and 2018 to reach a total of USD 42 billion. In addition, while the LDCs' share in global trade was about 0.95%, the corresponding figure for the European Union's imports from LDCs stood at 2.1%. She also noted that she was encouraged by the growing number of emerging economies that were providing preferential treatment to products from LDCs, in light of the growing importance of these economies as destinations for LDC exports.


&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
	•	WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman said that, in previous meetings, Members' attention had been drawn to the Decision taken at the Eleventh WTO Ministerial Conference (MC11) concerning the WTO's Work Programme on E-Commerce, which called for a continuation of the work under the Work Programme. He recalled that the CTD was one of the subsidiary bodies of the General Council mandated to undertake work under the Work Programme. Although there were no specific proposals from Members to consider in the CTD, it had been agreed at the last meeting that the item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.


&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, emphasized the need to pursue discussions under the Work Programme on E-Commerce – taking into account the economic, financial, and development needs of developing countries – and to report on progress in this regard, including any recommendations for action. He noted that, in line with this mandate, and given the specific challenges that LDCs faced in benefitting economically from e-commerce, it was vital to reinvigorate the Work Programme in order to take into account the LDCs' needs and realities.


&& The Committee took note of the interventions.
&& The Chairman proposed that the agenda item concerning the Work Programme on ECommerce be maintained on the agenda for the next meeting.
It was so agreed. 
	•	DATE OF THE NEXT MEETING
&& The Chairman said that the next meeting of the CTD Regular Session was tentatively scheduled to be held on Friday, 22 November 2019. An initial agenda would be circulated four weeks before the meeting, on 25 October 2019, as per the CTD's rules of procedure. After the circulation of this initial meeting notice, Members would still have the opportunity to request items on the agenda for the meeting. The agenda would close on 11 November 2019, and would be circulated on 12 November 2019.
	•	OTHER BUSINESS


&& The representative of the European Union said that she wished to inform the Committee of her delegation's initiative to strengthen the ability of regular WTO bodies to effectively address and resolve concerns with respect to trade-related measures adopted by Members. While an increasing number of Members were raising these concerns in WTO bodies, the issues often remained on meeting agendas for long periods of time, without substantial progress in discussions. This was why the European Union and several other Members were currently working to develop a proposal for a set of horizontal procedural guidelines that would apply to WTO Councils and Committees dealing with trade concerns. Examples of ideas contained in the proposal included a better preparation for meetings, more informal consultations between the Members raising and responding to trade concerns, better coordination between different WTO bodies which sometimes debated the same concerns, and the possibility for the Chairperson of the concerned WTO body to hold an informal meeting with the concerned Members in order to find a way forward. While the CTD dealt less with trade concerns than other WTO bodies, this information was nevertheless being shared at the present meeting, as it could be useful for the Committee. She went on to say that her delegation was in the process of consulting with other Members, and was willing to meet informally with interested delegations to explain the elements of the proposal in more detail. The intention was to present the proposal to the General Council in July 2019. 
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
