 
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 7 JULY 2014

Chairman: H.E. Mr. Pierre Claver Ndayiragije (Burundi)

 TOC \O "1-3" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC393462240" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC393462240 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC393462241" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC393462241 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462242" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc393462242 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462243" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc393462243 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC393462244" C.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC393462244 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462245" -	Implementation of the Technical Assistance and Training Plan: update by the Secretariat on the status of the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund	 PAGEREF _Toc393462245 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC393462246" D.	trade and development - work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (WT/MIN(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC393462246 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462247" (i)	Proposals by Members	 PAGEREF _Toc393462247 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462248" -	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc393462248 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462249" -	A proposal that the Committee on Trade and Development reports to the General Council on development work in the WTO in compliance with Ministers' request issued at MC8 - proposal from Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho and Mauritius (WT/COMTD/W/202)	 PAGEREF _Toc393462249 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462250" -	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: review of the application of S&D provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members - proposal from Ecuador (WT/COMTD/W/204)	 PAGEREF _Toc393462250 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462251" (ii)	Briefing by the Secretariat on the Post-2015 Development Agenda	 PAGEREF _Toc393462251 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC393462252" E.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC393462252 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462253" -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc393462253 \h 8
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462254" -	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc393462254 \h 10
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462255" -	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement  between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc393462255 \h 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC393462256" F.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC393462256 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC393462257" G.	review of the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC393462257 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc393462258" -	Statement by the Chairman	 PAGEREF _Toc393462258 \h 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC393462259" H.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to Least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC393462259 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC393462260" I.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC393462260 \H 12


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 91st Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/4322 circulated on 18 June 2014. He said that he wished to add a matter under "Other Business" concerning the implementation reports that were required under paragraph 15 of the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs).
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record. He informed the Committee, that further to OAPEC's requests in 2005 and again in 2012, the organization had submitted another request, dated 6 April 2014, for observer status in the CTD. He indicated that if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed. 
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	Implementation of the Technical Assistance and Training Plan: update by the Secretariat on the status of the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund
&& The Chairman invited the Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) to provide Members with an update on the implementation of the Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan) and the status of the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF). 
&& The Director of the ITTC began by providing an overview of the implementation of technical assistance (TA) activities in 2013. She said in this regard that the WTO had been able to maintain the implementation of activities at the same level as 2012. Close to 14,000 participants were trained in 2013, which was an increase of 9% relative to 2012. A total of 45% of the participants were women. She also noted that sufficient funds had been available to implement activities in 2013. Even though the funds due for 2013 had been received in the last quarter of the year, there had been a significant carryover from 2012 of CHF 12.4 million. She informed the Committee that the annual report on TA activities undertaken in 2013 would be presented to Members at the next CTD meeting. 
Moving on to the status of the DDAGTF, she said that the WTO had multi-year agreements with a number of donors - Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, the Netherlands and Norway - which helped to ensure predictability in the financing of TA activities. There was a balance of CHF 18 million in the DDAGTF at the start of 2014. As of the end of May, the balance was estimated to be CHF 11.8 million, after taking into account expenditures, commitments and pending activities. Based on the present implementation rate and taking into account the anticipated activities in the coming months, it was expected that approximately CHF 10 million would be spent in 2014, representing an increase of 20% relative to 2012. In the absence of additional contributions, this would leave a balance of approximately CHF 7 million to be carried forward to 2015. This amount would be sufficient to implement activities in the first half of 2015, but contributions would be required in the second half of the year to ensure the full implementation of the planned activities for 2015 that were reflected in the current biennial TA Plan. She said that similar information had been provided to Members at the recent meeting of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration.
Noting that some Members had inquired about the substantial carryover of funds at the end of 2013, she indicated that a few observations would help to explain the situation. She said firstly that, in 2013, nearly 70% of contributions had arrived in the fourth quarter. Combined with the fact that some activities normally foreseen in the last months of the year could not take place at the end of 2013 in light of the Ninth Ministerial Conference (MC9) held in December, the result was a substantial carry-over. She also pointed to a number of examples of measures that had been put in place to allow the WTO to provide TA services at a lower cost. One example was the E‑Learning strategy, which had reduced the number of face‑to‑face activities. Other examples included the greater emphasis being placed on leveraging partnerships to ensure that implementing partners contributed resources, and the introduction of the Progressive Learning Strategy (PLS) to promote better targeting of course content and therefore more efficient programming. Certain programmes and activities had been reviewed and redesigned, and the implementation of results‑based management (RBM) as a management tool had also started to contribute to resource efficiency. In closing, she suggested that it could be relevant going forward to review the way budget estimates were prepared for the next biennial TA Plan so as to reduce the gap between estimates and actual costs. 
&& The Representative of Bangladesh expressed appreciation for the WTO's TA activities and the efforts to achieve a gender balance. He noted, however, that the TA provided by the WTO was still not sufficient for the needs of least-developed countries (LDCs). An inclusive process was required that would allow representatives from LDCs to participate in all the activities. He suggested that measures be put in place to increase the scope of participation of officials from LDCs.
&& The Representative of Nigeria recalled that the DDAGTF had been established to receive extra-budgetary contributions from Members for the implementation of TA activities. He noted that more funds would be required in the second half of 2015 in order ensure that all planned activities were implemented, and called on donors to make the necessary contributions. He also noted that a new WTO facility for trade facilitation would be established shortly and in this regard expressed hope that the new facility would not affect contributions to the DDAGTF.
&& The Representative of Uganda, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed appreciation for the WTO's TA activities. He noted that, in the Marrakesh Agreement, Ministers had paid special attention to the situation of LDCs and had recognized the need for the provision of TA and capacity building.  It was on this basis that Ministers had agreed in paragraph 38 of the Doha Declaration to create a framework for TA and capacity building within the WTO so as to improve the participation of the LDCs in the multilateral trading system. The LDCs were pleased to note that, since the launch of the Doha Round, the WTO's TA had grown substantially. He referred to the biennial TA Plan, as well as to the Enhanced Integrated Framework, the Standards and Trade Development Facility and the WTO Reference Centres. While acknowledging the priority given to LDCs in the delivery of TA, he emphasized that assistance needed to be provided to LDCs on a sustainable basis so as to have a lasting impact. The LDCs hoped that the WTO would continue to be flexible in the application of the PLS so as to facilitate the participation of officials from LDCs in various training programmes. He also requested that LDCs be considered as venues for Regional Trade Policy Courses (RTPCs), since this would foster long-term institutional capacity and knowledge in the host countries. 
He went on to say that the WTO's internship programmes had proved particularly useful for LDCs. In this light, the LDCs wished to request that the internship programmes fund at least one official from each LDC Member every year. Turning to national TA activities, he noted that the LDCs' utilization rate remained low. This was due to various reasons, including the costs related to the organization of such events. He urged donors to give positive consideration to this problem and earmark funds so as to allow more national activities to be held in LDCs. He also asked the Secretariat to take note of this request. Finally, he stressed the importance of the Advanced Course for LDCs. He indicated that the LDCs wanted at least one such course to be held each year, as they would continue to require specialized training in evolving areas of the WTO's work.
&& The Representative of Nepal associated his delegation with the intervention by Uganda. He stressed the importance of the WTO's TA activities for developing countries, and particularly LDCs. The LDCs saw the biennial TA Plan as a key document allowing the implementation of TA activities in a transparent and predicable manner. He noted that the successful implementation of all planned activities depended on the availability of sufficient funds. In this light, he called on donors to provide timely funding for the WTO's TA activities.    
&& The Representative of Barbados commended the ITTC for its consultative approach in developing the TA Plan, and for its efforts to ensure value for money without sacrificing the quality of delivery. She noted with satisfaction the efforts that had been made to enhance the e-learning environment and the PLS. Appreciation was expressed for the recent RTPC that had been held for the Caribbean region, and for the opening of some activities for Geneva-based delegates. She also requested that, while continuing with the value-for-money approach, consideration be given to maintain programmes that were of critical importance to small states. In closing, she expressed hope that flexibility would continue to be built in to the WTO's TA programmes so as to address any identified needs.
&& The Representative of Egypt sought clarification from the ITTC as to whether all contributions to the DDAGTF were from extra-budgetary sources.
&& The Director of the ITTC said that the WTO's TA activities were funded from both the regular budget and from the extra-budgetary contributions to the DDAGTF. The contributions to the DDAGTF came not only from traditional donors, but also from some beneficiaries of TA. More than 60% of the WTO's TA activities were funded from the DDAGTF. She indicated that the ITTC would continue to hold informal consultative meetings and that there would continue to be some flexibility in the implementation of TA activities.  
&& The Committee took note of the update provided by the Secretariat and of all interventions.
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. On the agenda for the present meeting were two submissions containing proposals for work under the MC8 mandate that had been previously discussed by the Committee. One submission - by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group - was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. Another submission - by Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho and Mauritius - was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/202. In addition there was a new proposal by Ecuador, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204. The three submissions were listed under the first sub-item. After the Committee concluded its discussion under the first sub-item, it would turn to the second sub-item, which concerned a briefing by the Secretariat on the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
(i)	Proposals by Members
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
-	A proposal that the Committee on Trade and Development reports to the General Council on development work in the WTO in compliance with Ministers' request issued at MC8 - proposal from Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho and Mauritius (WT/COMTD/W/202)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the 87th Session, the Committee had agreed to one of the proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192. The proposal was for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its document on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. The updated Secretariat paper was circulated in June 2013 in document WT/COMTD/W/196 and had appeared on the CTD's agenda for a number of meetings. With regard to the remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202, he said that he had recently held informal consultations with some Members to explore what progress could be made. He believed that the discussions in the informal consultations had been constructive. It was his understanding that the proponents of the two submissions intended to explore whether they could possibly combine their ideas for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO, so as to come up with a single proposal on this matter. With regard to the other remaining proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192, which was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly, he said that he had encouraged the proponents of this proposal to continue their consultations with Members. He invited the proponents to brief the Committee on the status of the remaining proposals in the two submissions.
&& The Representative of Lesotho noted the similarities in the two proposals for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO and indicated that consultations were currently taking place among Members on these proposals. He hoped to be able to report back to the CTD shortly on the outcome of the consultations, after he had discussed the matter with the African Group.   
&& The Committee took note of the interventions.
-	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: review of the application of S&D provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members - proposal from Ecuador (WT/COMTD/W/204)
&& The Chairman invited Ecuador to introduce its proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204.
&& The Representative of Ecuador said that the proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/204 had initially been made during his delegation's intervention at the 90th Session. The proposal had subsequently been circulated as a CTD document in response to requests from Members. The rationale for the proposal was similar to that of an earlier proposal submitted by Ecuador in June 2012 in document WT/COMTD/W/188. The difference was that, in the new proposal, the Secretariat was being asked to regularly update - at least once a year - its document on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. He said that S&D was one of the pillars of the multilateral trading system, and had been crucial in ensuring balanced negotiations in the Uruguay Round. Furthermore, the CTD had a mandate to review S&D provisions, as laid out in paragraph 3 of its terms of reference. He believed that it was important for Members to have up-to-date information on how S&D was being made operational in the WTO. The proposed exercise was particularly important for developing countries, as it would provide information in a holistic manner on trends and developments in the implementation of the various S&D provisions.
He went on to say that the proposal did not overlap with the Monitoring Mechanism (MM) on S&D, which had been established at MC9 by a Ministerial Decision contained in documents WT/MIN(13)/45 and WT/L/920. According to paragraph 4 of this Decision, the MM would review all aspects of implementation of S&D provisions with a view to facilitating the integration of developing and least-developed Members into the multilateral trading system. The purpose of the MM was to identify problems relating to the application or substance of specific provisions that posed structural or implementation problems. Its work would be carried out mainly on the basis of written inputs or submissions by Members. On the other hand, the Secretariat document referred to in Ecuador's proposal was intended to provide Members with a general overview of the application of S&D. In addition to providing information on the implementation of S&D provisions, the document could serve as a basis for Members' written inputs or submissions under the MM.
&& The Representative of Egypt expressed support for the proposal. He said that the Secretariat paper on the implementation of S&D provisions was a useful guide for Members. Regular updates would add value to the CTD's work.
&& The Representative of the European Union appreciated the usefulness of the Secretariat document on the implementation of S&D provisions, and the need for the paper to be updated periodically. However, she wondered whether there would be sufficient developments to warrant annual updates to the document. She also observed in this connection that there had not been much discussion on the most recent update, which had been prepared in 2013. Noting that the Secretariat document was detailed and technical in nature, she inquired how Ecuador envisaged the document serving as the basis for a general discussion. Finally, she noted that the proposal called for the Secretariat document to include an objective and analytical listing of S&D provisions, identifying the measures that had been taken and put forward to operationalize them. In this light, she asked whether Ecuador was satisfied with the way in which information on the implementation of S&D provisions was provided in the current version of the Secretariat paper.  
&& The Representative of the United States, referring to the proposed frequency of the updates to the Secretariat document, questioned whether developments warranting an update could be reasonably expected on a yearly basis. He also asked for further clarification as to how the new proposal by Ecuador differed from the proposal that had been made in 2012. He additionally observed that there appeared to be similarities between the work of the MM and the work proposed by Ecuador, in particular since the MM was mandated to review all aspects of implementation of S&D provisions.
&& The Representative of Cuba expressed his delegation's support for the proposal.
&& The Representative of Barbados sought confirmation that, in 2013, the Committee had agreed to the proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its document on the implementation of S&D provisions.
&& The Chairman indicated that the last update to the Secretariat document had been prepared in 2013. He invited Ecuador to respond to the other questions that had been raised by delegations.  
&& The Representative of Ecuador said that paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference mandated the Committee to periodically review the application of S&D provisions. Although a specific timeframe for reviews was not mentioned, Ecuador did not want to see several years go by before another update to the Secretariat document was prepared. His delegation wanted discussions on the basis of updated Secretariat documents to take place regularly. He referred delegations to Ecuador's introductory intervention for further information, and also indicated that more detailed responses would be provided after he had consulted with his capital.
&& The Chairman noted that more detailed responses would be provided by Ecuador in due course. He encouraged delegations to consult informally with each other on the proposal. Discussions would also continue at the next CTD meeting.      
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
(ii)	Briefing by the Secretariat on the Post-2015 Development Agenda
&& The Chairman said that it was important for the CTD to be informed of the discussions on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, which were taking place at the UN. He believed that a briefing by the Secretariat could throw up some ideas which would help in identifying further possible areas of work for the CTD under the MC8 mandate. He invited Secretariat representatives from the Development Division and the Trade and Environment Division to brief Members on the Post-2015 Development Agenda. 
In his presentation, the representative of the Development Division gave some background to the Post-2015 Development Agenda. He said that the UN's Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) Summit in 2010 had launched a discussion on what action needed to be taken by the international community to build on the MDGs. Follow-up work took place at the Rio+20 Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012, which subsequently led to the creation of an Open Working Group (OWG) on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Also in 2012, the UN Secretary-General established a Task Team on the Post-2015 Development Agenda, which was led by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs and included more than 50 UN agencies. The International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the WTO were invited to participate. In a report issued in May 2013, a High-level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda had provided recommendations to the Secretary-General. Subsequently, at the 2013 General Assembly, a High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development was established to monitor the transition from the MDGs to the SDGs. National, regional and global thematic consultations had since been held, led by the UN Development Group. He gave examples of several UN processes and outcomes that would feed into the 2015 General Assembly, where the SDGs would be launched. These included the outcomes of the Fourth UN Conference on LDCs, the Third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, the Second UN Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, and the Third International Conference on Financing for Development.
The presentation by the representative of the Trade and Environment Division provided information on the process to develop the SDGs, and on the trade components of the SDGs. She recalled that, at the Rio+20 Conference, the importance and utility of a set of SDGs had been recognized. Some functions and criteria of the SDGs had also been laid out. She identified two phases in the development of the SDGs after the Rio+20 Conference. The first phase, which started with the establishment of the OWG in January 2013 and which was completed in February 2014, was concerned with a stock-taking exercise. The second phase focused on the preparation of a report. With regard to the report, she said that a revision to the "zero draft" had been circulated on 30 June 2014. The revision contained 17 proposed goals and 150 targets. The draft trade text could be found under proposed goal 17, which related to strengthening the means of implementation and the global partnership for sustainable development. There were three targets under this proposed goal. The first target was to promote a universal, rules-based, open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system. The second target was concerned with improving market access for the exports of developing countries, while the third called for the timely implementation of duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access on a lasting basis for all LDCs. She added that some trade-related targets could be found under other proposed goals as well. In concluding, she informed Members that the intention was for the report to be finalized and submitted to the General Assembly by September.
&& The Representative of Argentina indicated his delegation's interest in studying in more detail the Secretariat presentation. Clarification was sought by the representatives of South Africa and Uganda as to the role of the WTO in the process that had been outlined.    
&& The Representative of the Development Division said that the UN had invited the WTO to participate in the SDGs process from the outset. The role of the WTO was to help show how trade could contribute to achieving the SDGs. However, it was ultimately for the UN member states to determine how they wished to frame the SDGs. He indicated that delegations that wished to know more about the process could contact the Secretariat.  
&& The Committee took note of the briefing by the Secretariat and of all interventions.   
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs. With regard to the Agreement between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and India, he informed the Committee that the Secretariat had sent the draft factual presentation to the parties. Comments had been received from India, but the Secretariat was still waiting to receive comments from ASEAN. The draft factual presentation on the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the East African Community had also been sent to the parties, and the Secretariat was still waiting to receive comments.   
For a number of other RTAs - namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, India and Bhutan, and Cuba and El Salvador - the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties. He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible. He went on to say that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update.
Turning to the three listed sub-items under the present agenda item, the Chairman said that the sub-items had been appearing on the CTD's agenda for several years, and divergent views had been expressed on the way forward. He informed the Committee that he had held some informal consultations with a number of delegations, including on an individual basis, on the issues surrounding the three listed sub-items. While these consultations had helped him to better understand Members' positions, it was clear that further discussions - particularly among the concerned delegations - would be necessary before a solution could be found. In this light, he encouraged delegations to reach out to each other and discuss the matter with a view to finding a solution. He also indicated that he would continue his informal consultations with Members. 
&& -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The Representative of the United States indicated that his delegation's view on this matter was well-known. The present sub-item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made, and needed to be removed from the agenda.
He said that there was a divergence of views as to whether the GCC Customs Union was a case of a dual notification. His delegation believed that the GCC Customs Union issue was not an issue of dual notification, and was therefore different from the discussion relating to the ASEAN‑Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement. The US remained of the view that the GCC Customs Union had been incorrectly notified under the Enabling Clause. This was subsequently corrected, and the understanding of his delegation was that the GCC Customs Union was in the pipeline to be considered in the CRTA in line with the procedures of the RTAs TM. The US considered this issue closed and continued to request that the present sub‑item be removed from the CTD's agenda, as it had served its purpose. Turning to document WT/COMTD/W/175, he said that his delegation had not seen any specific issues relating to the GCC Customs Union. Rather, the paper appeared to be seeking a systemic discussion on RTAs, which was a discussion that was outside the scope of the CTD and belonged in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR). He indicated that the US was not open to a CTD process to discuss systemic issues concerning RTAs. The question of when the NGR would meet to discuss RTA issues was separate and distinct from the question of whether it had jurisdiction on this matter, which the US believed it did. He also indicated that the first three sub‑items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and these sub-items were distinct from the systemic discussion that some delegations wanted to have. The US did not believe that the CTD was the appropriate forum for a discussion on a systemic issue that cut across Committees.
&& The Representative of Egypt believed that Members could only deal with the matter by beginning a discussion on the systemic concerns that had been raised by China, Egypt and India, or otherwise by considering the GCC Customs Union in the CTD. The present sub-item, as well as the second and third sub-items under this agenda item, needed to be maintained on the CTD's agenda until a solution was found.
&& The Representative of the United States said that any discussion on systemic concerns would affect not only the CTD, but also the CRTA. In this light, the view of his delegation was that the NGR was the proper venue for a discussion of systemic issues. He also reiterated his delegation's view that the GCC Customs Union had been incorrectly notified under the Enabling Clause. This was subsequently corrected, and the understanding of his delegation was that the GCC Customs Union was in the pipeline to be considered in the CRTA in line with the procedures of the RTAs TM.  
&& The Representative of India indicated that his intervention related to the first three sub‑items under the present agenda item. He stressed the importance of addressing the systemic and specific issues arising from the three RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV, and in this regard pointed to the initiative taken by China, Egypt and India in their communication circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175. He went on to say that his delegation had noted a concerted effort to dilute and undermine the Enabling Clause - not only in deliberations in the CTD, but also in the CRTA, the NGR and other WTO bodies. Such efforts to chip away at the Enabling Clause were not new. In the context of RTA notifications, it dated back to 2002, when India and Sri Lanka had notified their bilateral free trade agreement under the Enabling Clause. During the consideration process in the CTD, a developed country Member had questioned whether the notification was to be made to the CTD or the CRTA, even though both India and Sri Lanka were developing countries and had a prerogative to notify their RTA under the Enabling Clause. He expressed his delegation's concern that a similar position was once again being taken by some Members, which questioned the notification of the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause and stated that it had been incorrectly notified. He also stressed the urgency of addressing the issues relating to the three "dually notified" RTAs as soon as possible. In closing, he expressed support for the intervention by Egypt, and requested that the three sub‑items under the present agenda item be retained on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.    
&& The Representative of China expressed support for the interventions by Egypt and India. He encouraged the Chairman to conduct further informal consultations.
&& The Representative of the European Union said her delegation wished to see the removal from the CTD's agenda of the three sub-items reflected under this agenda item, as they had served the purpose of informing Members of notifications made. She agreed that there was a need to clarify the issues surrounding the three RTAs notified simultaneously under the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV and to find a solution. However, the view of her delegation was that the proper forum for a discussion on systemic issues was the NGR. Furthermore, her delegation perceived a difference between the issues surrounding the GCC Customs Union, and those relating to the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement. That being said, the EU wished to find a pragmatic solution that would allow the three sub-items to be removed from the CTD's agenda. Her delegation was therefore willing to engage in bilateral consultations with other delegations, as well as in any consultations called by the Chairman.
&& The Representative of Egypt noted that the US representative had mentioned several times that the GCC Customs Union was in the pipeline to be considered in the CRTA. This was of great concern to his delegation. He did not see how the CRTA could consider the GCC Customs Union when questions were still being raised by some Members in the CTD. While he wished to have clarification, he indicated that he was not seeking clarification from any specific delegation, or from the Secretariat. Rather, he was bringing this matter to the attention of the Chairman. He went on to say that the Enabling Clause did not make any specifications concerning the level of trade liberalization and cautioned against interpretations that undermined the rights of developing countries in the WTO.
&& The Representative of the United States said that he wished to clarify the US' understanding that the GCC Customs Union had been correctly notified under GATT Article XXIV. This would set in motion the process for a consideration in the CRTA. He also reiterated the US' view that the GCC Customs Union was not a case of dual notification and expressed his disagreement with the observation made in India's intervention that some Members were trying to dilute and undermine the Enabling Clause. He explained that, while the US had no quarrel with any developing country notifying a qualifying agreement under the Enabling Clause, not all RTAs qualified under the Enabling Clause. To maintain otherwise would make a mockery of the Enabling Clause and basic statutory interpretation.
&& The Chairman reiterated his intention to continue his informal consultations with Members on this matter. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement 	between India and Korea (Goods)
&& The Chairman said that the second sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement. The third sub-item concerned the notification of the India-Korea Agreement.
&& The Representative of Korea said that his country had consistently notified its RTAs under GATT Article XXIV. He observed that all RTAs, even RTAs between developing countries, could be notified under this provision. Korea's RTAs were comprehensive agreements, which were more appropriately notified under GATT Article XXIV. While noting that some delegations had raised concerns with "dually notified" RTAs, he called for a solution to be found as soon as possible. He indicated Korea's willingness to work with Members in this regard.
&& The Representative of the United States said that his delegation continued to have concerns with the sub-items addressing the ASEAN-Korea and the India-Korea Agreements being listed on the CTD's agenda. These sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. The issue of dual notifications was directly linked to the functioning of the RTAs TM and went beyond just the CTD.
  && The Committee took note of all interventions.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on PTAs. He firstly informed the Committee that Chile had notified its DFQF scheme for LDCs on 10 April 2014 in document WT/COMTD/N/44. Chile had also subsequently circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/44/Add.1 the Certificate of Origin concerning the DFQF scheme. The Secretariat was currently in touch with Chile with regard to the information it required for the preparation of the factual presentation on the scheme. He went on to say that, with regard to four other PTAs that had been notified since the establishment of the TM for PTAs - PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation and Chinese Taipei - there had been no significant developments since his last update.  In particular, the full set of data required for the preparation of the factual presentations of the four PTAs had not yet been provided to the Secretariat. He urged the notifying Members to provide the data as soon as possible.
The Committee took note of the Chairman's update. 
REVIEW OF THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& -	Statement by the Chairman
&& The Chairman said that the TM for PTAs was being implemented by the CTD, as per the provisions contained in document WT/L/806, which was the General Council Decision of 14 December 2010 which established the Mechanism. He recalled that, at the 90th Session, he had brought to Members' attention paragraph 26 of the TM for PTAs, which indicated that the Mechanism would apply on a provisional basis until Members approved its permanent application. The paragraph also indicated that Members would review the Mechanism after three years and if necessary modify the Mechanism in light of the experience gained from its provisional operation. He went on to say that three years had elapsed since the General Council Decision which established the PTAs TM. Members would, therefore, need to consider the question of the review of the Mechanism. Whether enough experience had been gained yet to conduct a review would also be for Members to determine. He informed the Committee that he intended to hold informal consultations to hear views concerning the timing and the nature of a review of the PTAs TM.    
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's statement. 
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  
&& The Representative of the United States said that the US was carefully considering how to be responsive to the Ministerial Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs that was taken at MC9. He noted that the Decision had only recently been taken, and in this light indicated that efforts by the US would take some time. 
&& The Representative of Uganda, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed appreciation to Chile for its recently notified DFQF scheme. The understanding of the LDCs was that the scheme was comprehensive and covered more than 97% of tariff lines. The LDCs commended those Members that had already attained the 97% mark and encouraged others to do so as well. It was important for preference-granting countries to fulfill the notification requirements and make available the utilization rates in their DFQF schemes. The LDCs had taken note of the notifications made by various developed and developing countries and encouraged Members to provide DFQF market access for all products originating from LDCs in a manner that ensured stability, security and predictability. It was essential that developed countries ensured that products of commercial interest to LDCs were effectively included in their schemes. He also noted that Chile had circulated a communication on the rules of origin requirements and expressed hope that the requirements would be simple in order to facilitate LDCs' exports. He stressed the importance of rules of origin in DFQF schemes and called on Members to make their rules of origin transparent, simple and objective, in line with the guidelines agreed to by Ministers at MC9.
&& The Representative of Chile said that Chile's DFQF scheme, notified in document WT/COMTD/N/44, applied to all LDCs designated as such by the UN. Under the scheme, the customs duties on imports of all goods originating from LDCs - excluding imports of wheat, wheat flour and sugar - were set to zero. He highlighted his delegation's support for the development dimension of the multilateral trading system and noted that Chile's scheme responded to the Ministerial Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs that was taken at MC9. He informed the Committee that the Certificate of Origin relating to the DFQF scheme - circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/44/Add.1 - needed to be certified by the competent authority in the beneficiary country. In this regard, he invited LDCs to submit information on their certifying authorities as soon as possible, so as to be able to benefit from preferential treatment under the scheme.
&& The Representative of Bangladesh called on Members to implement the Decision contained in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration. He expressed appreciation for Chile's notification of its DFQF scheme and stressed the importance of notifications at the tariff line level.     
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to raise a matter under "Other Business" concerning the implementation reports that were required under paragraph 15 of the TM for RTAs. He informed the Committee that, according to this paragraph, at the end of the implementation period of an RTA, the parties were to submit to the WTO a short, written report on the realization of the liberalization commitments in the RTA as originally notified. He understood that a discussion on the issue of implementation reports had been taking place in the CRTA, and a list had been circulated in document WT/REG/W/82 of RTAs notified under GATT Article XXIV and GATS Article V that were subject to implementation reports. 
From a practical point of view, he believed that it was in Members' interests to continue to maintain similar procedures between the CRTA and the CTD when it came to implementing the TM for RTAs. In this light, he said that he had requested the Secretariat to prepare an updated list of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were subject to implementation reports. He invited Members to consult the list, which would be circulated as a CTD document, and inform the Secretariat of any inaccuracies. He also called on Members to submit the required implementation reports. For some possible guidance on format, he referred Members to document JOB/REG/5 - which contained a mock report on the EU-Chile Agreement that would shortly be circulated in the CRTA as a formal report - as well as documents JOB/REG/1 and JOB/REG/4 that had been circulated by the Secretariat. He noted, however, that since the purpose of the implementation reports was to increase transparency on each Agreement's implementation, form was less important than substance. Therefore, as would be the case in the CRTA, he called on Members to submit the reports to the CTD in the format that they saw fit.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________


 The discussion concerning documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202 is presented together in this Note, since the Chairman's intervention and the subsequent intervention by Lesotho related to both submissions.  
 The points in this paragraph, made by the US at the 90th Session, are reflected in the minutes of this meeting at the request of the US delegation.
 The discussion under the second and third sub-items is presented together in this Note, as the interventions made by delegations applied to both sub-items. Although the intervention by Korea was delivered during the discussion under the first sub-item, the delegation of Korea subsequently indicated that the intervention referred to the second and third sub-items and therefore requested that it be reflected accordingly in the minutes of the meeting.    









WT/COMTD/M/91

-  PAGE 1 -


WT/COMTD/M/91

-  PAGE 2 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/91

21 July 2014
(14-4213)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/ NUMPAGES  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 12
Committee on Trade and Development
Ninety-First Session
 




