WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/70
15 September 2008


(08-4256)


Committee on Trade and Development
Seventieth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 15 JULY 2008

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724315" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC208724315 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724316" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC208724316 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc208724317" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc208724317 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc208724318" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc208724318 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724319" C.	report of the 41st session of the joint advisory group on the international trade centre unctad/wto (itc/ag(xli)/216)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724319 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724320" D.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC208724320 \H 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724321" -	communication from brazil on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724321 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724322" -	communication from china on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724322 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724323" -	communication from india on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724323 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724324" -	communication from pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724324 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724325" -	communication from the european communities – responses to questions submitted by brazil, china, india and pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724325 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724326" -	communication from the united states on the notification by china of the amendment to the first agreement on trade negotiations among developing member countries of the economic and social commission for asia and the pacific (bangkok agreement) (wt/comtd/62/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724326 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724327" -	communication from china – responses to the questions posed by the united states on the asia-pacific trade agreement (apta) (wt/comtd/62/add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724327 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724328" -	agreement on trade, commerce and transit between india and bhutan – notification by india (wt/comtd/n/28)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724328 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724329" -	communication from brazil on the generalized system of preferences scheme of norway (wt/comtd/65)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724329 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724330" E.	declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries	 PAGEREF _TOC208724330 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724331" F.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (wt/l/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC208724331 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724332" G.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC208724332 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724333" H.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC208724333 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc208724334" (i)	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/165)	 PAGEREF _Toc208724334 \h 10
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc208724335" (ii)	Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/166)	 PAGEREF _Toc208724335 \h 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC208724336" I.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC208724336 \H 12


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 70th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3210/Rev.1 issued on 9 July 2008.  He also drew Members' attention to a corrigendum contained in document WTO/AIR/3210/Rev.1/Corr.1.  He recalled that Members had agreed at the last meeting to revert to the matter raised by the European Communities (EC) concerning the change in the notification status of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union from Article XXIV of GATT 1994 to the Enabling Clause.  He proposed that this matter be considered at the present meeting under "Other Business".  He said that he also wished to add a matter under "Other Business" concerning the Work Programme on Small Economies, in particular to assess the status of this work programme and to seek the guidance of Members as to when the CTD could meet in Dedicated Session to consider issues relating to small economies.
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
REPORT OF THE 41ST SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XLI)/216)
&& The Chairman invited Ms. Eva Murray, Director of the Division of Programme Support in the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), to present the report of the 41st Session of the Joint Advisory Group (JAG).
&& The ITC representative said that the JAG had held its 41st Session from 4 to 5 December 2007.  The report of the meeting was contained in document ITC/AG(XLI)/216.  She had the pleasure of submitting the report to the CTD on behalf of the Chair of the JAG, Ambassador Malloum Bamanga Abbas of Chad. 
She said that the JAG had been convened to discuss the ITC's Consolidated Programme Document (CPD) for 2008 and 2009, and to consider options for a new ITC governance structure.  The meeting had also provided the opportunity for government  representatives to announce their trust fund contributions to the ITC for 2008 and 2009.  In their opening statements, the Director-General of the WTO and the Secretary General of UNCTAD had expressed their full support to the ITC.  They had, in particular, supported the efforts of the ITC's Executive Director to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the organization through the reform process that was being implemented.  The CPD was seen as a step in the right direction, illustrating how the ITC could respond to its clients' needs.  
She continued by saying that the ITC's Executive Director had informed the JAG that the organization had consulted widely with its stakeholders in Geneva and in partner countries in the course of 2007.  Results of a client survey had shown that the ITC was considered efficient in serving its clients, but needed to engage more with them to be able to provide tailored solutions.  This required the organization to build common values among staff at all levels, strengthen key management functions and have a more results-based approach to its work.  The ITC's new vision had been defined as "Export Impact for Good".  The organization's focus would continue to be on LDCs and Sub-Saharan Africa, particularly land-locked countries, small island states and post-conflict countries.  Five new business lines had been defined.  The ITC was also working very closely with UNCTAD and the WTO in joint programmes such as the Integrated Framework, the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme (JITAP) and Aid for Trade, and was closely following the One UN initiative.    
On the change management process, the ITC's Executive Director had informed the JAG that the organization was developing a competency-based performance appraisal system for staff.  In addition, a new organizational structure was about to be put into place.  A four-year strategic plan would also be developed, and results-based management would become an integral part of strategic planning and project management processes.  The Group was also given an overview of the ITC's actual and projected funding, including a presentation on the evolution of the organization's resources from the 2000 to 2001 biennium to the 2008 to 2009 biennium.  
She said that the JAG had generally complimented the ITC on the quality of the CPD, but had also agreed that further refinement was required in some areas.  The JAG had also stressed the demand-driven nature of the ITC, and had called upon it to focus on its comparative advantage while at the same time seeking greater coherence with partners and avoiding duplication.  The ITC was identified as an important vehicle for Aid for Trade.  She added that detailed comments were made on the organization's regional strategies.   
On governance issues, she said that a recent external evaluation of the ITC had recommended a review of the organization's governance structure.  In this regard, the ITC had facilitated discussions on alternative arrangements, including through the preparation and circulation of background and position papers.  Following some discussion, the JAG had agreed that its annual meeting would take place in December of each year, with shorter sessions.  The ITC's financial reporting year would be aligned to the regular budget cycle, from 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2009.  A new ITC Trust Fund would be established as of 1 January 2008, and discussions amongst interested parties would be convened in early 2008 on a possible new Consultative Board. 
Finally, she mentioned that government representatives had announced voluntary contributions to the ITC.  In this regard, she thanked Canada, China, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie,  Sweden and  Switzerland for their financial support to the organization.    
&& The representative of the European Communities expressed his support for the work of the ITC. 
&& The representative of Canada observed that the ITC had recently been going through a complex change management process.  He noted with appreciation that these changes were beginning to yield results.  
&& The Committee took note of the report of the 41st Session of the JAG and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide the Committee with a brief update on some matters concerning recent notifications of regional trade agreements (RTAs) under the Enabling Clause, and their consideration in the CTD.  He firstly informed Members that since the last CTD meeting, a new notification of an RTA under the Enabling Clause had been circulated.  The notification related to the Pakistan-Sri Lanka Agreement, and had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/27.  It was envisaged that the agreement would be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD in June 2009. 
He also recalled that he had mentioned at the last CTD meeting that the Egypt-Turkey Agreement and the GCC Customs Union were scheduled to be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD in October 2008.  As a follow-up, he informed Members that the factual presentation on the Egypt-Turkey Agreement had been drafted by the Secretariat.  Preliminary comments had been received from the Parties, and some remaining questions were currently being resolved.  The Secretariat hoped to circulate the factual presentation on this agreement to Members shortly.  Turning to the GCC Customs Union, he said that the factual presentation concerning this agreement had not yet been prepared, because the Secretariat had not as yet been provided with the required data needed to complete the factual presentation.  He urged the members of the GCC to provide the necessary information to the Secretariat as soon as possible to make sure that consideration of this RTA remained on schedule and was completed within the one-year period required under the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.
Also on the matter of the GCC Customs Union, he informed Members that he had written a letter to the Saudi Arabian Ambassador after the last CTD meeting, laying out a number of points relating to the consideration of this agreement in the CTD.  He had requested that the Parties to the GCC Customs Union provide the Secretariat with the data necessary to prepare the factual presentation.  In his letter, he had also referred to the notification concerning the Pan-Arab Free Trade Area Agreement – which, as he had informed Members at the last meeting, had still not been circulated due to some missing information – and had requested that the Parties to this agreement provide the necessary information to the Secretariat which would allow the notification to be circulated.  He said that he would continue to remain in contact with the Saudi Arabian Ambassador on these issues, and would keep the Committee informed as necessary.
-	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.3)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4, respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would continue his informal consultations on this matter and would report back to the Committee.  In this regard, he said that his consultations indicated that more time would be required before this item could be taken off the CTD's agenda.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor. 
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the EC's responses to a second set of questions posed by Pakistan in November 2006 had only been received by her delegation in February 2008.  She added that the responses were not satisfactory, and that the issues raised in the questions had been side-stepped.  She believed that the EC's current special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance ('GSP-plus') – which would terminate on  31 December 2008 – was based on non-objective criteria, for example allowing only a "closed list" of countries to benefit. Countries that ratified the same conventions after the stipulated date did not qualify for the arrangement.  Now that the EC was in the process of revising its regulations and the eligibility criteria for the next phase of its GSP scheme, she said that Pakistan had two specific questions.  First, she noted that one of the EC's eligibility criteria for the GSP-plus arrangement required demonstration that an economy was "dependent and vulnerable".  However, the definition and criteria used for qualifying as "dependent and vulnerable" were not transparent.  In this regard, she inquired whether it was intended to bring more transparency in the revised scheme by reviewing these criteria.  Second, she observed that another of the criteria for eligibility under the arrangement was that countries should have ratified a stipulated number of conventions by 31 October 2005.  In the context of the EC's new GSP scheme, she asked whether adequate notice would be given to allow interested countries the opportunity to ratify these conventions before 1 January 2009.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation was still analyzing the information that had been provided to it by the EC.  He added, however, that this information had not answered Brazil's questions satisfactorily.  He also recalled that his delegation had previously requested the EC to provide trade data for 2007.  Since this data had still not been made available, his delegation was once again making the same request.  He looked forward to continuing the discussion at the next CTD meeting. 
&& The representative of India said that the relevant authorities in India had  examined  the information that had been provided by the EC in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  Since the responses were neither precise nor clear and did not fully respond to India's queries, he informed the Committee that his delegation had submitted follow-up questions, relating particularly to transparency and objectivity.  While the EC had responded to these follow-up questions, India was now seeking further clarifications, and was awaiting a response from the EC in this regard.  He added that his delegation supported the points made by Pakistan concerning the EC's GSP scheme.  He requested that this item remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation had already replied on a number of occasions to the concerns that had been raised by some Members on the EC's GSP scheme.  He listed the eligibility criteria for the GSP-plus arrangement – which, he pointed out, had already been provided as part of the EC's notification of its GSP scheme – and stressed that his delegation believed these were objective criteria.  On Brazil's request for 2007 trade data, he said that his delegation would provide such data on a bilateral basis when it became available.  He added, however, that the baseline calculations concerning any graduation decisions at this time could not possibly have taken into account figures for the year 2007.  With regard to the EC's new GSP scheme which would be implemented in the years 2009 to 2011, it was expected that the regulations concerning this scheme would be approved very shortly by the Council of the European Union.  Applications for the new GSP-plus arrangement needed to be submitted by 31 October 2008.  The list of GSP-plus beneficiaries would be established at the end of 2008. 
&& The Chairman said that he would continue with his informal consultations, and would report back to the CTD at the next meeting.  The present item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.  
It was so agreed.
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE UNITED STATES ON THE NOTIFICATION BY CHINA OF THE AMENDMENT TO THE FIRST AGREEMENT ON TRADE NEGOTIATIONS AMONG DEVELOPING MEMBER COUNTRIES OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMISSION FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC (BANGKOK AGREEMENT) (WT/COMTD/62/ADD.1)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA – RESPONSES TO THE QUESTIONS POSED BY THE UNITED STATES ON THE ASIA-PACIFIC TRADE AGREEMENT (APTA) (WT/COMTD/62/ADD.2)
&& The Chairman recalled that China, on behalf of the Participating States of the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), had introduced a notification at the 65th Session of the CTD concerning the Amendment to the First Agreement on Trade Negotiations Among Developing Member Countries of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (Bangkok Agreement).  A communication from the United States raising questions on the notification was subsequently  circulated in document WT/COMTD/62/Add.1.  Responses from China to the questions had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/62/Add.2.  He recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that this item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.  The US had also raised some follow-up questions.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation had only very recently submitted follow-up questions on APTA for circulation to Members, and was therefore not expecting responses at the present meeting.  Since the representative of China had informed him that responses to the follow-up questions would also be circulated to Members, he did not see the need to maintain this item on the agenda.    
&& The representative of China said that the APTA member countries were still in the process of preparing and coordinating the responses to the follow-up questions from the US.  The responses would, however, be provided soon.  If it was agreeable to Members, he proposed that this item be removed from the CTD's agenda.      
&& The Chairman noted that responses to the US' follow-up questions would be circulated to Members.  He proposed that the Committee take note of the notification concerning APTA.   
It was so agreed.
-	AGREEMENT ON TRADE, COMMERCE AND TRANSIT BETWEEN INDIA AND BHUTAN – NOTIFICATION BY INDIA (WT/COMTD/N/28)
&& The Chairman said that the notification by India concerning the Agreement on Trade, Commerce and Transit between India and Bhutan had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/28.  He invited && The representative of India to introduce the notification.
&& The representative of India said that the Agreement on Trade, Commerce and Transit between India and Bhutan was signed on 28 July 2006, and became  operational on 29 July 2006 for a period of ten years.  Trade was transacted in Indian rupees or Bhutanese ngultrums.  The agreement factored in the asymmetries in the sizes of the economies of India and Bhutan, and sought to address the special needs of Bhutan, which was a landlocked LDC.  While the agreement's aim was to promote free trade and commerce between the two countries, for the protection of its industries Bhutan was permitted to impose non-tariff restrictions on the imports of certain goods of Indian origin.  All Bhutanese exports to, and imports from, third countries were free from the customs duties and trade restrictions of India.  Under the agreement, India provided 16 exit and entry points for this purpose.  There were also provisions for the mutual refund on an annual basis of the excise duties on goods exported to each other.  The agreement also provided for the movement of Bhutanese goods from one part of Bhutan to another part of Bhutan through India.  He said that India was the largest trading  partner of Bhutan, with bilateral trade in 2006 reaching 28 billion rupees and a trade balance in favour of Bhutan.  The agreement was expected to contribute to further strengthening bilateral economic relations.  
&& The Committee took note of the notification concerning the Agreement on Trade, Commerce and Transit between India and Bhutan.
-	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF NORWAY (WT/COMTD/65)
&& The Chairman recalled that Norway had made a notification at the previous CTD meeting concerning its GSP scheme.  Questions on Norway's GSP scheme had subsequently been received from Brazil, and had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/65.  Written responses from Norway were available at the back of the meeting room.  He first invited Brazil to introduce its questions.
&& The representative of Brazil said that the provisions contained in Norway's revised GSP scheme included the extension of a preferential treatment to a number of developing countries similar to the preferential treatment provided to least-developed countries (LDCs).  The extension of this preferential treatment was based on criteria such as levels of income, among others.  Considering the possible systemic implications of these provisions, Brazil had presented a list of questions to Norway.  While Brazil did not intend to question the generosity of any Member sponsoring preferential schemes, differentiation of any kind between developing countries raised concerns.  He said that the questions from Brazil aimed to clarify the functioning of Norway's GSP scheme as it related to the 14 developing countries offered duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access, as well as the criteria governing the selection of these beneficiaries.  He thanked the delegation of Norway for the responses that had been provided at the present meeting, which would be analyzed by the relevant authorities in Brazil.  His delegation looked forward to presenting its comments at the next session of the CTD.
&& The representative of Norway said that his delegation would circulate written responses to Brazil's questions in due course.  For the present meeting, responses had been made available at the back of the meeting room.  He said that he wished to highlight a few points from the responses.  He firstly confirmed that Norway had used the OECD's Development Assistance Committee (DAC) list of LDCs and other low-income countries, in combination with the UN's population criteria for LDC status, when establishing its expanded list of countries eligible for DFQF market access.  These were the only criteria relating to income levels.  Norway intended to update the list of eligible countries under its GSP scheme in accordance with any revised DAC list.  The objective was to create a transparent and predictable way to revise Norway's GSP scheme.  His delegation looked forward to any further comments from Members on the scheme.  
&& The representative of Pakistan supported the intervention by Brazil.  Her delegation wished to make known some systemic concerns it had in the way countries had been selected for eligibility in the Norwegian scheme.    
&& The representative of India said that his delegation was interested in the clarifications sought by Brazil, in particular in view of the possible systemic implications of some aspects of Norway's revised GSP scheme.  India was particularly interested in the eligibility criteria for preferential treatment used in Norway's scheme.
&& The representative of China said that his delegation also had an interest in this issue, in particular in view of the differentiation that was being made between developing countries in Norway's GSP scheme.  He hoped that this item would remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee take note of the interventions that had been made. This item would remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting. 
It was so agreed. 
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES	
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would continue his informal consultations with Members to get a better idea as to how the Committee could continue to add value in its discussion on commodities.  He had already informed the Committee that some Members were working to explore ways in which the CTD could contribute to the commodities issue, particularly in light of the outcome of the UNCTAD XII Conference.  While a concrete proposal had not yet been communicated to him, he noted that delegations were extremely busy at this time.  For the next CTD meeting, he proposed that a representative of UNCTAD be invited to briefly outline UNCTAD's mandate on commodities and the work that the organization was undertaking in this area.  He also proposed that he continue his informal consultations with a view to concretizing a way forward for the CTD on this matter. 
It was so agreed.  
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The Council had extended the deadline to its July 2008 meeting.
He recalled that he had informed Members at previous CTD meetings that the proponents had prepared a draft text on the issue of transparency for preferential trade arrangements (PTAs).  He had explained that the text had undergone revisions based on the comments made by some Members in a number of informal consultations that he had held.  He had also indicated that his intention was to have the proponents' draft text considered in an informal, open-ended format as soon as possible.  He now wished to further inform Members that a new revision of the text had just been completed and had been transmitted to him.  He observed that some important progress had therefore been made.  It was also clear, however, that more time and more work would be required before the CTD could come to a decision.  It was his intention to continue to work with Members on this matter.
&& The representative of India agreed with the Chairman's assessment that more time and more work would be required before the CTD could come to a decision.  He expressed appreciation for the constructive engagement shown by Members in the informal consultations called by the Chairman.  His delegation looked forward to having the matter discussed in an open-ended format, and remained hopeful of closing the gaps soon.
&& The representative of El Salvador confirmed the interest of his delegation in this matter, in particular in view of the trade and development benefits that would arise from enhanced PTA transparency.     
&& The Chairman said that he would need to report to the General Council at its July 2008 meeting on the status of the CTD's consideration of this matter.  He said that he would inform the Council of the progress that had been made, and would essentially provide the Council with the same information that he had been providing to the CTD.  He proposed to also ask the Council to grant the CTD additional time – until December 2008 – to consider the matter and report back for appropriate action.  He added that it was his intention to continue working with Members on the issue of transparency for PTAs.  The item would, therefore, remain on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting.
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Ministerial Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  He recalled that the CTD had to date undertaken two of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Ministerial Decision. 
&& The representative of India recalled that his delegation had provided information on India’s Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for LDCs at the 69th Session of the CTD.  The scheme was in fulfilment of the mandate contained in paragraph 47 of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration as it related to DFQF market access for LDCs.  All LDCs were eligible, whether or not they were WTO Members. According to the scheme, 85 per cent of total tariff lines at the 6-digit level of the Harmonized System would become duty-free in a five-year timeframe.  These lines accounted for 92.5 per cent of LDCs' global exports.  He said that each beneficiary country was required to designate a nodal point to facilitate communication with the Government of India.  The Indian nodal point had already been designated.  To utilize the scheme, LDCs also needed to submit their letter of intent to the Department of Commerce of India.  His delegation wished to remind LDCs to expedite the designation of nodal points and the transmission of letters of intent so that they could benefit from the scheme without any delay.  His delegation also urged other developed and developing countries that had not yet announced their DFQF market access schemes for products of the LDCs to do so in an expeditious manner.
&& The representative of Lesotho, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that the LDCs had on previous occasions shared with Members some of their key concerns regarding the implementation of the Hong Kong Ministerial Decision.  She noted that the level of ambition on the DFQF issue was being watered down in the course of the negotiations.  For example, the disclosure of the product coverage contained in the 97 per cent of tariff lines, as well as the timeframe for the phasing in of the remaining 3 per cent that would be initially excluded, remained unresolved.  In this regard, she recalled that the LDC Group had proposed a text on DFQF market access with a clear roadmap to eventually phasing in the remaining 3 per cent of tariff lines by the end of the implementation period.  The Group believed that the extent to which Members took measures to fulfil the DFQF mandate would be a testament to their commitment in ensuring a development-friendly outcome to the Doha Round.  She added that the LDCs were also encouraging developing countries in a position to provide DFQF market access to LDCs, to make their positions known.  In this regard, she noted with appreciation that some developing countries had already indicated that they were in the process of finalizing a DFQF package for LDCs with simple and transparent rules of origin.  In response to the intervention by India, she said that the LDCs would transmit the necessary letters of intent which would allow them to benefit from the DFTP Scheme.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/165)
Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/166)
&& The Chairman said that there were two reports for consideration under this agenda item, namely the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2007 – circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/165 – and the Technical Cooperation Audit (TCA) Report for 2007 – circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/166.  He recalled that Members had had a preliminary discussion on the TCA Report at the last CTD meeting.  He invited the Secretariat to introduce the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training. 
The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) said that about 460 technical assistance (TA) activities had been implemented in 2007.  Of these activities, 37 per cent were implemented in Africa, while LDCs were associated with more than 40 per cent.  Particular attention was being paid to the quality of the activities and their impact.  In this regard, methods had been adopted for evaluating quality and measuring the impact.  He noted that the Secretariat was also facing certain difficulties in implementing its TA activities.  One difficulty concerned the level of response from potential beneficiaries, which was sometimes inadequate.  In this light, he invited beneficiaries to share their particular needs with the Secretariat.  Another difficulty had to do with the financial situation.  For one thing, delays were being experienced in the receipt of contributions from some Members.  The value of these expected contributions was also insufficient in light of the planned activities.  He noted in this regard that CHF 10.8 million had been received to date and CHF 2.2 million had been committed – for a total of CHF 13 million – while the required amount for the year was CHF 24 million.  He encouraged Members to make the necessary contributions.  He also noted that efforts were being made to enhance understanding and communication with Members with regard to the WTO's TA activities.  In this regard, an open-door session on this subject would be held after the present meeting, to which all delegations were invited.
&& The representative of Guinea expressed her appreciation for the WTO's TA activities.  Her delegation had taken note of the invitation from the Secretariat for beneficiaries to make known their specific needs.  She expressed her support for the intervention that had been made by Lesotho under the agenda item concerning DFQF market access for LDCs.  She added that the information provided by India under the same agenda item would be conveyed to her capital.
&& The representative of Burkina Faso also expressed appreciation for the WTO's TA activities.  He said that he had taken note of the request from the Secretariat for beneficiaries to make known their specific needs.
&& The representative of Lesotho echoed other delegations' appreciation for the WTO's TA activities.     
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation had already had an opportunity to discuss with the Secretariat a number of issues relating to the WTO's TA activities.  These included issues relating to the cost of the regional trade policy courses, as well as the occasionally low level of participation in certain events.  On the financial situation, he said that a number of EC member States had recently come forward with contributions to the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF).  He noted that the EC was already making a substantial contribution to the DDAGTF, and invited other Members to do the same.     
&& The representative of Barbados expressed his appreciation for the open-door session on TA which would be held after the present CTD meeting.  He said that his delegation was among those that was comfortable with the TA Plan for 2008 and 2009, and was particularly pleased with the attention given to distance training and the use of e-Learning.  He also noted that the conclusion of the Doha negotiations would open up new areas of needs for small economies.  He cited as examples non‑agricultural market access, trade facilitation and fisheries.
&& The ITTC Director said that the Secretariat had taken note of the comments that had been made by delegations.  He informed Members that the ITTC was having an open dialogue with both beneficiaries and donors on the ways and means to improve the quality of TA being provided.   
&& The Committee took note of the reports and of all interventions.
OTHER BUSINESS 
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that the Committee would revert to the matter raised by the EC concerning the change in the notification status of the GCC Customs Union from Article XXIV of GATT 1994 to the Enabling Clause.  He added that, along with other issues relating to the GCC Customs Union, he had informed the Saudi Arabian Ambassador of this matter after the last meeting.  He inquired whether a GCC representative wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the GCC countries, said that he wished to respond to the three points that had been raised by Members.  He recalled firstly that the EC had asked the GCC countries to elaborate on the reason for the change in the GCC notification from GATT Article XXIV to the Enabling Clause.  In this regard, he said that the Economic Agreement between the GCC States ("the GCC Agreement") could have been notified to the WTO under either Article XXIV or the Enabling Clause, as it qualified under both provisions.  The GCC Agreement  established a customs union that eliminated "all tariff and non-tariff barriers, while taking into consideration laws of agricultural and veterinarian quarantine, as well as rules regarding prohibited and restricted goods".  He explained, therefore, that the GCC Agreement covered substantially all trade within the meaning of GATT Article XXIV:8(a)(i), and was fully consistent with Article XXIV.  At the same time, all the parties to the GCC Agreement were developing countries, which meant that the GCC Agreement was a regional agreement among developing countries for the mutual reduction or elimination of tariffs within the meaning of paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.  The GCC Agreement was, therefore, also fully consistent with the Enabling Clause.
He went on to say that although the GCC Agreement had initially been notified under GATT Article XXIV, the GCC had decided upon further reflection that it would be more appropriate to notify the agreement under the Enabling Clause, which was designed to facilitate trade among developing countries.  While the agreement qualified under both the general provision of Article XXIV and the specific provision of the Enabling Clause, the GCC members had determined that it would be logical to change the notification to the more specific provision.  He said that the Appellate Body had stated in the EC – Tariff Preferences case that the Enabling Clause had become an integral part of the GATT 1994.  The Appellate Body had also noted that the relationship between trade and development, and in particular the role of the Enabling Clause, remained prominent on the agenda of the WTO.  He added that the Enabling Clause, by its own terms, sought to promote the fuller participation of developing countries in the world trading system.  It was, therefore, appropriate for a customs union among developing countries to be based on this provision.
He next went on to explain, as per the request of the EC, the basis for which the GCC considered that a customs union fell within paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.  In this regard, he said that paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause provided for the establishment of regional or global arrangements among developing countries for the mutual reduction or elimination of tariffs and, in accordance with criteria or conditions which might be prescribed, for the mutual reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures.  He observed that the criteria relating to tariffs had clearly been met, as the GCC Agreement provided for the elimination of all tariffs, taking into consideration agricultural and veterinarian laws, as well as rules regarding prohibited and restricted goods.  As for the criteria relating to non-tariff measures, he said that it was inapplicable, as WTO Members had not prescribed any criteria or conditions for the mutual reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures.  He noted, however, that the GCC Agreement did provide for the elimination of non-tariff barriers.  On the basis of his explanation, he indicated that the conditions set forth in paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause had been fully met.
Finally, he responded to a point that had been made by Australia in the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements.  Australia considered that the right to notify under the appropriate provision existed at the time of the first notification, and was interested in the reasons for the change in the notification status of the GCC Customs Union from a systemic standpoint.  In this regard, he noted that nothing in GATT Article XXIV, the Understanding on Article XXIV, or the Enabling Clause prohibited a change in notification.  Moreover, paragraph 14 of the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements provided, in part, that the required notification of changes affecting the implementation of an RTA, or the operation of an already implemented RTA, would take place as soon as possible after the changes occurred.  The same paragraph also indicated that the changes to be notified would include, inter alia, modifications to the preferential treatment between the Parties and to the RTA's disciplines.  He observed that this was very general language, and the list of changes to be notified was illustrative, not exhaustive.  In the view of the GCC countries, the decision to change the basis for the notification was a change affecting the implementation of an RTA within the meaning of this provision.  He added that since the review of the GCC under GATT Article XXIV had not commenced, the change in venue of the review to the CTD should be of little consequence to any Member.
&& The representative of Kuwait supported the intervention by Saudi Arabia. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that her delegation would appreciate if the intervention by Saudi Arabia could be made available to Members in written form.  She observed that her delegation had a different reading of the Enabling Clause.  In particular, it was the understanding of her delegation that paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause could be invoked only to justify the reduction or elimination of tariffs, and not the reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures.  She requested that the CTD revert to this matter at its next meeting. 
&& The representative of the United States said that the matter raised questions that merited further review.  His delegation had concerns in the change of the notification status of the GCC Customs Union to the Enabling Clause, and did not support moving forward with the process of reviewing the agreement until further clarification was obtained.  He requested that the  intervention by Saudi Arabia be made available to Members in written form.  He also suggested that this matter be considered as an item on the agenda of the next CTD meeting, and not under "Other Business".  
&& The representative of Brazil said that the understanding of his delegation was that, in the case of RTAs in goods between developing countries, the Parties were free to notify under either Article XXIV of GATT 1994 or the Enabling Clause.  He added that paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause made reference to non-tariff measures as well as to tariffs. 
&& The representative of Saudi Arabia added his voice to Brazil in stating that paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause made reference to non-tariff measures.  He requested that the EC put its concerns on this matter in writing.  He confirmed that Saudi Arabia would circulate its intervention to Members. He also requested that this matter be treated by the Committee at its next meeting under "Other Business".
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee continue its consideration of this matter at its next meeting under "Other Business".  If significant concerns remained after the next meeting, the Committee would have to decide how to move forward in addressing the issue.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman next turned to the Work Programme on Small Economies.  He recalled that this work programme was being dealt with by the CTD meeting in Dedicated Session.  The Dedicated Session had not met for some time, and he sought the guidance of Members as to when a meeting might take place. 
&& The representative of Barbados recognized that the CTD had not met in Dedicated Session for some time.  He explained that the small, vulnerable economies (SVEs) had been promoting, discussing and negotiating the issues of interest and concern to them in the negotiating and other bodies of the WTO.  That being said, he recognized the desirability of the Dedicated Session meeting in late September or October 2008.  This would permit Members to assess how the SVEs' issues were being taken into account in the negotiations.  He made particular reference to the agriculture, NAMA and services negotiations – in light of the Ministerial meeting and the services signalling conference that were scheduled to take place in Geneva at the end of the July 2008 – as well as the July 2008 reports of the Chairpersons of the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR) and the Negotiating Group on Trade Facilitation (NGTF).  He informed the Committee that since the last meeting of the Dedicated Session, the SVEs had tabled an additional document in the NAMA negotiations and also continued to be active in the area of domestic regulation in services.  In the fisheries subsidies negotiations, the SVEs had recently tabled a proposal on enhancing the provision of technical assistance.  A revised proposal co-sponsored by a number of SVEs – advocating a regional approach to the provision of technical assistance – had also recently been introduced in the NGTF. 
He added that a meeting of the Dedicated Session would give Members the opportunity to more fully develop and determine a roadmap for the future course of SVEs' issues in the WTO.  Such a meeting would also allow the Secretariat to update its compilation paper on the Work Programme on Small Economies.  Outside the context of the WTO negotiations, he said that the SVEs' template for pooling intellectual, capacity and negotiating resources amongst a group of geographically dispersed countries had been gaining increased attention.  As an example, he pointed to studies being undertaken by the Commonwealth Secretariat, Oxford University and the University of California which attempted to examine the SVEs' template, as well as the constraints that the SVEs faced in multilateral negotiations.  He believed that the interest from both the academic and the policy side reaffirmed the relevance of the Work Programme on Small Economies and the work that WTO Members had undertaken on SVEs' issues since the Doha Ministerial Conference.  The SVEs looked forward to a successful incorporation of their interests in the outcome of the July 2008 Ministerial discussions, in which a number of Ministers from SVEs would be involved.
&& The Chairman proposed that Members think along the lines of holding a meeting of the  Dedicated Session of the CTD in October 2008.
It was so agreed.  
The meeting was adjourned.

__________



WT/COMTD/M/70 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/70 	Page  PAGE 13



 

 

 

 



