WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/46
24 November 2003


(03-6245)


Committee on Trade and Development
Forty-sixth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 16 AND 23 OCTOBER 2003

Chairperson:  H.E. Mr. Habib Mansour (Tunisia)


Subjects discussed:  

 TOC \O "1-6" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC57181930" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC57181930 \H 1
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC57181932" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC57181932 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc57181933" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc57181933 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc57181934" (ii)	Further Consideration of request for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc57181934 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC57181935" C.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC57181935 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc57181936" (i)	Report on the Implementation of the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan  (second quarter report WT/COMTD/W/118)	 PAGEREF _Toc57181936 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc57181937" (ii)	Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2004  (WT/COMTD/W/119)	 PAGEREF _Toc57181937 \h 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC57181940" D.	Notification under the Enabling Clause	 PAGEREF _TOC57181940 \H 30
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc57181941" -	Notification from Iceland (WT/COMTD/N/17)	 PAGEREF _Toc57181941 \h 30
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC57181942" E.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries (WT/COMTD/W/113)	 PAGEREF _TOC57181942 \H 32
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC57181943" F.	Notification Procedures for Regional Trade Agreements Among Developing Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC57181943 \H 39
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC57181944" G.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC57181944 \H 39
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc57181945" -	Presentation by the Market Access Division	 PAGEREF _Toc57181945 \h 39
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC57181946" H.	Electronic Commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC57181946 \H 46
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC57181947" I.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC57181947 \H 46

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft Agenda for the meeting was contained in Airgram WTO/AIR/2166/Rev.1 of 7 October 2003.  
The agenda was adopted.
OBSERVERS

(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite the following intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the African Union (AU);  the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the South Pacific Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).  He therefore proposed that, in accordance with the CTD's procedures, those organisations be invited to the next formal meeting of the Committee.  
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further Consideration of request for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman said that, at previous meetings, the Committee had also had before it a number of outstanding requests for observer status.  Those came from the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and from the Common Fund for Commodities.  The positions of delegations were well known and on the record.  He proposed that, unless there had been any recent change in Members' positions, the Committee would revert to those requests at its next formal meeting.
It was so agreed.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Report on the Implementation of the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan  (second quarter report WT/COMTD/W/118)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under agenda item C related to the implementation of the 2003 Technical Assistance Plan (TA Plan), namely the consideration of the Second Quarter Report contained in document WT/COMTD/W/118.  The report covered the period of 1 April to 30 June 2003.  At the 45th Session of the Committee, the Secretariat had presented to Members the First Quarterly Report on the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan (WT/COMTD/W/112).  The Second Quarter Report was the first since the creation of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) on 15 March 2003.  The report provided information on technical assistance (TA) and training activities that had been carried out during the second quarter of 2003.  In response to a request by Members, the Secretariat report also included the cost of each one of the activities that had been carried out.  The implementation rate of activities had increased during the second quarter.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that paragraph 3 of the report stated that "A qualitative assessment, as well as relevant data relating to all TRTA activities undertaken since the fourth Ministerial Session held in Doha, is presented in the Report by the Director-General under paragraph 41 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration (WT/MIN(03)/3)".  He said that it was important for the qualitative assessment to be taken into account as well as an assessment by developing countries themselves in terms of whether the assistance they had received responded to their needs both from a quantitative and qualitative point of view.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that given that the report was a tool that would help ensure an efficient 2004 TA Plan he would make his comments when discussing the draft 2004 TA Plan.  The question was to what extent the report should include qualitative elements, benchmarking and  whether there should be a real time evaluation. 
&& The representative of the United States echoed the remarks made by the delegations of the European Communities and Switzerland.  She said that the report would be helpful when considering the financial elements of the delivery of the 2003 TA Plan and in terms of what the Secretariat was attempting to deliver for 2004 with the same resources.  That gave Members a better sense to where they stood with respect to the overall 2003 TA Plan and its implementation.  Members had received an assessment for the first half of the year and she asked when they would receive the report on the third quarter.  She asked what the Secretariat's plans were with respect to ensuring that it delivered the remainder of activities that were feasible.  She was talking in terms of an assessment of how those activities that had not been delivered as part of the 2002 TA Plan could be delivered or perhaps in finding an alternative way than had been anticipated to meet those needs.  There had been a lot of reprogramming due to the SARS crisis and the Iraqi war.  She said that it would be helpful for information on further implementation in 2003to be provided orally or where figures were involved it would be useful for delegations to receive that information in writing.
&& The representative of Mauritius said that he was speaking on behalf of his Government, but as coordinator of the African Group wished to point out that the African Group had not yet met to discuss the document.  However, he was certain that it would do so and come up with substantive reflections in due course.  A large number of the components of the TA Plan catered for the needs of African countries.  He would deal with both the report on the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan and the draft 2004 TA Plan together.  It was important that the TA Plan continued to be based on the principles and priorities laid down in the strategy for the TA cooperation as enunciated in the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  He noted that the Geneva-based trade policy courses would include a trade policy course for French speaking officials.  That was important and useful because there were a large number of Francophone African Member countries.  In paragraph 19 on page 5 that the Secretariat had planned regional trade policy courses for Anglophone African Member countries to be held in Nairobi, Kenya and that the venue for the course for Francophone African Member countries, was still to be determined.  There were other programmes of interest to Africa such as the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme (JITAP) that was well underway and which in the initial stages had been delivered to a number of African countries and which would probably be extended to other African countries.  The African Group might wish to express its interest on the round table held in Tanzania, Uganda and Gambia on the Integrated Framework (IF).  Among the regional seminars, the Secretariat had continued to focus on the needs of African countries in terms of working towards the needs of the Anglophone and Francophone countries.  That was an important component of the 2004 TA Plan.  His delegation was pleased to see that the regional seminars would cover the Uruguay Round Agreements and WTO related topics.  He said that African countries were interested in the national TA and training activities spelt out in paragraph 36 of page 9 which related mainly to accessions and mainstreaming.  Mention was made of assisting Members in the services negotiations an issue which needed emphasis as African countries were well behind in that process.  
&& The representative of Japan said that at the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration (Committee on BFA), it had been stated that his delegation would urge the CTD to examine and evaluate the TA activities that had been implemented before embarking on discussions regarding the 2004 TA Plan.  His delegation sought clarification as to whether the TA activities planned for the remaining part of 2003 would be fully implemented according to schedule.  He was reiterating those points to make Members aware of them.  To avoid any misunderstanding, he would explain that in more detail.  The intention was to caution against the hasty implementation of TA activities.  Since there were only three months remaining in 2003, more attention needed to be paid to the expenditure on the TA activities and that did not mean just adding the numbers of implemented activities.  Thus, at the Committee on BFA, his delegation had indicated its reservation on any hasty implementation of TA activities.  He expressed his delegation's appreciation to the Secretariat in preparing the first draft of the 2004 TA Plan which incorporated the comments and inputs made by both donor and beneficiary Members during its preparation process, and provided a good basis towards finalizing the 2004 TA Plan.  He stressed the importance of reviewing the implemented plans while embarking on discussions on the draft 2004 TA Plan and on the projected total amount of expenditure.  While his delegation appreciated the Secretariat's report on the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan as well as the Director-General's report on paragraph 41 of Doha Ministerial Declaration (WT/MIN(3)/3) submitted at the Fifth Ministerial Meeting at Cancún, it believed that a more qualitative analysis of the implemented plan was useful to embark on that exercise.  In other words, his delegation would appreciate an elaboration on both the positive and negative points experienced in the delivery of the TA activities.  Upon receipt of such detailed information, which should provide examples of an efficient and effective implementation of the trade-related technical assistance (TRTA) as well as areas where there was room for improvement, it would be useful to share the experiences and make use of the lessons learned before enabling any justification for the 2004 TA Plan.  That feedback exercise would contribute to a more efficient and effective use of human and financial resources.  
&& The representative of Morocco said that Members needed to resume work on a good footing.  With respect to the Report on the Implementation of the 2003 TA Plan he said that his delegation was surprised that there was no mention of the training foreseen in Morocco during the first quarter.  That regional trade policy course had been excluded without his Government being consulted.  His delegation was therefore faced with a fait accompli and would revert to that question at a later stage.  The course had been geared towards twenty-five French-speaking countries. A group of Ambassadors of the Francophone Member countries had met in July to discuss the question of the course being postponed and had decided to express their concerns to the Director-General.  Those Member countries were surprised by the way the Secretariat had acted and hoped that the course would be organised as soon as possible for the benefit of the Francophone Member countries.  Due to the fact that that had happened before Cancún Ministerial Conference the troika had decided to wait and avoid further complicating the Director-General's task.  Up until then, the Francophone Member countries, particularly Morocco who was meant to host the course, were surprised by the way in which the Secretariat had behaved.  The Secretariat had decided to postpone the course and sent a letter, dated 15 March 2003, informing the Government of Morocco that the course would be held in Morocco but that it had to be postponed until a later date.  He had spoken to the Secretariat who had promised that the decision would be taken by common agreement.  However, that decision had been taken without agreement.  His delegation hoped that the Secretariat would be transparent and respect the Francophone Member countries that had not been given due attention and whose right to benefit from the course had been forgone.  The course had been replaced by a three week course for delegates in Geneva in July 2003.  He said that his delegation could not approve the report and once conditions permitted, the group of French speaking Ambassadors would meet with the Director-General to ensure that such an incident did not happen again.
&& The representative of Senegal said that the report gave an indication of the large number of activities that had been carried out during the second quarter of 2003.  He said that page 2 of the Second Quarter Report made reference to the regional workshop on the Agreement on Agriculture and on-going negotiations for West Africa which was to be held in Senegal and had been replaced by a Conference on Commodities.  He was not certain whether that should have been included in the report as the Conference on Commodities had not ended up taking place.  
&& The representative of Cuba said that the report provided a good illustration of the implementation of TA activities.  She expressed her delegation's appreciation for the two national seminars that had been recently held in Cuba;  the first, on trade policy which took place in April 2003, and the second on trade and investment held in July 2003.  She would make a number of preliminary comments on the draft 2004 TA Plan (WT/COMTD/W/119).  Her delegation was pleased to note that Member countries were being offered a wider range of TA activities based essentially on their demands.  She was pleased to note as one of the draft 2004 TA Plan's key features, the maintaining of geographical balance which was necessary when allocating activities.  However, she asked why the Caribbean and Latin American Member countries would not benefit from the regional trade policy courses on non-agricultural market access (NAMA), or other activities related to rules of origin and customs valuation.  It was important for those activities to be extended to Latin American and Caribbean Members as they were directly related to the effective participation of those countries in the negotiations.  Her delegation welcomed the workshops that had been designed for university professors on WTO matters and the support programmes for doctoral studies amongst other activities that were aimed at academia.  Those would contribute towards broadening the knowledge of the WTO to other areas of society that were directly or indirectly involved in such matters.  Her delegation wished to see activities related to trade, debt and finance, and trade and transfer of technology included in the 2004 TA Plan.  Those could be jointly delivered in collaboration with other organisations such as UNCTAD.  Those were areas of interest to many developing countries and were currently under examination in the WTO.  The fact that they were an integral part of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA) would benefit the developing countries. 
&& The representative of the United States said that she had neglected to raise a question that might be helpful to Members. Her authorities had suggested that in the next quarterly report it would be useful to have an indication of the number of participants involved in the different activities.  That was something that would provide a sense of the number of people actually being reached in the efforts of providing TA.
&& The representative of the Philippines said that he agreed with those delegations that had stated the need for a qualitative analysis of the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan and that at the same time there should be no hasty implementation of the 2004 TA Plan.  As a recipient of TA activities, he assured donor Members that as far as his Government was concerned, all the activities that had been implemented in his country had been of a high quality.  Quality was difficult to quantify, but the mere fact that the Philippines now possessed more Government officials that were aware of what the WTO was all about, and of the different agreements his Government were party to, was a measure of the quality of the TA that had been delivered.  He agreed with the representative of the United States that it was important to receive information about the number of participants that had attended different courses.  
&& The representative of Nigeria said that his delegation supported the preliminary remarks made by the representative of Mauritius on behalf of the African Group.  As a beneficiary of TA his delegation agreed with the representative of the Philippines that the assistance delivered was satisfactory.  His delegation had no objection to suggestions made by other delegations on the assessment of TA and believed that Members needed to be consulted when the draft TA Plan was being drawn up.  There needed to be a continuous evaluation not only in terms of assistance carried out, but also in terms of an assessment by the recipients of that assistance.  That was part of what his delegation wished to see included in future TA Plans. He hoped that his country would be considered in the next phase of the JITAP programme.  Officials from Nigeria had benefited from the courses carried out in Kenya and in Geneva and the officials who had attended those courses were becoming increasingly involved in WTO activities.
&& The representative of Rwanda said that his delegation was aware that officials from Rwanda had benefited from TA activities delivered in 2003, and particularly from the setting up of reference centres and a workshop on the mechanism for policy reform; and would benefit from a trade seminar to be held on 26 October 2003.  His Government had been a Member of the WTO since 1996, but it was only in 2003 that officials from Rwanda had begun to benefit WTO's TA programmes.  His delegation was pleased with the draft 2004 TA Plan and approved it.  The approach with which the Plan had been put together was flexible and had taken Members' requests into account.  He hoped that the activities to be delivered would be of high quality.  He agreed with what the representative of Mauritius had said on behalf of the African Group.  With respect to the national seminars he asked whether there could be flexibility to allow delegates from LDC missions in Geneva to participate in national seminars.  Seminars at which the Secretariat presented the status of the negotiations in the WTO would provide greater awareness and thus contribute to the integration of those countries into the multilateral trading system.  Activities related to the IF were of great importance to his country because his Government had devised a programme to reduce poverty which was one of the aims of the IF.  Unfortunately, his Government had not yet fully integrated the trade dimension into its production strategies.  An activity to assist his government to do so would add to his Government's own efforts.
&& The representative of Canada said that the Director-General's report (WT/MIN(03)/3) of 14 August 2003 on Paragraph 41 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration was good and thorough.  Her delegation had not had a chance to indicate that as it had only been presented at the General Council.  She said that the Second Quarter Report combined with the activities report and the inclusion of some of the issues that had arisen, such as problems, issues and lessons learnt, were positive elements of the various training programmes.  All that information could probably be put together at the end of each year in the form of a report that would demonstrate what had transpired and how the TA Plan had been managed.  All the elements were present it was just a question of bringing them together.  
&& The representative of Pakistan said that, like the representative of Canada, his delegation had also noted that the Director-General's report on Paragraph 41 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration was thorough.  He agreed with those delegations that had mentioned the need for a quality analysis of TA. When analysing the TA Plans it was important to see whether there were some areas that were being ignored.  It was also important to ascertain who would carry out that analysis.  He agreed with the representative of the United States that it was important to include in the report, information regarding the number of participants in each of the courses.  With respect to the comment made by the representative of Japan on the hasty implementation of activities, he asked whether that meant that activities would continue to be delivered and a review carried out at the same time.  
&& The Chairman underscored the importance that Members attached to TA and capacity building which made Members aware of what they were negotiating.  The Director-General had underlined that in his report on Paragraph 41 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  He also underscored the efforts the Secretariat continued to make towards the implementation of the 2003 TA Plans.  He said that the implementation of a TA Plan within particular budget constraints required a qualitative assessment in light of the needs and special characteristics of developing countries.  Such an assessment was necessary to ensure effective future planning.  Activities could continue to be delivered while the assessment was being carried out.  He said that some delegations had expressed reservations with respect to approving the report and it remained to be seen how the Committee could address some of the issues raised before the next meeting of the CTD.  
&& The Secretariat said that it would respond to the comments made on the Second Quarter Report on the Implementation of the 2003 TA Plan and would respond to those comments made on the draft 2004 TA Plan when that item was taken up.  He said that a number of remarks had been made on the need for a more qualitative analysis of the activities that had been delivered in 2003.  He recalled that in response to that, it had been suggested to the Committee on previous occasions that, for a qualitative analysis to be meaningful, it had to be based on a critical mass of activities.  That was why the Technical Cooperation Audit submitted an annual report and that was why, particularly in 2003, the Director-General had made a report on Paragraph 41 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration which contained a large number of qualitative assessments of the activities in the area of TA.  The quarterly reports were more like monitoring reports which brought Members up to date on the activities that had taken place in the previous quarter, mainly in terms of numbers.  However, the Secretariat had agreed to draw Members' attention to any particular lessons learned, even if those were more likely to emerge from the overall annual assessment.  It was clear that a number of the remarks made were still valid in the Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2002 (WT/COMTD/W/111) were still valid.  
He continued by saying that the Second Quarter Report covered activities that had taken place in that period, not activities that had not taken place.  For the bigger picture, it had to be noted that 336 activities had been carried out to date.  He assured Members that the Secretariat was working hard towards the preparation of the regional trade policy courses.  The Secretariat regretted that it had not been possible to hold a trade policy course for Francophone African Member countries in 2003.  A three week short trade policy course had been held in Geneva for the same Members that would have attended the regional trade policy course and a briefing was planned for the partner resource persons that the Secretariat would be working with for the regional trade policy course for Francophone African Member in 2004.  The briefing would take place in November 2003 for 30 resource persons from regional academic institutions who would be sharing experiences in WTO training.  With respect to the question raised by the representative of Senegal on the Conference on Commodities, the Secretariat said that it was still trying to obtain information on the holding of that conference.  The Secretariat would further look into the request made by the representative of the United States to include the number of participants in the reports.  That information was usually available but the Secretariat was not certain whether that was always the case.  The Secretariat would attempt to obtain that information and pass it on to Members.  With respect to the remark made by the representative of Canada of bringing all the information together to create one report, the Secretariat said it would need to reflect on how to respond to that.  There were a large number of reports issued on TA and it was sometimes difficult to follow all of them.  
&& The representative of Morocco said that his delegation was not satisfied with the Secretariat's response to its concerns.  The Government of Morocco, as designated host of the regional trade policy course had the right to be informed of the decision to cancel it and the right to be notified of the alternatives that would be offered in its place.  He was surprised to hear that there would be a briefing of experts on that issue.  The Secretariat was not being transparent, and as host to that course his Government wished to be informed of the Secretariat's intentions.  His Government had a legal obligation to share such information with other concerned Member countries.  However, the Secretariat continued to implement a strategy and plan in a non-transparent way.  That practice needed to end as it carried risks.  His delegation wished to see that information was shared.  The course had been successful and his delegation had hoped to contribute to the thought process of the Secretariat.  His delegation was not pleased with the way the Secretariat had managed the issue.  It was a question of principle and management style.  Whether the course was organised in Morocco or elsewhere was not the point;  the Secretariat needed to respect the principle of transparency, consultation and informing Members.  
&& The representative of Canada said that she had asked how Members could transmit the recommendations in the TA audit to the TA Plans.  There was a missing link there.  The audit contained good recommendations on what needed to be done to improve TA.  Then there was a report on the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan and there was also the draft 2004 TA Plan.  The missing link was how to get the recommendations from the audit taken on board in future activities.  There was also a need for a review to ensure that the recommendations in the audit were met.  That was what delegations meant when they were talking about quality and ongoing evaluation.  All the elements were present, but the final piece was missing.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that his delegation endorsed what the representative of Canada had said.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that Members had referred to the qualitative assessment and the report of the Director-General of 14 August 2003.  He asked whether the Secretariat planned to provide a more qualitative assessment of the different activities, not only on a general basis but also on an individual course basis because that was something that would be part of the discussions on the 2004 TA Plan.  
&& The Chairman said that the Secretariat would need to revise the report while taking into account Members' comments.  He said that the representative of Canada had raised a problem of approach and methodology.  That would be useful when planning future TA Plans and in the assessments that would follow.  The Secretariat would have to find a solution to the issue raised by the representative of Morocco.  He said that there were two ways of approving the report.  One was for the Secretariat to revise the report, send it to Members for comments and providing there were no objections or recommendations for any amendments, it could then it would be approved.  The second alternative was for the report to be approved at the next meeting of the CTD.
&& The representative of the Philippines said that her delegation understood that the report on the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan was an information report.  Members had been informed on the activities that had been implemented and had requested that the report be improved, for example by having the number of participants of activities reflected in the next quarterly report as suggested by the representative of the United States. 
&& The representative of Morocco said that there was no rush to finish the documents.  His delegation preferred that a revised version of the report be made available for the next meeting.  It was true that the report was for information purposes, but the substantive issues raised had to be settled before Members could approve the report.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation was in favour of approving a revised report at the next meeting.  By then, a Third Quarter Report would perhaps also be available which might include a qualitative assessment and incorporate other suggestions that had been made. 
&& The representative of Switzerland said that he agreed with what the representative of the European Communities had just said.  There was no need to make major changes to the Second Quarter Report and the Third Quarter Report could take up some of the issues that Members had raised.  A larger issue had been mentioned by the representative of Canada and others which was not strictly related to the quarterly reports.  That was the question of on what basis to make a decision on a yearly TA programme.  He believed that the decision to a large extent had to be based on the evaluation of previous activities carried out.  The Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2002 (WT/COMTD/W/111) and further indications of the implementation of activities in 2003 could be included in the analysis and in the design of the 2004 TA Plan.  That would enable Members not only to make use of the experiences of the previous year for planning future TA Plans but to also have accumulated experience.  That was a larger question that could probably not be addressed by the quarterly reports.  Members might therefore need to consider ways of putting the analysis and the lessons of the past and together with the planning of a TA Plan.  He suggested that the Secretariat consider how to bring those accumulated elements together into the planning exercise and how the planning exercise could respond to the questions raised and recommendations made in the accumulated audits of earlier periods.
&& The representative of Canada said that she fully agreed with what had been said by the delegations of the European Communities and Switzerland.
&& The representative of Mauritius said that his delegation was comfortable with the report being taken up at a future meeting for approval.  That was because it was important to the African Member countries and as he had mentioned earlier, the African Group might wish to share its views on the report.  He said that he was not certain when the next meeting of the CTD would be held and did not see the urgency in having the report revised before November.  However, the African Group would attempt to provide their views as soon as possible, provided they were given an indication of when it would be issued.  
&& The representative of Argentina said that the Second Quarterly Report should be taken note of by Members and the Secretariat should take note of the comments made and revise the Report accordingly.  
&& The Chairman said that the Second Quarterly Report had been issued for information purposes and needed to meet with Members' satisfaction.  It was not to be adopted or approved but should reflect Members' concerns.  He suggested that the Secretariat be asked to revise the Second Quarterly Report taking into account Members' observations and that the Third Quarterly Report take into account the questions raised by delegations on the methodology, quality and financial assessments.
It was so agreed.   
Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2004  (WT/COMTD/W/119)
&& The Chairman said that the second part of item C related to the draft Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2004  (WT/COMTD/W/119).  
&& The Secretariat said that the presentation would focus mainly on the approach that had been followed and the design of the 2004 TA Plan.  The Secretariat recalled that in preparation of the draft 2004 TA Plan, separate meetings had been held with representatives of regional groupings, with the donor community, as well as with many beneficiary countries.  In preparing the draft 2004 TA Plan, the Secretariat had endeavoured to take into account as much as possible all the feedback that it had received.  It should therefore not contain any surprises in relation to its content.  The 2004 TA Plan followed a different approach from the past plans in several respects.  First, it was quality-oriented, aiming at building long-term, i.e. sustainable, human and institutional capacity in Members, especially in the LDC Members, and shifted away from a purely quantitative approach.  Second, it established clear objectives for each type of "product", whether the activity took place in Geneva or in the regions.  Third, it covered all the issues of the Agreements and the DDA.  Fourth, it was flexible, allowing the Secretariat to respond to Members needs in a targeted way and at the right time.  Fifth, it proposed a new range of "products", in particular with regard to activities designed to enhance the capacity of academic institutions to backstop policy-making.  Sixth, it continued to put a premium on activities undertaken in cooperation with partner institutions.  Finally it did not entail any increase in resources in relation to the 2003 TA Plan.  The Secretariat had provided a comprehensive listing of all the activities that it could undertake, called the "products".  Those included, among others, activities as diverse as the trade policy courses, regional seminars, national seminars, university programmes and trade policy clinics.  That gave a clear picture of the coverage of the Plan, as well as the complementarity of the different elements in the programme, providing both general and more specific training and assistance.
&& The Secretariat went on to say that it had planned what was could be planned while maintaining the necessary degree of flexibility, particularly but not exclusively, in relation to national activities.  While some emphasis was put on a regional approach covering all WTO related topics, that did not reduce the importance that was attached to national activities and the specificity that those engendered.  The number of national seminars to be undertaken was likely to be approximately the same as for 2003, with the main difference being that they were not enumerated at the outset in the draft 2004 TA Plan.  Instead, they were left to be generated through ongoing consultations with beneficiaries, who could draw attention to their needs at any time.  By following such a flexible approach, the Secretariat could more adequately respond to the needs that might arise during the year, in accordance with the criteria that were enumerated in paragraph 37 of the draft 2004 TA Plan.  However, should a Member country wish to list its priorities early, it could do so.  He stressed that the Secretariat was ready to undertake the same number of national activities in 2004 as in 2003 and had budgeted accordingly.  The Secretariat had put emphasis on partnership arrangements and encouraged and invited other international agencies, regional institutions and donors to join in the Secretariat's activities.  The Secretariat gave examples of the WTO's partnerships with UNCTAD, ITC, the Arab Monetary Fund and others.  In order to achieve such partnership agreements, those organisations had been contacted and the Secretariat was already receiving positive feedback on those organisations' participation in WTO activities.  Such partnership arrangements were also likely to have beneficial financial effects, as in many instances partners would share in the cost of the activities.  He said that the Secretariat would be pursuing its partnership arrangements in the JITAP and the IF.  The annex to the Plan contained just fewer than 150 planned activities.  That was the core programme.  The national activities would be added to that, which, if past experience was any guide, would total 250 activities.  That brought the total number of activities to approximately 400, which was more or less the limit that the Secretariat was able to undertake, given its human capacity constraints.  It was only slightly less than what was planned for 2003, but the aim had been to be more focused, more quality-oriented and more geared towards longer term capacity building, which had been of concern to Members.  Also, Members would find a number of innovations in the draft 2004 TA Plan, in particular in the integrated approach to partnership arrangements with the academic community.  He said that the Director of the Administration and General Services Division would present the financial aspects of the 2004 TA Plan in more detail.  He concluded by saying that the Secretariat was not seeking more money than in the past, but that it was convinced that the beneficiaries would get more value for money. 
&& The Chairman drew Members attention to the situation as of 15 May 2003 of the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF) contained in document Job(03)/97.
&& The Secretariat said that it would provide an overview of the Secretariat's cost estimates for WTO's TA and training activities in 2004.  The Secretariat hoped that those figures, taken together with the details contained in the draft 2004 TA Plan would provide Members with the basic information they needed.  The results of the discussions in the CTD would be taken into consideration by the Committee on BFA later in the year when it would make recommendations to the General Council on the WTO regular budget for 2004 and 2005, and on a target amount for the DDAGTF in 2004.  The cost estimates to be presented would be fully adjusted to reflect the results of Members' discussions and the Secretariat would report back to the Committee on BFA accordingly.  Document Job(03)/198 which had been circulated to Members followed the structure of the draft 2004 TA Plan.  Globally, the costing arrived at for the 2004 activities was approximately SwF 29.6 million.  The total comprised of first;  an estimated overall cost of SwF 36,198,343, second;  the reductions in cost to WTO due to cost sharing arrangements of SwF 6,585,743 and third;  a net total for the WTO of SwF 29,612,600.  For national activities, the Secretariat had based its estimates on a total volume of approximately 250 activities, which was more or less the same as that estimated to be reached in 2003.  A provision for twenty WTO Reference Centres had also been included.  In 2004, the Secretariat proposed to fully finance 13 L posts out of the DDAGTF.  He reminded Members that 19 L posts were created in 2002 to give the Secretariat additional human resources needed to implement the DDA.  In 2003, it had been initially agreed that such posts would all be financed out of the Programme Support Fund.  When making that proposal to Members in 2002, it was made clear that that solution would no longer be available in 2004, obliging the Secretariat to find a different source of funding for the L posts.  The posts that were to be financed out of the DDAGTF were those directly associated with the delivery of TA or training.  The remaining six L posts played more of an internal support role in the implementation of the Plan and would continue to be financed out of the Programme Support Fund in 2004.  The cost-sharing hypothesis on which the estimates were based on was ambitious (SwF 6.6 million).  That amount needed to be considered as a maximum figure.  As far as the "bottom line" was concerned, the Secretariat hoped that Members would maintain in the regular budgets of 2004 and 2005, an envelope for TA and training fairly similar in size to what had been approved for 2003 i.e. SwF 5.6 million.  The estimation was consequently that all of the activities in the draft 2004 TA Plan, taken together, would involve a cost to the WTO over and above the regular budget available for TA and training of about SwF 24 million.  That amount would have to be financed out of the DDAGTF.  He stressed that that was identical to what had been asked of donors for 2003.  The Secretariat said that if Members took into account the probable balance of the funds at the end of 2003 and the pledges that had already been made by some donor countries, then the Secretariat would require funds between SwF 14.5 and SwF 17.5 million for 2004 for the DDAGTF.  He concluded by saying that any adjustment to the 2004 TA Plan which might result from discussions in the CTD would influence the cost estimates just presented.  
&& The representative of Morocco said that the draft 2004 TA Plan, which differed from those of previous years in its form, structure and content, prompted a number of remarks from his delegation.  The first had to do with consultations.  The Secretariat had mentioned in its presentation that the draft 2004 TA Plan had been prepared in consultation with the representatives of regional groups.  He said that Morocco had been the coordinator of the African Group until the previous week and that his delegation had not been involved in any preparatory consultations for the draft 2004 TA Plan.  The Ambassador had been contacted by the Secretariat by telephone to discuss the question of TA.  That was ten days ago when the draft 2003 TA Plan had already been circulated.  A colleague from the mission of Morocco had discussed that with the Secretariat but his delegation had unfortunately not been satisfied with the explanations given.  His delegation had been contacted in its own capacity and not as the coordinator of the African Group.  He agreed with the representative of Mauritius that the African group had not yet discussed documents Second Quarterly Report and the draft 2004 TA Plan.  Nevertheless, his delegation was pleased that the regional structure of the TA planned for 2004 encompassed the Arab and Middle Eastern countries.  In view of the specificities and special needs of that region, that initiative was welcome and he hoped that those Members would continue to constitute a fully fledged region in future WTO TA programmes.  His delegation was also pleased that the Secretariat, through its draft 2004 TA Plan, was seeking to extend and strengthen its network of cooperation and partnerships with academics and researchers.  That would enable the LDCs and developing countries to develop their own capacity.  However, such an initiative should not exclude higher training institutions that dealt with trade issues in general, and with the multilateral trading system in particular.  Those specialized institutes, which in Morocco were independent and had access to greater financial resources than universities for example, were better equipped to absorb and develop the capital of knowledge that would result from a partnership with the WTO.  He hoped that the different activities listed in paragraph 65 of the draft 2004 TA Plan would not duplicate each other and that the necessary steps would be taken to ensure that they remained complementary.  His delegation welcomed the outreach programme for parliaments and civil society.  It was an activity that would help those two groups develop a more in-depth understanding of the multilateral trading system.  
He continued by saying that the approach of preparing the draft 2004 TA Plan had been different from the past.  That approach had given rise to serious problems for his delegation which would have liked to have an objective and exhaustive evaluation of the TA and capacity building delivered in the past two years.  His delegation also requested explanations on the abandoning of previous practice.  He wished to pose some questions because his delegation had not been convinced by the enumeration of some of the activities in the draft 2004 TA Plan.  He referred to paragraph 6 of page 2 containing the key features of the draft 2004 TA Plan that had an influence on the new approach of the TA Plan, the first being that the Plan would be based on quality.  That implied that the previous approach had not been based on quality, and if that was the case that was something that needed to be recognised.  The second feature was product-oriented.  He asked whether that meant that  the modules presented in the two previous TA Plans were not appropriate and if that was the case that needed to be underlined.  However, if that was not the case it had to be acknowledged.  The third feature was based on obtaining results and he asked whether that meant that the results of the previous TA Plans did not meet the expectations of the beneficiaries.  The fourth feature was that the Plan would be geographically balanced. His delegation agreed with that because the 2004 TA Plan would provide for a greater coverage among the various regions.  The fifth feature meant that the Plan would be broader and deeper in scope.  He asked whether that related to the countries or the results.  There was confusion there because the subjects covered in the past two TA Plans did not correspond to the themes of the DDA.  The sixth feature referred to the Plan as being simple and flexible.  He asked whether that implied that the previous Plans had not been simple and flexible.  The final feature related to building and strengthening strategic partnerships.  His delegation had doubts about that because until then there were no real partnerships between the beneficiaries and the Secretariat because those activities had continued to be prepared without the effective participation of the countries concerned.  The needs and concerns of African countries should to be taken into account.  The needs of his Government were not the same as those of other countries in Africa.  Each country possessed its own economic level had its own human resource constraints and problems with institutions and universities.  The strategic partnerships should be real action plans with all countries concerned involved in their conceptualisation and all the countries would be requested to establish a common understanding either in small meetings or in the Secretariat with the different regional groups.  So that some countries, particularly the LDCs with great needs could be involved in the negotiations and better defend their interests.  His delegation noted that national activities would no longer be planned annually in advance, and that Members' requests would be studied and, where applicable, approved as and when they were made.  Although flexibility was cited in justification of that change, his delegation had serious reservations regarding that approach.  That new approach would go against the principle of transparency which was advocated by all WTO Members and which needed to be applied by the Secretariat.  The new approach would, on the one hand give the Secretariat discretionary power, and on the other hand become the consecration of the discriminatory practice of first come first served without any control on the part of Member states.  The precedent of the regional trade policy course that was supposed to have been held in Morocco but which was cancelled without consulting the Moroccan delegation gave an example of the difficulties that could be encountered if the decision was exclusively in the hands of the Secretariat.  Members would then find themselves in a situation where decisions would be taken without their participation.  For all those reasons his delegation would not be able to adopt the draft 2004 TA Plan.  
He went on to say that with respect to the regional trade policy courses, four of which would be organized in 2004, his delegation was surprised to note that the venue of the course for Francophone African Member countries was yet to be determined.  Although the 2002 course was held in Casablanca, the second one, planned for 2003, had not yet taken place in Rabat for reasons relating to the choice by WTO officials.  The sharing of responsibilities for the actual course management and for the training partnerships had made it impossible to organize the course at a time when the preparations for the Cancún Ministerial Conference were underway.  His delegation had been faced with a fait accompli, and was never consulted about the postponement.  His delegation had merely been informed, in a letter dated 15 March 2003, of the Secretariat's decision and promised that the necessary action would be taken to ensure better preparation in the future.  Both his Mission and his authorities in Rabat interpreted that to mean that the course had been postponed until 2004 and in other words that it would still be held in Morocco.  While expressing its reservations about that course, his delegation still hoped that the course would be organized in Morocco as agreed.  As in the past, his delegation was willing to fully cooperate with the Secretariat to ensure optimal conditions for a successful course in Morocco in 2004, in keeping with the hope of several Francophone African Member countries.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that he wished to take as a reference for the 2004 TA Plan, four elements which were recommendations that had come out of the Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2002.  The first was that more operational goals should be set for different programmes, including benchmarks and indicators.  Second, that support strategies be developed which would guide different programmes and would ensure a better impact.  Support strategies in the sense that even short-term programmes and workshops should be linked into a longer chain of activities and be part of longer term capacity building.  Third, that demand analysis be better developed and fourth, that in any type of training, the question of the selection methods should be more thorough and build on the institutional goals in developing countries.  Traces of all those recommendations could be found in the draft 2004 TA Plan which was generally pleasing.  For instance, there was stronger emphasis on regional activities and maintaining the importance of regional trade policy courses both in Geneva and in the regions.  The first question he had relating to the regional courses was how the Secretariat envisaged the transfer to the regions, for example to regional academic institutions, because what Members had seen in the 2002 TA Plan was that the general courses would be taught by regional professors or regional academic institutions and that the WTO related courses would be taught by WTO experts.  That transfer of responsibility when everything was going to be held in the regions was a challenge.  It was interesting that there were regional experts attending seminars in Geneva.  Associating those experts with training activities in Geneva was a step in the right direction.  His next comment related to demand and he said that he shared some of the views expressed by && The representative of Morocco but not necessarily his conclusion.  When considering demand and supply it was clear that Members had to differentiate.  The question of demand with respect to the regional trade policy courses was how the participants were going to be selected, how the contents of the courses was going to be influenced in terms of their knowledge and the priorities being set as a function of the detected insufficiencies.  It was clear that the Governments as partners had an important role to play. That might also mean demand in the sense that for certain activities the choice of the specific sectoral or problem-oriented activities that were part of the training and the workshops was what was at stake.  The next element of demand related to national activities and he believed that their demand was being determined in a different way.  It was a good suggestion to identify that type of demand through trade policy reviews, the IF process and analytical studies being carried out, JITAP, existing capacity building efforts and through discussions with partners in the beneficiary countries.  What needed to be clear was that what was being discussed had to be a reflected, analysed and justified demand and not wishes by partners in developing countries or donors.  
He went on to say that his delegation had always opposed, like many others, the notion of ad hoc activities and activities that were not part of longer term capacity building strategies.  The draft 2004 TA Plan went in the opposite direction in anticipating a higher amount of national activities that were ad hoc.  He reminded Members that when discussing the draft 2003 TA Plan one point that had been made was that no more than 5 per cent of the activities should be ad hoc.  His impression was that the Secretariat had departed from that original idea and was defining demand for national activities that was based on dialogues with the beneficiaries, their short-term needs and their short-term deficits.  It was a rather operational demand in respect to negotiations and the next events in the WTO.  It was related to trade policy clinics which were another way to consider that.  That had also been mentioned in the context of the extended discussions and seminars that had been held with countries in the trade policy review mechanism.  There were in fact three instruments that were being projected, trade policy reviews, trade policy clinics and ad hoc national activities as a way of interacting with countries and providing beneficiaries with operational support as WTO Members having obligations and rights and having problems in dealing with those obligations and actively participating in negotiating processes.  If that was the concept, then his delegation had no problem with those activities being ad hoc.  However, ad hoc then meant that the Secretariat intervened with the beneficiaries in a focused way using different instruments to establish a more policy-related and practical dialogue on their Membership issues and their role in the negotiations.  That would be a way of identifying the demand of such activities, which could not be planned ahead of time.  It would not simply be wishes from countries but it would reflect a good analytical and policy related dialogue with the countries.
He concluded by discussing what was already implicit in the discussions on the Second Quarterly Report which related to the function of monitoring and evaluation in respect to the 2004 TA Plan.  He said that in the Second Quarterly Report it was not clear what the function of the monitoring unit of the Audit was.  What his delegation knew from the past was that the Secretariat had employed the typical training tools to consider process monitoring, to consider whether the courses were satisfactory to the participants and to consider whether the trainees were achieving the expected results.  There were people attending courses on a sample basis making observations and that was something that would then be reflected in the audit report.  The real question was whether the Secretariat was attempting to go beyond that.  There were two ways to do that, one was to associate clear qualified objectives with the different courses and training goals and to find a way to evaluate how those objectives were met each time a course took place.  There would thus be results at the end on certain indicators and benchmarks which could be reflected in the reports.  Another way was to consider impact.  He asked whether that was something the Secretariat planned, and whether it in some cases would try to follow up on what happened to the participants to courses in previous years, whether they were the same people who were anticipated to be in certain positions, whether they were utilising the knowledge they had acquired in their functions.  He asked if the Secretariat used what that indicated in terms of improving courses.  Such impact analysis was difficult but necessary.  In that respect he asked the Secretariat what methods it was using with respect to planning for future years and also with respect to previous programmes.  That was not an easy task because there was a cost element associated to it.  It was a question of numbers and the intensity of the effort of the evaluation.  His delegation attached great importance to the evaluation.  Because training efforts were elusive and costly it was important to be efficient and to provide quality to the beneficiary countries.  That effort had to be stepped up to ensure that the large sums of money being earmarked for this purpose were well spent.  
&& The representative of the European Communities said that he agreed with what the representative of Switzerland had said but would limit his comments to the more general and fundamental issues underlying the draft 2004 TA Plan, and would leave other comments on the Plan for later.  He said that although the Secretariat was to be thanked for its efforts in drawing up the draft 2004 TA Plan, his delegation had the impression that the Plan was based on the pre-Cancún situation.  The Cancún outcome required a re-assessment of TA priorities.  It could not be business as usual.  He said that his delegation had not been consulted during the drafting of the Plan and was only consulted after the Plan had already been drawn up.  First, Members needed to reconsider the scope of future TA since it was not clear what the scope of the DDA would be in future, given the rejection by many Members of key subjects in the DDA Work Programme, the almost certain delay of negotiations, and the general uncertainty that now prevailed.  It was, for example, premature at that point to assume that there would be TA needs related to some or all of the Singapore issues.  Second, as Cancún had revealed, there were problems in understanding issues and there were limitations when it came to negotiations.  TA was therefore even more necessary than ever before, at least for those issues that would continue to be part of the DDA Work Programme.  Third, one of the immediate results of Cancún was that the European Communities would be critically considering the functioning of the WTO and the case for possible institutional improvements within it.  That would include the scope, organisation, resources necessary for, and funding of within a broader review of the role, funding and organisation of the Secretariat.  Fourth, and linked to the question of WTO reform was the relationship between the future TA activities of the WTO and the contribution in that field of other international organisations, in other words the interface between coherence and development aid.  Members' definition of this interface and the allotment of specified roles based on competencies would have immediate implications for the scope, nature and management of future WTO TA.  In view of that, his delegation was of the opinion that the 2004 TA Plan should focus first and foremost on the WTO's core activities, that was the implementation of existing agreements, and when the DDA had been re-launched, on TA for those subjects that would be part of the negotiating agenda and the work programme.
He continued by saying that the 2004 TA Plan had taken a different approach as compared to the 2003 TA Plan.  In that respect the Plan confirmed what was stated in paragraph 21 of the Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2002 (WT/COMTD/W/111 of 28 March 2003) that "The plan lives and dies from one year to the next.  Therefore, the cumulative benefits of the current TAs for the beneficiaries are more the result of coincidence than systematically thought out efforts."  The draft 2004 TA Plan read like a catalogue from which developing countries could choose what they desired.  It provided an overview of what the WTO Secretariat would actually do in the area of TA and training without being specific on the content of the courses.  The text and the tables in the annex of he Plan were also not fully compatible.  Also the cost estimates as presented in document JOB(03)/198 of 10 October 2003 did not follow the same set-up as the description of the Plan in pages 2 to 21.  That inconsistency made it difficult to get a comprehensive and clear insight on what was actually being proposed and at what cost.  Commenting on the design and the costing of the Plan, he said that output was now measured in terms of the number of "participant days" but costing was general and not transparent.  Cost per participant per day was a useful criterion for judging the mix of activities, those held regionally, nationally and in Geneva.  It seemed that activities in Geneva remained extraordinarily expensive (over SwF 2000 per participant day).  There was also no insight as to the cost of national activities because national activities were only designed in a general way.  He said that the establishment of the Plan was clearly based on what the WTO could offer, and was therefore to a large extent supply driven.  Most of the "products" had been available in 2002 as well.  In 2002, donors and recipient developing countries had insisted on a needs based approach.  The question was how had the Secretariat determined that what it could offer was what the developing country Members needed.  He said that it was striking to see that the list in paragraph 6 failed to mention any customer-oriented criteria.  He said that the 2004 TA Plan focused almost exclusively on training and capacity building related to training.  At the national level technical workshops were foreseen, but no TA was foreseen for the actual implementation and application of existing WTO Agreements.  From the financial note his delegation understood that less than 10 per cent of the budget would be devoted to national activities.  Also the way in which national activities would be agreed on was not clearly defined.  The four criteria included in paragraph 37 of the draft 2004 TA Plan also left a number of doubts.  For instance, the first of the criteria was not consistent with what was stated elsewhere in the document on the capacity of countries to be able define their own priorities and individual needs.  Therefore, in his delegation’s view, the dilemma of matching needs with what was on offer in terms of regional, national and Geneva-based activities could be overcome if the WTO Secretariat clearly identified the target group for the different courses.  The proposed candidates could then be assessed on the basis of their CV's and a better selection could be made.  That would at least provide some check on the level and relevance of the training for individual participants, and would prevent "course hoppers" attending as many courses as possible.  
In addition, he said that his delegation was opposed to using the DDAGTF for activities related to the IF, the trade policy reviews and for attending, among others, international meetings and conferences.  His delegation felt that those activities should be funded from the regular budget.  His delegation disagreed that JITAP and the IF were products similar to the other training courses in the Plan.  He said that the crucial issue of the needs of developing countries had not been addressed.  The key task of the WTO Secretariat should be to address that issue and to base in the 2004 TA Plan on a strategy to get that off the ground.  Other non-priority activities needed to be dropped to make that possible.  As had been mentioned by the representative of Switzerland, feedback from trade policy reviews, JITAP, the IF and similar exercises carried out in of the different Committees should be used to engage with the developing countries in defining their needs.  He was pleased to note that the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade and the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary had carried out surveys of developing country needs.  The results of those surveys should be taken into account.  It was also important to assist and focus the TA Plan more on assisting developing countries with mainstreaming trade into their national policies.  Thus, there still remained an important issue that was not being well addressed and the Cancún experience had given some further ideas on that.  Finally with respect to monitoring, he said that it was stated in the Plan that the achievement of the "desired outcome of the products" was an important objective of the activities.  However, this could only be assessed when the desired outcome was clearly specified up front.  He said that it was also important to introduce some kind of verification of the accrued knowledge and understanding both at the beginning and at the end of a course so as to measure the impact of the activity.  The European Communities had done that in the four week DDA training course that it had organised in April.  That had been systematically done at the beginning, during and end of all the subject areas and was a valuable exercise that would help define the content for the next course.  With respect to the evaluation of the TA Plan, he said that it was important that apart from the Secretariat carrying out the evaluation, there was also an independent outside evaluator to assess the achievement of the objectives of the Plan.  
&& The representative of Barbados said that report on the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan (WT/COMTD/W/118) gave her delegation confidence in the Secretariat and especially in the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation and in its delivery and implementation of the 2003 TA Plan.  She said that her delegation supported the draft 2004 TA Plan which was a good basis for the 2004 TA programme.  She said that when considering the key features of the 2004 TA Plan her delegation felt that the orientation which had been chosen was pertinent.  It was good that the Secretariat had established priorities which were based on an assessment of countries needs and realities.  In that context, her delegation welcomed the fact that the 2004 TA Plan took into account the needs of LDCs, small and vulnerable economies and non resident WTO Members.  An impressive range of products had been envisaged and in that context her delegation was pleased to see that a regional trade policy course would be held in the Caribbean.  With respect to the TA and training activities envisaged at a national level, her delegation noted the emphasis being placed on the complementarity of national activities with regional activities and trade policy courses.  Her delegation also noted that flexibility and specificity were highlighted as key guidelines to the conduct of national activities.  Her delegation was willing to see how that new approach to the delivery of TA would work in practice.  With the introduction of new products such as the trade policy clinics, her delegation was confident that there would be no sidelining of national activities in the 2004 TA Plan and in that regard her delegation welcomed the Secretariat's affirmation that the WTO was ready to undertake the same number of national activities in 2004 as was being undertaken in 2003.  With respect to the Geneva-based support activities, she highlighted the importance and benefits of "Geneva Week" for non-residents.  She was pleased to note that that activity had been retained for the 2004 TA Plan.  With respect to the partnerships for training and capacity building, her delegation had indicated in the past and still considered that to be an important initiative and urged the WTO to continue to develop institutional links with academic bodies in Member states, especially in developing countries.  Her delegation felt that those partnerships for training and capacity building were a good example of sustainable capacity building and that it was clearly an investment in the beneficiary countries national capabilities.  Her delegation was therefore pleased to see that there was an attempt to accelerate work on that initiative and hoped to see tangible results from that project during the course of 2004.  Another related activity that her delegation felt had significant potential was the distance learning and information technology initiative and her delegation hoped that progress would also be made in that area in 2004.  With respect to the trainee programmes and internships, she emphasised the importance that her delegation attached to those programmes as a significant channel of enhancing national capacity both in capital as well as in missions in Geneva.  Internships were particularly important for countries such as hers that had limited human resources.  
She drew Members attention to part IV of the draft 2004 TA Plan which dealt with the establishment by the WTO of partnerships through Memoranda of Understanding and other arrangements.  In the Caribbean region there was evidence of positive synergies which had been generated by such partnerships and her delegation looked forward to continued and enhanced positive results from such arrangements in the future.  On the issue of funding, what she had said demonstrated the extent to which TRTA and capacity building were important to developing country Members.  Her delegation was therefore confident that the developed country trading partners who were the principle donors, were fully aware of the importance placed by developing countries on the ability of the WTO to deliver substantial and effective TRTA.  The WTO continued to be a viable institution in which her delegation placed its trust. The Doha Work Programme which possessed many different components both of a negotiating and non negotiating nature, remained important to Barbados and it was the WTO's responsibility to assist developing countries with regard to both the regular work of the institution as well as the Doha Work Programme mandated by Ministers.  She therefore urged that the financing required to implement the 2004 TA Plan be provided in full in an effective and useful manner.
&& The representative of Venezuela said that her delegation welcomed the improvements to the TA Plan which had an improved form and structure and made room for Member countries' requests and took into account her delegation's request of introducing greater flexibility in the Plan.  Her delegation believed that to be an important element.  Her delegation was also pleased to see that the interests and needs of beneficiaries were taken into account.  TA had to go beyond the implementation of the WTO Agreements and needed to take into account institutional capacity building in beneficiary countries.  Her delegation particularly favoured the role given to academic activities and in that context she said that priority should be given to universities and training centres in developing countries.  During consultations on the TA Plan her delegation had noted the importance of considering not only the universities in developed countries, but also those in developing countries because not all their nationals had an opportunity to study in those universities.  She said that cooperation with other agencies should continue considering Members needs and she hoped there would be closer cooperation with UNCTAD which her delegation was pleased to note had signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the WTO.   She said that her delegation also favoured the initiatives for distance-learning and hoped that in the future those initiatives would not replace the attendance-based training courses.  She however voiced her delegation’s concern over the fact that a trade policy course had not been planned for the Latin American Region.  Nevertheless, her delegation was pleased to note that one such course would be held in the Caribbean Region.  With respect to paragraph 34 of the 2004 TA Plan, she said that her delegation believed that there should be a revaluation of activities in light of the outcome of the Cancún Ministerial Conference.  Some activities would need to be reformulated taking into consideration the needs of developing countries.  Her delegation appreciated the information provided in paragraph 65 of the draft 2004 TA Plan and reiterated the importance that her delegation attached to the training of academics as well as the support programme for doctoral studies.  Her delegation believed that UNCTAD could assist in that area.  Details on start dates;  coverage;  and number of participants should be indicated to make the courses clearer.  She agreed with the comments made by the representative of the European Communities with respect to obtaining information on participants' level of knowledge, something her delegation had always believed to be desirable and had never understood the explanations as to why that had not been done in the past.  The United Nations Institute for Research and Training had specific models on how to assess participants and the WTO needed to take that into account in the future.  She said that she agreed with the representative of Barbados that the draft 2004 TA Plan was a good basis for the 2004 TA programme.   
&& The representative of Tunisia said that his remarks would focus on the features of the draft 2004 TA Plan and on the activities listed therein.  He assured the Secretariat of his delegation's full cooperation and availability in the ongoing consultations with regional groups, with a view to making any necessary improvements to the initial draft of the 2004 TA Plan.  With respect to the key features of the 2004 TA Plan, beginning from paragraph 6, he said that Tunisia was pleased to see that the Plan had been drafted in a balanced fashion, since broadly the same number of activities had been scheduled for each region.  He hoped that this balance was maintained at the level of national activities too.  The idea of giving countries the opportunity to consider their own priority needs and put forward their requests at any time they felt appropriate during the year, was interesting.  Nevertheless, it was necessary to ensure that a number of conditions were taken into account.  Firstly, the Secretariat should ensure a fair implementation of activities that benefited developing countries.  Secondly, the Secretariat should ensure the necessary transparency in the implementation of such activities by publishing periodic reports on the requests received from Members and on the cooperation activities that were to be allocated.  Elements should be incorporated into the revised plan that would take into account some of the concerns expressed by the delegation of Morocco.  As regards the products contained in the draft 2004 TA Plan, his delegation supported the Secretariat's initiative aimed at extending TA activities to the academic sector.  His delegation was confident that that new initiative would lead to the establishment of a network of national trainers in the multilateral trading system, so as to ensure sustainable strengthening of the capacity to understand the multilateral trading system.  His delegation welcomed the initiative introduced by the Secretariat in 2002, of assigning a resource person to assist the regional groups in their coordination activities which was stated in the second bullet point of paragraph 76 of the Plan.  As coordinator of the Arab Group, his delegation hoped that that facility would be extended to the Arab Group, as it was to other regional groups.  Furthermore, his delegation noted that the table on regional activities on page 27 of the Plan did not include any trade policy courses for the Arab and Middle Eastern countries.  He advised the Secretariat to include a regional trade policy course for those countries so as to ensure a geographical balance;  that was a key feature of the 2004 TA Plan.
He went on to say that the draft 2004 TA Plan cited the JITAP programme as one of the "products" provided by the WTO.  The contribution made by the WTO in conjunction with UNCTAD and the ITC, in ensuring the smooth running of the programme, should not be underestimated.  The programme was presently in its second phase and should benefit eight new African countries in addition to the eight countries that were already covered in the first phase.  Tunisia, the country where JITAP now originated, took a special interest in the programme.  His delegation hoped that the JITAP programme would achieve the anticipated objectives, in particular improvement in the supply side capacity of beneficiary countries and in the market knowledge of exporting enterprises, so that those firms were able to export and derive benefits from the business opportunities that were likely to arise within the framework of the ongoing negotiations.
&& The representative of India said that a range of products had been proposed in the draft 2004 TA Plan to address the complexity of both geographic and substantive needs.  Even though there had been some preliminary contacts made with his delegation, they would have preferred a more structured process of consultations.  His delegation also welcomed the emphasis on a regional approach to TA, both because trade issues increasingly possessed a regional dimension and also because of the networking opportunities and sustained capacity building possibilities that this would provide.  His delegation noted that a venue for Asia had yet to be chosen and he suggested that India be considered in that respect.  He requested more details of the responsibilities that the host would need to take.  His delegation welcomed the proposed regional seminars, but said that his delegation would like, in the inventory of possible themes mentioned in paragraph 34 of the draft 2004 TA Plan, the inclusion of Trade and Development;  an area of critical interest to all developing countries.  With respect to the national activities, his delegation noted the proposed criteria but as mentioned by other delegations, there was a need for greater clarification on the selection process.  He was not certain what could be done in that aspect but said that perhaps this was something that the CTD or the CTD Chair could do.  He highlighted the need for assistance relating to the trade policy clinics and assistance in the trade policy review mechanism, to be demand driven. While that was recognised in the Plan as a whole there was a greater need to underline the necessity of the content of those courses to be demand driven rather than having any aspects that might suggest a prescriptive approach from the part of the Secretariat.  With respect to the proposed activities under the outreach programme, Members needed to realise that outreach was a distinct activity and was different from TA.  He was not certain whether those activities should be accorded the same priority as had been suggested.  It was perhaps something that should be left to the countries in terms of their own perceived needs under the national activities umbrella.  As a preliminary reaction to what had been said by the representative of the European Communities in relation to the emphasis of training assistance on existing agreements, he said that whatever else Ministers might or might not have agreed on at the Cancún Ministerial Conference, they did reaffirm their commitment to the DDA and flowing from that mandate training assistance would need to cover both the implementation of existing agreements as well as the capacity of developing countries to participate and deliver towards meaningful agreements arising form the DDA.  
&& The representative of Mauritius said that both the report on the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan (WT/COMTD/W/118) and the 2004 TA Plan (WT/COMTD/W/119) were related in the sense that the comments made on the 2003 TA Plan were useful inputs for the 2004 TA Plan.  It was in that respect that he had mentioned that African Member countries should provide their comments on the two documents.  It was important to consider how to take that issue forward in the sense of the challenging work of the Doha Work Programme ahead of Members.  Many delegations had expressed their views on some of the shortcomings of the present and past TA Plans.  He shared the perspective of Morocco but as a group, Members needed to work together to find ways of addressing those issues.  As he had stated earlier, there were a number of elements in the draft 2004 TA Plan which were of interest to the African Group.  He had given his views on the inclusion in the 2004 TA Plan of the regional trade policy courses to be held in Kenya and the other one for which the venue was yet to be confirmed.  The 2004 TA Plan was work that served a purpose and in the past TA Plan had been prepared on a needs basis and he hoped that this would remain a guiding principle of the process.  His delegation, like that of Barbados had confidence in the Secretariat and the job it was doing.  Although there were commendable positive elements in the draft 2004 TA Plan, there were still certain areas that could be improved upon.  He gave the example of the trade policy review mechanism which was an institution in the architecture of the WTO.  As an institution it catered for all Members and in the context of the preamble of the WTO agreement, the draft 2004 TA Plan should include something on the role played by the trade policy review mechanism.  It was not just providing capacity building to developing countries but the whole process of appreciation that the trade policy review mechanism brought for the Membership as a whole in defending the multilateral trading system in the way that Members applied the principles of the WTO rules was the basic aim.  That was why TA was important not only in helping the developing countries and the LDCs to implement the WTO Agreements but at the same time defending the system as a whole.  For those involved in outsourcing that would give a full picture of what the WTO TA was doing.  There were a number of other elements that were important.  With respect to the assistance for coordinators, he said that his delegation had received a letter from the Secretariat offering an extension of that assistance which was much appreciated.  He felt that that would assist the African Group in discharging its responsibilities. 
&& The representative of Chile said that her delegation supported the new approach of the draft 2004 TA Plan in terms of objectives and products.  She said that the regional trade policy courses were the most important products on offer as they generated long-lasting strategic associations and were thereby well suited to providing long-term capacity building.  In that context, her Government had sent a note to the Secretariat offering the assistance of the University of Chile as host for a regional trade policy course in the Latin American region.  The draft 2004 TA Plan did not include any regional trade policy course for the Latin American region.  However, it was important for the countries in that region for a course to be held there.  She said that knowledge about the WTO Agreements should get permanent and broad-based dissemination.  That was particularly important as many Latin American Governments had begun bilateral and regional initiatives.
&& The representative of Australia said that it was important that Members did not overplay the need to completely review or revise the existing arrangements for TRTA immediately following the Cancún Ministerial Conference.  The draft 2004 TA Plan clearly referred to the need to review elements of the proposed work programme after the meeting of senior officials scheduled for 15 December 2003.  That caveat was sufficient for the current situation.  All Members were likely to agree that TA was an important part of WTO's work under the DDA and that it was time to continue its full delivery and develop mechanisms of appropriate accountability.  She said that the point made earlier by the representative of India had been well taken.  She said that she would make her comments on a chapter-by-chapter basis although there would be some overlapping themes.  Amongst those overlapping themes was the need for strong mechanisms for monitoring and accountability.  She wished to add her delegation's voice to many of the comments already made by both donor and recipients of TA.  The list of key features in Chapter II on the "Key Features of the Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2004" was impressive.  The important point was to ensure that an explanation was given of how those key features would be delivered, how the delivery would be measured, and how the key features would be factored into the product linkages and evaluation process which her delegation hoped would feed into subsequent planning processes.
She went on to say that her delegation, like others, would be grateful for some supplementary information in Chapter III on national activities and the possibility to request ad-hoc activities throughout the year.  There was a delicate balancing act between the flexibility to address urgent needs as they arose, and the need to ensure transparency, geographical equity and to maintain clear oversight of product delivery.  It was therefore important to engage in the details of how that balance would be achieved.  She noted the reference in paragraph 85 to the use of money from the Global Trust Fund for WTO Secretariat attendance at international meetings and conferences.  The paragraph made some useful points regarding the need for WTO Secretariat attendance, but it was not clear whether there were any explicit criteria to ensure the development impact of that attendance.  That paragraph therefore needed some further clarification.  In Chapter III her delegation also wished to see a reference to the Pacific region in addition to Asia in the fourth bullet point of paragraph 19.  With respect to Chapter IV she said that her delegation supported the Secretariat's move to increase partnerships but wished more details on the content of the Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) signed and the efforts that would be made to ensure delivery of quality activities, including through maintaining appropriate levels of supervision and involvement in the development of course content.  Her delegation had been disappointed to find that there was only a brief reference to outsourcing, an issue on which the CTD had produced some good work.  A reference could well be made to the desirability and practicality of outsourcing in the delivery of any activity contained in the 2004 TA Plan which might realistically move Members towards meeting the objectives outlined in the previously discussed Secretariat note on outsourcing.  Some useful comments had been made by other delegations on monitoring and evaluation under the previous agenda item and with respect to Chapter V.  Her delegation fully agreed with the concern expressed by the representative of Canada and the helpful proposal on a possible way forward.  The representative of Switzerland had also clearly articulated concerns which her delegation shared about both the need for and the purpose of monitoring and evaluation.  The 2004 TA Plan should, at the least, include an outline or at least a reference to indicators that would be used for monitoring and evaluation.  The 2004 TA Plan should also, for transparency purposes, include an indication of the method used to ensure the selection of appropriate candidates for the training courses, as that was critical for achieving sustainable impacts.
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation in general considered the content of the draft 2004 TA Plan as good and pledged to fully cooperate with the Secretariat to make it an effective one.  His delegation wished to continue to carefully examine the financial aspects of WTO TA.  In that context and with regard to item 6 of JOB(03)/198 he asked for a justification in terms of workload for the cost of the 13 L-posts mentioned.
&& The representative of Cuba said that there should be a natural continuation of both the draft 2004 TA Plan and the Second Quarterly Report on the TA implementation of the 2003 TA Plan.  Her delegation considered the draft 2004 TA Plan to be a good platform for WTO TA and training under the DDA.  As other delegations had said with regard to fundamental guidelines, it was key that the draft 2004 TA Plan be based on needs expressed through requests made by the beneficiaries and that a geographical balance be respected for the activities.  The draft 2004 TA Plan could be improved in certain areas by considering the views expressed by delegations and she requested the Secretariat to take the concerns expressed into account.  Other specialized institutions should be involved in the implementation of the draft 2004 TA Plan such as in the areas of trade and finance and trade and transfer of technology.  The draft 2004 TA Plan was preliminary and could be adjusted as needs arose, but it provided a good basis from which to start.  Related to both the draft 2004 TA Plan and the Second Quarterly Report on the implementation of the 2003 TA Plan, she said that it might be more constructive to take her delegation's concerns into account when planning for the future.  She noted that her Government had not been invited to participate in the training activities of the DDA planned for the Latin American and Caribbean region in the second quarter of 2003.  She was not asking for a public explanation from the Secretariat but said that she wished to state that that practice would set an unacceptable precedent in the delivery of TA provided by the WTO.  Her Government wished to reiterate that a Government that accepted to host any WTO TA activity had to guarantee the possibility for all WTO Members to participate in it, and had to abstain from any bilaterally or multilaterally applied discriminatory practices.
&& The representative of Norway said that her delegation was generally pleased with the targets as presented in part I and II, and particularly with the priority put on the LDCs in paragraph 2, the importance of having a quality-oriented approach as mentioned in the first bullet-point in paragraph 6, the focus on more result-oriented activities which would leave a sustainable trace, and better coordination with other agencies and partners.  The draft 2004 TA Plan also provided a good overview of the various types of activities on offer.  Nevertheless, her delegation saw scope for improvement with regard to the format of the draft 2004 TA Plan and its use as a strategic tool.  She said that it was difficult to understand how the stated LDC priority and geographical balance would be followed-up in practice.  Her delegation also considered it useful to have a TA Plan targeted to each Member's TA and capacity building needs.  However, she was aware that an annual plan would be of an ad hoc nature and not specific enough with regard to the implementation in specific Member countries.  && The Secretariat might therefore, as an internal planning tool, consider making a comprehensive overview of different Members' needs as they were perceived by the Secretariat and as defined by the Members themselves.  Such an overview would have to be established in close cooperation with Members in order to ensure a demand-driven approach to the WTO TA Plan.
&& The representative of Malaysia said that the draft 2004 TA Plan was a good basis for further work.  She said that her Government wished to host a regional trade policy course in Asia.  As her delegation had mentioned at earlier meetings, it was important to ensure a fair distribution of geographical locations for regional seminars.  Her delegation was pleased with the statement made by the Secretariat that national activities for 2004, although not enumerated in the draft 2004 TA Plan, could be discussed with the Secretariat on an ad hoc basis.  She asked how it would be ensured that a Member was allocated the courses it requested.  Consultations with the Secretariat would ensure that the courses met Members' needs.  It would be useful to ensure the incorporation of some of the key features emphasised in paragraph 6 such as the practical, quality-oriented approach to the courses enhancing the understanding of the WTO.  Her delegation supported the draft 2004 TA Plan as long as it gave due attention to national seminars and courses.
&& The representative of Paraguay said that the objectives were well defined in the draft 2004 TA Plan and that the products on offer were aimed at tackling the needs identified by Members.  Some of the 19 products were good initiatives to ensure that developing countries received the TA they needed to meet their objectives.  However, there were some shortcomings with the basic characteristics of the draft 2004 TA Plan.  Despite the fact that Members had been told that the draft 2004 TA Plan would meet the priority needs of WTO TA and deal with the specific requests made by the beneficiaries of WTO TA, his delegation felt that the draft 2004 TA Plan focused on the products, effects and results rather than on the critical needs of developing countries.  What was needed to ensure product transparency were procedures that ensured a clear definition of the criteria used for choosing the developing country beneficiaries of the TA on offer.  That, in turn, was linked to national and regional activities.  His delegation wished to see such elements reflected in order to improve the good work that the Secretariat had provided Members with.  Like other delegations from his region he noted the absence of regional trade policy courses in the Latin American Region.  As coordinator for the GRULAC Group, his delegation, during the review of the results of the Regional Trade Policy Course held in Casablanca, had flagged the need to have that type of course in the Latin American region.  That was linked to the importance of strategic alliances such as that with the ANDEAN integration programme of the Inter-American Development Bank.  It was also important to have a clear link to regional universities.  Finally, a well-functioning follow-up and assessment mechanism of WTO TA had to be put in place which would enable Members to ensure an efficient, high-quality management of each TA Plan as envisaged by the Secretariat. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that, in the preparation of the draft TA Plans for 2002 and 2003 Members had been consulted about the areas of interest in which they wished to receive TA.  However, his delegation had not been consulted in the preparation of the draft 2004 TA Plan and he asked if such consultations would be carried out for the regional workshops so that Members received the type of TA they required.  The Annex to the draft 2004 TA Plan containing the list of activities had a section (xii) on Trade and Environment which listed a workshop for francophone African Members but no such course was listed for Anglophone African Members.  He asked what would happen if some Anglophone African members felt that they needed such a course.  He would continue his comments chapter by chapter.  With respect to paragraphs 16 and 17 on page 5 on regional trade policy courses he said that it was mentioned that some of the lecturers would be from the region and asked on what basis they would be selected and if a roster of lecturers existed.  He remembered that Members had been asked to identify potential lecturers that the Secretariat may have recourse to.  He asked if all lecturers identified would get the possibility to participate or if a core list of chosen lecturers existed.  His delegation wished to see a copy of that list annexed to the draft 2004 TA Plan, if such a list existed.  With respect to the section on national TA and training activities on page 9 he said that a pragmatic approach to enhance the transparency process would be to set a deadline for the submission of requests and that the Secretariat then compile such requests and identify which areas were and which were not accepted.  The CTD would then get the opportunity to discuss the approach taken by the Secretariat.  
He continued by saying that, in the fourth bullet of paragraph 50 of section (h) on "Specialised Courses" of the draft 2004 TA Plan, there was a mention of a Specialized Course for English speaking officials with the topic to be determined.  His delegation suggested that that specialized course be on agriculture, and more specifically on notifications of the implementation of Members' obligations under the current agreement, and in the framework of the ongoing negotiations.  The fourth bullet of section (k) on "Geneva-based Support" mentioned briefing sessions through video-conferencing.  It would be useful for Members to obtain information about the briefing sessions held in 2003, the Members who benefited from that activity and the briefing sessions planned for 2004 and to have that information annexed.  Section (l) on "Partnerships for Training and Capacity Building:  An Integrated Approach" mentioned that the WTO Secretariat was "engaged in a process of developing partnerships between the WTO Secretariat and the trade policy related academic community in Member countries".  It would be useful for Members to get a list of the academies with which the WTO Secretariat had developed such partnerships or the ones with which the Secretariat was in the process of developing such partnerships.  With respect to section (i) "Regional Trade Policy Courses" of paragraph 65 he said that his delegation supported the plea made by the representative of Tunisia for a trade-policy course for Arab and Middle-Eastern WTO Members.  There was also a section (ii) in the same paragraph on "Workshops for university professors on WTO matters" and his delegation believed that that was an interesting and useful exercise.  However, five working days might be more adequate for that activity than the three days suggested.  The Geneva-based missions would be interested in having contacts with the visiting professors in order to consider how to enhance WTO-related programmes at national universities.  Section (iii) on the "Support programme for doctoral studies" was also interesting and his delegation wished to see the estimated cost of that activity and information about whether that cost would finance the stay in Geneva for those students.  He also asked if the costs would be sponsored by the DDAGTF or by the universities to which the doctoral students belonged and if it was possible for the diplomats residing in Geneva who undertook doctoral studies to have recourse to that system.  His delegation wished to see further elaboration of the "computer-based training modules (CBTs) on WTO Agreements/Issues" mentioned in paragraph 67.  A module had been developed by WIPO and the United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) which involved online distance learning with a tutor that had permanent contact with their students.  The exams were taken on-line and the studies led to a certificate for the students.  That was a more interesting and rewarding system for the students.  Paragraph 72 mentioned that the Secretariat envisaged to undertake some 25 missions for the establishment of 15 and upgrading of 10 Reference Centres, to be financed through the DDAGTF, and he asked for a list of those Reference Centres.  His delegation supported the plea made by the representative of Tunisia for having an intern assist the coordinator of the African Group in the context of the "Trainee programmes and Internships" mentioned in paragraph 76 of the draft 2004 TA Plan.  He said that his delegation shared the views expressed by the representative of India with respect to section (r) entitled "Outreach Programme for parliaments and Civil Society".  Such activities could not be considered as TA activities.  They should be considered  as national activities.  His delegation shared the view expressed by the representative of the European Communities and other delegations with respect to section (s) on "Attendance at international meetings, conferences, workshops, seminars and symposia" that such activities should not be funded from the DDAGTF as they could not be described as TA activities.  As the figure of 80-100 such meetings attended by the Secretariat seemed high and in order for Members to get a better understanding of such activities he requested an Annex to the 2004 TA Plan containing a list of the meetings attended by the Secretariat.  The representative of the European Communities had raised the issue of whether the programmed activities effectively responded to the new post-Cancún situation.  A regional workshop on competition policy had been planned as well as one on trade and investment and his delegation was not certain whether those activities should be retained.  The Secretariat needed to keep in mind that there was a probability that those issues might be dropped from the WTO's work.  Such activities should therefore not be planned for early 2004 but rather towards the end of the year as there might not be a need for such workshops.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the draft 2004 TA Plan was comprehensive.  His delegation supported its key features presented and believed that it would enable the WTO Secretariat to pursue its TA programme in a coherent and effective manner.  He expressed his delegation's appreciation to the Secretariat for having consulted with his delegation prior to the circulation of the draft 2004 TA Plan.  With regard to the continued implementation of WTO TA activities his delegation believed that there was no reason to say that business was not as usual in the WTO.  There might have been some problems at the Cancún Ministerial Conference, however, that did not imply that ongoing work in various WTO bodies should come to a halt, it was rather business as usual and his delegation was pleased to meet to discuss future training as practical assistance to developing countries.  In the history of international organizations there were different periods, but they should not produce adverse feelings.  Difficult times should rather focus Members' attention on the need to work with more vigour and a clear sense of direction.  His delegation was of the view that there had not been any decision at the Cancún Ministerial Conference which implied that any work had to stop.  Moreover, if Members wished the DDA to be implemented in its true letter and spirit, they needed to engage in a positive and constructive way to fulfil the DDA mandate.  With respect to the outreach programme his delegation supported the Secretariat's efforts to undertake outreach programmes for parliamentarians and the civil society.  Such programmes helped in meeting the objectives of fostering greater public understanding and to inform participants about the multilateral trading system.  Such programmes helped dispel many misunderstandings about the concept and working of the multilateral trading system.  Finally, he reiterated his delegation's support for the draft 2004 TA Plan as a whole.
&& The representative of Costa Rica said that his delegation believed that positive efforts had been made in the area of TA since the Doha Ministerial Conference.  The outcome was tangible and his Government had taken advantage of the regional activities organized in the Latin American region and activities carried out in Geneva.  It was important to keep in mind that improving of technical cooperation and training was an ongoing process.  It was therefore important to learn from the implementation of previous TA plans, and that was reflected in the draft 2004 TA Plan insofar as it aimed to promote better coherence in the TRTA the WTO provided.  His delegation welcomed the change of emphasis towards building sustainable capacity in the beneficiary countries such as Costa Rica.  In terms of the products on offer he noted that the regional trade policy courses had been positive and his delegation agreed that they should be extended to other regions.  In that context it was strange that no regional trade policy course was scheduled for the Latin American region.  He welcomed the relationships the WTO aimed at creating with local universities which would make the cooperation more long-lasting.  His delegation was also in favour of the initiative to provide more flexibility to individual Members in deciding national activities.  However, much remained to be done for the draft 2004 TA Plan to become successful.  Recipient Members would also have to participate in and assist the process by identifying their needs and priorities.  In conclusion, he believed that the innovations presented in the draft 2004 TA Plan were important and necessary and that Members were on the right track.
&& The representative of Senegal said that TA was an important subject to all WTO Members.  He thanked all Members that had contributed to making the delivery of WTO TA possible such as the international organizations and the donors.  His delegation welcomed that the draft 2004 TA Plan had been circulated sufficiently in advance allowing Members to suggest necessary improvements.  He appreciated the new products mentioned in the draft 2004 TA Plan and supported the strengthened partnerships with local universities in developing countries.  That approach should contribute to the dissemination of knowledge about the WTO and a more sustainable delivery of TA in developing countries.   His delegation had also noted that the concept of flexibility was more marked in the draft 2004 TA Plan.  However, that also raised a number of questions.  In the past two years Members had received requests from the Secretariat to communicate their TA needs.  He noted that there had been a change of approach as indicated in the sixth bullet point of paragraph 6 which stated that the 2004 TA Plan should be simple and flexible and that "It plans what is plannable (core activities, whether in Geneva or for regions) and leaves room to address priority needs and to accommodate specific requests from beneficiaries".  He asked how the Secretariat intended to deal with Members' requests for TA in the future.  He asked what the envisaged time frame was for Members to submit their TA requests and whether those requests would be subsequently disseminated.  He agreed with the representative of Tunisia that a certain geographical balance had to be ensured in terms of the activities delivered.  As the regional trade policy course for Francophone African countries had been the subject of discussion he said that his delegation believed that it would be useful for all Francophone African countries to benefit from such a course on a regular basis.  The Anglophone African countries were already one year ahead of the Francophone African countries in terms of the number of regional trade policy courses held.  That situation had to be remedied quickly in order for the regional trade policy course for the Francophone African countries to be held.
&& The representative of Rwanda said that his delegation appreciated the new approach outlined in sections II and III of the draft 2004 TA Plan.  That approach was worth developing as it moved away from the traditional means of TA delivery, which could be described as "off the shelf" assistance, to give priority to the real needs of the beneficiaries.  He underlined the complementarity between national and regional seminars and the training courses which permitted participants to be a part of the actual professional environments of their studies such as the negotiation environment.  It was also important that workshops be held to train university professors from developing countries who in turn would train students from their regions.  However, a number of delegations had found a number of important insufficiencies in the draft 2004 TA Plan.  The aim was for the CTD to assist to improve it.  The draft 2004 TA Plan was nevertheless a solid basis for providing sustainable training.  His delegation agreed with the comments made with respect to the necessity of verifying the level of knowledge of the participants in any training course, both before and after their participation in the course, in order to judge the quality of the training given and ensure that there was value-added.  Anyone who had taken part in WTO training was aware to what extent simulation exercises were useful, and he suggested that simulation exercises be part of all courses.  It was important for developing country officials to be able to feel what it was like to negotiate trade policy matters.  It also enabled participants to use everything they had learned and for the teachers to see to what extent the trainees had assimilated the content of the course.  His delegation welcomed that there would be a regional balance in the delivery of WTO TA and that priority attention would by given to the LDCs.  In that context he thanked the Secretariat and the other agencies for the extension of the IF, which permitted the integration of trade into the development strategies of developing countries.  He supported the idea of having the requests by the beneficiaries published at regular intervals as well as the activities undertaken by the Secretariat in response to those requests.  That was important for transparency reasons.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation realized that it had been difficult for the Secretariat to compile the draft 2004 TA Plan in light of its recent efforts to speed up the delivery of the 2003 TA Plan.  Her delegation believed that Members were moving in the right direction with the draft 2004 TA Plan.  Her delegation appreciated the more strategic approach, the focus on creating a sustainable result, sustainable programming, and the desire to try to improve the quality.  The key features identified were the right ones.  However, like other delegations, her delegation wished to see more detail on how the key features related to the programme of activities put together in the draft 2004 TA Plan.  She asked what that connection was, how the Secretariat intended to achieve that and how quality was going to be ensured.  Her delegation was attracted by the efforts made to cooperate with academic institutions, whether through the regional trade policy courses or through the doctoral study programmes.  That was one way in which the WTO might succeed in delivering TA with a long-term impact.  However, while it was understandable that all developing country Governments desired a programme immediately, she cautioned that the WTO Secretariat had to learn from experience with that innovative approach before such cooperation could be expanded.  While such cooperation was a step in the right direction, she did not believe that all requests for such activities could be met in 2004.  She said that her delegation believed that there was a value in laying out the products that existed and how the programme should be composed in its core elements and only thereafter have a dialogue with the different recipients regarding their additional priorities.  That mechanism might avoid some of the duplication experienced in the past.  It also allowed beneficiaries to understand where they could benefit from regional programmes and other activities and where the gaps were in terms of their own needs.  Her delegation had also had concerns about the extensive degree of ad hoc activities in the past.  It was therefore important to find the right balance between programmed and ad hoc activities as well as to ensure that, in developing bilateral programmes, there was sufficient transparency to ensure the balance that Members wished to see and sufficient transparency to allow donors to ensure that they could complement ongoing activities.  A continuously updated list of projects agreed as suggested by the representative of Tunisia would be useful.  It was not possible to agree on every activity by a particular date if the aim of the draft 2004 TA Plan was to allow sufficient flexibility for Members to make requests throughout the year to meet particular needs.  That would undo the flexibility the Secretariat had aimed to build into the draft 2004 TA Plan.  Though she understood what the Secretariat was trying to accomplish as well as the concerns expressed by some delegations, she said that Members were moving in the right direction.
She continued by saying that her delegation was pleased to see the attempt made at better coordination with other agencies.  Her Government, as a bilateral donor, wished to be a part of that.  The Secretariat should aim to keep the active coordination by building on the successes achieved in 2002.  With regard to the link to the JITAP and the IF processes she said that her delegation agreed with others that those were not programmes in the same sense as other projects.  It should nevertheless be kept in mind that the overarching processes were integrated.  It would therefore be useful to define more clearly where there were cross linkages between those programmes and how the priority given to LDCs and small economies would be met, over and above the JITAP and the IF.  Her delegation continued to be interested in the idea of outsourcing and how it would be used.  She understood that the Secretariat would be taking some steps in the near future but requested more clarity on that as well as on the trade policy clinics.  It was still difficult for Members to understand in what circumstances the trade policy clinics would be used as distinct from a national programme.  Her Government requested more information than that contained in the document circulated (WT/COMTD/W/117) on what the trade policy clinics were and how they would be used.  She noted the trade policy clinic pilot project undertaken but asked for further elaboration of that experience.  
With respect to monitoring and evaluation, she said that her delegation had noted that the Secretariat had changed the entire structure of the draft 2004 TA Plan and asked what implications that would have on how the Secretariat planned to monitor and evaluate the activities.  It was important for Members to understand that.  A number of comments had been made on ways to check knowledge and she suggested that it might be useful to follow through on those.  It was clear that it was useful with interactive, practical training leading to practical knowledge.  She requested more information on how the draft 2004 TA Plan would build on courses offered in previous years in terms of the level of sophistication.  Officials should not be retrained on the same thing.  They should move up the skills chain.  She therefore requested more clarity regarding which course was geared towards what level.  If one official for example had attended an introductory course on the customs valuation agreement it was important to ensure that any additional course offered to that official would provide additional knowledge.  She asked if the Secretariat was re‑teaching the same course for a similar set of introductory candidates.  Information about which course which officials had attended would help Members identify which group of officials each course should target.  With regard to the question of consultation she acknowledged that there had been some attempted outreach as the Secretariat had tried to brief Members on the evolution of its thinking and to inform Members of how it had been treating the concerns.  Her delegation would nevertheless welcome a more interactive dialogue along the way, and other delegations seemed to have similar wishes in light of the comments made during the meeting.  It would therefore be useful to hold informal discussions among donors, recipients and the Secretariat staff as there were a number of policy issues that had been raised in the past that were still outstanding, a number of questions that had been raised in the debate during that meeting, and a number of other issues that came out of some assessments of the needs following the Cancún Ministerial Conference.  
&& The representative of Mexico said that TA, when properly delivered, could be an effective tool for development.  The increased cooperation with local universities was an important aspect of the draft 2004 TA Plan.  Even more importantly was for the Secretariat to integrate Members' requests into the TA Plans.  That was what had contributed to the success of previous TA delivered.
&& The representative of Indonesia said that his delegation could accept the draft 2004 TA Plan as the basis for further discussions.  His Government was pleased with the participation of its officials in regional TA programmes.  Concerning the planned TA activities in the Asian region he said that his delegation had already expressed at previous meetings its concerns with the distribution of venues for regional seminars and workshops.  His Government also expected the WTO to invite more participants from WTO Members from the region when it organized regional activities, including the regional trade policy course to be organized in the Asian region.  His delegation fully agreed with the suggestions made by the representatives of India, Venezuela and Pakistan and was ready to work closely with the Secretariat to ensure a more meaningful outcome of WTO TA activities for the recipient Members.  The new products presented in the draft 2004 TA Plan were welcome in order to ensure a better delivery.  He asked, with respect to paragraph 65 on "Activities geared towards building partnerships for Training and Capacity Building", for private consultations with the Secretariat on the pilot support programme for doctoral studies, bearing in mind that some other international organizations like UNCTAD were also involved in similar activities.  That information would then be transmitted  back to his Government for their views.
&& The representative of Kenya said that the draft 2004 TA Plan was a good basis for further work.  Her delegation was particularly pleased to see the enhanced regional approach.  In that context, she welcomed the continuation and expansion of the regional trade policy courses.  She also noted the different approach used in the draft 2004 TA Plan, in particular the flexibility given to the choice of national TA activities.  That approach was objective and she hoped that the Secretariat would be able to respond effectively to the specific needs of the recipient countries when they so requested.
&& The Secretariat said that the number of interventions and the care with which the draft 2004 TA Plan had been examined, as reflected in those interventions, was encouraging.  The Secretariat thanked all delegations that had spoken for their contributions to the debate.  There had been a number of detailed comments and questions and he would respond to those in a grouped manner.  The remarks made regarding consultations clearly indicated that consultations had been held in the process of developing the draft 2004 TA Plan.  The Secretariat had consulted all regional groups and the donor community and had endeavoured to take any comments made during those consultations into account.  The Secretariat would also consult Members when preparing the revision of the draft 2004 TA Plan to ensure that the Secretariat had understood every aspect of the concerns expressed.  The draft 2004 TA Plan presented a two-pronged approach to TA.  There were on the one hand activities which were going to be held and which covered all WTO Agreements and all issues emanating from the DDA.  The question of whether some of those issues should no longer be dealt with was one on which the Secretariat would need guidance from Members.  However, all DDA issues were covered by the draft 2004 TA Plan and it was not in the Secretariat's remit to remove any of them.  Some Members had mentioned that in one region or the other one subject or the other had not been dealt with.  That was because it had emerged from the consultations that certain subjects had been dealt with recently in certain regions as part of the 2003 TA Plan.  
He continued by saying that Members would have noted that one of the important features of the 2004 TA Plan was flexibility.  That flexibility applied not only to national activities.  The Secretariat was prepared to hear from any regional grouping that felt that a subject not covered in their region should be covered, and would attempt to accommodate any such wish.  On the other hand, there were the unplanned activities.  That was when the flexibility really came into play.  He was pleased to hear that there was general support for that approach.  Flexibility was particularly important in relation to the national activities, but not exclusively.  Many Members were concerned with how that flexibility would be applied in practice.  Some had suggested that a deadline be set for Members to request what they wanted.  Others had said that that might defeat the very objective of flexibility.  What he believed would happen was that Members, beginning immediately, would identify their priorities which had not been adequately taken care of in the planned activities of the draft 2004 TA Plan and communicate those to the Secretariat.  It was important to bear in mind, when considering an even distribution of activities, that not all Members demanded an equal number of national activities.  For example, out of the 49 LDCs, only 30 had requested activities.  The Secretariat could not impose itself on Members that did not request national activities.  The Secretariat was nevertheless ready to speak to any Member at any time.  That was why the Institute for Technical Cooperation and Training had designated regional desk officers who were Members' privileged interlocutors.  It was them Members should approach with their demands.  Members also had to bear in mind, and the Secretariat would attempt to ensure, that the phenomenon of "first-come first-served" would not disserve the Members.  The Secretariat could report regularly to Members on the activities carried out for Members to see that the equality of treatment had been maintained.  He emphasised that in relation to national activities, and because the Secretariat's capacity to deliver was limited, the draft 2004 TA Plan emphasized the need for the requesting Members to carefully prioritise what they requested.  If Governments realized that they had made incorrect choices, it would be difficult for the Secretariat to compensate for that at the end of the year.  A number of the products were considered under the umbrella of national activities, one of which was the trade policy clinics.  A document had been issued on the trade policy clinics.  The Secretariat had undertaken a pilot trade policy clinic in Sierra Leone which had been successful.  It had basically been a needs assessment mission conducted in collaboration with the ITC, UNCTAD, UNIDO and UNDP.  Those agencies had been able to come back from their mission with a clear programme of how the needs of Sierra Leone were going to be approached as the country had just emerged from national strife.  The trade policy clinic was a diagnostic tool which did not, in itself, provide TA.
He went on to speak about the regional trade policy courses, as they had elicited great interest.  That was understandable as the experience with the University of Nairobi had led the Secretariat to believe that regional trade policy courses had the potential to provide sustainable and regionally owned capacity enhancement.  However, it was also a question of the capacity of the Secretariat to carry out such activities.  The regional trade policy courses had begun in Africa as it was the region where the needs were the greatest.  The programme would be continued with two courses every year in Africa.  A venue had been determined for the course for Anglophone African trade officials and the Secretariat was in the process of considering a venue for the trade policy course for Francophone African trade officials.  Two additional regional trade policy courses were foreseen for 2004 in the Asia/Pacific region and in the Caribbean region.  Four regional trade policy courses together with four courses at the Geneva headquarters was the most that the Secretariat could offer.  It had to be borne in mind that the organisation of a regional trade policy course was more complicated than the organization of such a course in Geneva.  The Secretariat envisaged the extension of the regional trade policy courses to the Latin American and to the Middle Eastern and Arab Regions in 2005.  Other regions that would be concerned were the Eastern European/Central Asian region.  The Secretariat would have to work with Members to consider how the demands could be best met in an equitable way in light of the limited resources available.
Some Members had referred to a discrepancy between the features the Secretariat had listed its intentions, and the activities themselves.  They had asked how the Secretariat had factored in the lessons learned, drawn to the Secretariat's attention by the TA Audit, and how the Secretariat could know whether its activities had enhanced the capacity of the participants.  The Secretariat had attempted to incorporate some of the reflections that had been made in the 2002 TA Audit Report into the draft 2004 TA Plan.  The 2002 TA Audit Report suggested a redirection of emphasis towards more sustainable capacity building and that was what the Secretariat had tried to do.  However, the feedback received from Members indicated that the Secretariat could not ignore the more traditional activities such as the subject-based seminars and short trade policy courses as there was a demand for those as well.  The Secretariat had tried to respond to comments in the TA Audit Report by integrating all training and technical cooperation activities in one division and thereby attempting to ensure that there was a clear complementarity between the activities in Geneva and the training carried out in the regions which earlier had been carried out by two separate divisions.  Third, the Audit report had referred to the need for clear objectives.  The draft 2004 TA Plan openly stated the objectives to be achieved by each product on offer.  To have clearly stated objectives at the outset would make it easier for the TA Audit as well as the self-evaluation process to analyze the success of each product.  It would also be desirable to state the objectives of each individual activity.  However, the stating of objectives for individual activities might not get as much attention as it should as many activities were repeated.  The needs-assessments was another issue mentioned in the TA Audit and on which Members had commented.  He said that the draft 2004 TA Plan was based on the feedback from Members.  The content of the regional activities was based on what Members had said that they wished to have, and would cover all WTO Agreements and DDA issues.  The real needs-assessment aspect was going to be covered by the national activities for which each Member could request a content that was tailored to its needs.  The Secretariat attempted to incorporate any lessons learned as it proceeded with the implementation of the TA Plans.  However, those lessons often related to details of practical arrangements such as logistics which would be fastidious to explain in detail.  
He went on to say that remarks had been made regarding how the Secretariat incorporated development issues and mainstreaming issues into the draft 2004 TA Plan.  The Secretariat believed that was done in relation to each subject.  The developmental aspects related to the topic of a seminar and of special importance to a particular beneficiary were built into that  seminar by the resource person organizing that seminar.  Regarding the selection of participants and the assessment of what they learned the selection of participants was a feature of some of the products but not all at them.  It was essentially a feature of the activities offered in Geneva and the regional trade policy courses.  For other products such as national and regional seminars the Secretariat had considered the possibility, with the available resources and time-constraints, of engaging in a full-fledged selection process, and had come to the conclusion that it did not have the capability to do that.  In addition, many beneficiaries had said that it was their prerogative to select the participants to the national and regional seminars.  In that respect, Members would need to guide the Secretariat on how to proceed.  The Secretariat would need additional resources if it was asked to select the participants.  It also had to be considered whether that would lead to a significantly better result.  The Secretariat was aware that so called "course hoppers" existed.  However, as long as the Secretariat did not have Members' authority to refuse participants, assuming the Secretariat knew who the participants would be before the beginning of a seminar, some course hoppers would continue to attend WTO activities.
Turning to the question of assessment he said that there were systems of assessment for the longer activities.  The participants of the regional trade policy courses for example were required to produce a substantial term paper during their training.  That term paper was presented to the other participants at the end of the course and there was a kind of tacit peer assessment.  There was no marking system and he was not certain that it would be acceptable for the Secretariat to engage in such an exercise.  The Secretariat could, at the end of each course, point out the participants who had benefited most and those who had benefited less, but as long as there were no grounds for refusing entry into a course, the Secretariat could not do much with that information.  The case studies and simulation exercises that the Secretariat attempted to build in to the regional and national activities also provided a good opportunity for the resource people to assess whether the participants had benefited from an activity to the desired extent.  Regarding the international symposia, seminars and conferences that Secretariat staff attended, he said that every one of those that the Secretariat attended had a TA component to it.  The Secretariat would otherwise not attend.  The Secretariat refused attendance at far more conferences than it attended as many did not clearly comprise a TA component.  The Secretariat had for example received a number of invitations to attend regional ministerial and high level officials meetings which were designed to help in the preparations of the Cancún Ministerial Conference.  The Secretariat had concluded that it was desirable to be represented at those conferences in order to assist the regional groups with expertise knowledge.
With respect to outsourcing, he said that the Secretariat was in the process of communicating with all Members inviting them to submit names of individuals and institutions with which the Secretariat could cooperate.  If Members had not already received such an invitation, they would shortly receive one along with explanations of how to propose candidates.  The process was open, that was why all Members would be invited to make suggestions.  The Secretariat welcomed suitable candidates from every region and every country from which, inter alia co-teaching partners for the regional trade policy courses were chosen.  The selection process had shown the importance of choosing a good local institutional partner.  The institution had to have a network of relations with academic personnel who spoke the right language in the region.  That institution was the one the Secretariat, in the first instance, counted on to put it in touch with regionally based resource people who were able to work with the WTO on the regional trade policy courses.  Institutions without such networks or with networks in the wrong places would not be able to participate as main partner institutions for a regional trade policy course.  The Secretariat also knew suitable local people.  The outsourcing roster would be another way of identifying such people.  He assumed that, in most cases, the Secretariat would have a list of more resource people from the regions than it could usefully employ to co-teach, but he nevertheless welcomed all suggestions in that regard.
Another representative of the Secretariat said that the Secretariat had undertaken a lot of initial work to include regional trade policy courses for the Caribbean and the Asia and Pacific region in the 2004 TA Plan.  Similar preparatory work had begun for the Latin American region.  A meeting with academics from the Latin American region was scheduled which would pave the way for future cooperation.  The Secretariat was aiming to extend the regional trade policy courses to all regions.  However, the regional trade policy courses required careful preparations and exploratory contacts with academics and universities in Latin America were underway.  It was key for the quality of the regional trade policy courses that the Secretariat establish contacts and ensure the training of trainers.  The capacity issue was also fundamental.  The Secretariat did not have the capacity to run more than eight trade-policy courses a year (four in Geneva and four in the regions).  A regional trade policy course would be held in the Latin American region in 2005.  Members should keep in mind that the two regional trade policy courses held in Africa had not even been included in the draft 2003 TA Plan.  The Secretariat would do as much as it could, with its existing capacity, to undertake regional trade policy courses.  The regional trade policy courses had in just one year grown to become a centrepiece in WTO's technical cooperation activities.  The fact that certain activities were not mentioned in the draft 2004 TA Plan did not necessarily mean that they would not be undertaken.  The PhD mentor programme was also going to be extended to all WTO Members.  It would not be for the exclusive benefit of developing countries.  One third of the students would be from developed countries and two thirds from developing countries. It would be open to all universities with PhD students in trade-related policy matters.  The students would be brought to the WTO, they would receive a small stipend, some space would be created for them in the library and they would be assigned appropriate mentors.  That programme was at an advanced stage of preparation.
A third representative of the Secretariat said that, with respect to the question posed by the representative of Japan, the decision to engage a certain number of new staff on L-posts had been taken in 2002 immediately following the approval of the DDA in light of the lack of resources of certain WTO divisions to fulfil the mandate given in their particular area of competence.  The 19 L‑posts were directly connected with the implementation of the mandate from the DDA.  The staff on the L-posts enjoyed the same benefits as regular WTO Secretariat staff.  However, as the L-posts were financed through extra-budgetary resources, the staff on the L-posts had yearly contracts which could be renewed to a duration of five years in the current circumstances.  The list of the L-posts had been communicated to the Committee on BFA.  The Secretariat could issue such as list again, if so requested.  The costs of the L-posts had been calculated on the basis of the benefits enjoyed by the people currently employed on those posts.  The costs were calculated on the basis of the grade at which the post had been created with the same benefits as a regular post at that level.  Three L-posts were currently vacant.  The representative of the European Communities had also asked about the daily cost per person for participants of TA activities.  In order to produce the cost estimates, the Secretariat had used the same methodology as it had used for the previous two yearly TA Plans.  That methodology was based on the costs for a sample of completed activities.  The rather comprehensive sample represented 40 per cent of the total cost of the TA activities undertaken until mid August 2003.  The results obtained showed quite divergent costs depending on the venue and the type of activity.  The Secretariat had therefore defined several standard costs:  for national activities, for regional activities, for training activities and for Geneva-based activities.  The national activities were those which only involved a cost to the WTO for the travel of Secretariat staff.  Regional activities were those for which the WTO financed both the travel of the Secretariat staff as well as the travel for other participants from the region.  Training activities constituted a sub-set of the regional activities when the duration of the activity exceeded ten days, as the travel costs then were distributed over a larger number of days which significantly reduced the average daily cost.  Finally, activities held in Geneva were self explanatory.   The estimated cost per person and day was Sw F 1700 for national activities, Sw F 1100 for regional activities, Sw F 500 for training courses and Sw F 2300 for Geneva-based activities at WTO headquarters.  The Secretariat had based the estimated cost for the planned activities on those figures and on the duration and number of participants indicated for each activity.
&& The Chairman said that the draft 2004 TA Plan had given rise to a number of questions and sometimes harsh, but useful, comments.  It had also given rise to useful suggestions which the Secretariat should keep in mind in order to better meet Members' needs.  TA and training was a fundamental component for the organization.  He suggested that the Secretariat revise the draft 2004 TA Plan in light of the comments made.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATION UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& 	Notification from Iceland (WT/COMTD/N/17)
&& The Chairman said that the Committee had before it a notification under the Enabling Clause by the Government of Iceland regarding an initiative taken by the Government of Iceland to improve market access for products originating in the LDCs contained in WT/COMTD/N/17.
&& The representative of Iceland said that he was pleased to introduce the notification from Iceland, on duty-free and quota-free market access for imports from LDC to the Icelandic market.  As stated in the notification, the Ministry of Finance in Iceland had issued Regulation No. 119/2002, on 29 January 2002, implementing a law, passed by the Icelandic Parliament on 15 May 2001, granting unilateral duty-free and quota-free market access for imports in essentially all products originating in the LDCs.  The tariff preferences in the regulation applied to products falling within;
HS Chapter 25-97, except for a few products in Annex 1 to the Regulation;
Processed agricultural products, provided they fell within headings listed in Annex 2 to the Regulation;
Fish and other marine products, provided that they fell within headings listed in Annex 3 to the Regulation.

Enclosed with the Regulation was a list of working or processing required to be carried out on non-originating materials for the product manufactured to obtain originating status.  The list only applied to products originating in the LDCs listed in Annexes 1 to 3.  Furthermore, he drew Members' attention to the fact that the applied rate of duty for many products in chapters 1-24 was zero, especially for products of export interest to developing countries.  The initiative had been made in response to a call made by the former WTO Director-General for Members to take market access initiatives in favour of LDCs and further to a statement made by the delegation of Iceland in a meeting of the WTO General Council in May 2000.  The initiative reflected the principles of the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP).  The Government of Iceland had taken the initiative in order to support international efforts to improve market access opportunities for the LDCs.  His Government recognized that the barriers to certain products originating in the LDCs were one of the critical impediments to economic development and poverty alleviation in the world's poorest countries.  He said that he was confident that the treatment covered all products of importance to LDCs in the Icelandic market.
&& The representative of Switzerland asked whether, for categories 1-24, the zero tariff was applied exclusively to quantities included in the quota or whether the notification also included the same products above of the quota.  He asked whether products outside the quota would receive zero tariff treatment as well or whether a distinction would be made for products inside and outside the quota.  
&& The representative of Senegal said that he would limit himself to general observations as his delegation had not had the time to study the notification and given that it was only at present available in English.  He thanked the Government of Iceland for having taken the initiative to improve market access in favour of the LDCs.  He said that his Government was grateful that priority had been put on further integrating the LDCs into the multilateral trading system.  It was clear from the documents studied by the Sub-Committee on LDCs that LDC exports were still marginalised in global trade.  It was therefore encouraging to see that initiatives were being taken to enable LDCs to increase their exports.  He said that the objective of duty-free market access for all products originating in the LDC had not yet been achieved in Iceland.  However, the Government of Iceland had taken an important step in the right direction and he hoped that that effort would be pursued.  He reiterated the need for a mechanism to evaluate the use of preferences granted in order to evaluate their utility and their possible weaknesses.  The utilisation rates would be particularly important in that respect.  Such information would enable Members to turn the preferences into beneficial tools of real value and would permit the LDCs to maximize their use of the opportunities offered.  Finally, he pointed out that Senegal was not included in the list of the LDC beneficiaries in the Notification by the Government of Iceland.  He said that that was perhaps due to the fact that, when the legislation was passed, Senegal had not yet become an LDC.  In principle he did not think that that would cause a problem, but it was nevertheless something that he wished to raise.
&& The representative of Paraguay said that Members were currently engaged in a debate on the interpretation of special and differential treatment with respect to the Enabling Clause.  His delegation did not believe that the Enabling Clause envisaged the treatment of quotas.  The administration of quotas was something that was covered by Article 13 of the GATT while the Enabling Clause was an extension of Article 1 of the GATT 1994.  That was an important element which needed to be taken into account when implementing any preference scheme.  His delegation was upholding that view in a panel in the Dispute Settlement Body which was due to meet in the coming weeks.  He said that his delegation's view was that the administration of quotas was not covered by the Enabling Clause and that that was something that needed to be corrected.  
&& The representative of Iceland said that the representative of Senegal was correct in saying that Senegal had not been included in the list of beneficiaries because it had only been given LDC status after the Government of Iceland had passed the legislation.  He said that the Government of Iceland was in the process of preparing an amendment to the present legislation with a view to include Senegal in the list of beneficiaries.  He said that he would revert to the question raised by the representative of Switzerland at the next meeting.
&& The Chairman suggested that the Committee keep the item on the agenda for its next meeting in order for the representative of Iceland to respond to some of the questions raised.  However, as the notification concerned improved market access for LDCs, he suggested that it be referred to the Sub-Committee on LDCs for substantive consideration and reporting back according to the reporting procedures agreed to at the 32nd Session of the CTD.
It was so agreed. 
&& The Chairman said that, before concluding the item, he wished to draw Members' attention to a letter related to the reporting by the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  At the request of the CTD at its 44th Session, the Sub-Committee on LDCs had considered the initiative by the Government of Canada for the LDCs.  He said that, following the consideration, the Chairman of the Sub-Committee, Ambassador Molander, had sent a letter which stated that, during its 33rd Session, the Sub-Committee on LDCs had welcomed the initiative taken by the Government of Canada.  That letter was available in the room.  The Sub-Committee had also appreciated the improvement in the rules-of-origin regulations for textiles and apparel products.  The Chairman of the Sub-Committee had indicated that, for further information, the discussion in its entirety was available in the report of the 33rd Session of the Sub-Committee contained in document WT/COMTD/LDC/M/33.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES (WT/COMTD/W/113)
&& The Chairman said that said that the item relating to declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to the trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries had been discussed at the last meeting upon the request by some African primary commodity exporting countries.  The delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda had submitted a paper on the issue contained in document WT/COMTD/W/113.  The delegation of Kenya had, when introducing the document, highlighted the declining terms of trade for primary commodities and its effects on the trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries and had suggested that the WTO take action.  The Committee had taken note of the document and the statements made and as requested by the Committee the Chairman said that he had held informal consultations on 3 July 2003 after which the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda had suggested that the issue of declining terms of trade for primary commodities be included in the Cancún Ministerial Declaration or any document issued from that Conference.  They had, in that context, submitted document WT/GC/W/508 of 22 July 2003 to the General Council.  During the informal consultations of the CTD, Members had agreed that the Committee revert to the issue at its 46th Regular Session.
&& The representative of Kenya said that she wished to begin by thanking the Chairman, on behalf of her delegation and the delegations of Tanzania and Uganda, for the efforts he had made in pursuance of the request made by them to get a paragraph on commodity issues included in the Cancún Ministerial text.  Her delegation considered that the failure of the Cancún Ministerial Conference should not in any way lead to the postponement of the analytical and research-oriented work which the Committee should undertake to ensure that in the current negotiations, solutions were found to the problems that the commodity exporting countries encountered as a result of declining commodity prices.  Towards that end, she said that she wished to make the following suggestions for consideration and appropriate decisions at that or future meetings.  First, the sponsors of the paper wished to propose that the Committee commence an examination of the problems that primary exporting countries encountered, on the basis of the elements that had been identified in the non-paper.  She further proposed that the Secretariat be asked to prepare the background documentation for that exercise including an inventory of documents and reports that could provide a useful basis for discussion.  That would help Members avoid duplicating what had already been done by other organizations.  In that context, it was important to note that useful work for addressing those problems was being done not only by the concerned international commodity organizations but also by other organizations like UNCTAD and the World Bank.  UNCTAD for instance, had recently arranged for a meeting of eminent experts to examine the problems faced by coffee exporting countries.  The World Bank had issued a study entitled "The State of Sustainable Coffee:  A Study of Twelve Major Markets" which surveyed the demand and consumption trends in eleven European markets and Japan.  In addition, it appeared from the recent annual report of the WTO, that the Economic Research and Statistics Division of the Secretariat was engaged, as a part of its ongoing work, in examining some of the issues that had implications for the development of trade in primary commodities.  To begin such discussions the CTD could hold a special session during which substantive discussions could be held on the issues identified in the non-paper.  However, in order for substantive discussions to take place it would be necessary to ensure that the required background documentation was available to delegations well in advance of the proposed special session of the Committee.  She proposed that the representatives of the World Bank, IMF and UNCTAD, and if possible the representatives of international commodity organizations, be invited to that special session.
She went on to suggest that the Committee decide to transmit the non-paper, which her and other delegations had submitted, for consideration by the following bodies:  the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture when it resumed its work, the Negotiating Group on Market Access when it resumed its work, the Working Group on Trade, Debt and Finance and the Working Group on Trade, Transfer and Technology.  Those bodies should be requested to commence an examination of the issues and problems identified in the non-paper, which fell within their respective mandates.  She further suggested that the CTD should remain responsible for overseeing that progress was made by those bodies in finalizing concrete solutions during the course of the negotiations to the problems which the primary exporting countries faced as a result of declining commodity prices.  The Committee should, towards that end request the other bodies to send continuous reports on their respective discussions for review and assessment.
&& The representative of Cuba said that at the last session when the initial proposal had been made by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, her delegation had not been prepared to make any comment with respect to whether what was proposed could be implemented in the CTD.  However, her Government had considered the issue and felt that it merited attention and her delegation therefore supported the proposals made in the third part of the document regarding the need to broaden the WTO's attention to primary commodities.  That issue should be dealt with in the CTD.
&& The representative of the United States said that her Government had had an opportunity to carefully review the paper submitted by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda and had strong reservations regarding the direction of the paper.  The paper anticipated stabilizing commodity prices through supply management and other actions such as reducing production for example by cutting trees, buying buffer stocks or destroying them, forming international commodity agreements, and banning exports based on quality criteria.  Her Government thought that that was going in the wrong direction.  As her delegation had stated at the July 2003 meeting of the General Council, it was her delegation's view that prices and the terms of trade for commodities were functions of markets.   The WTO was devoted to the ideas of competition and free trade.  Her delegation therefore did not see the merit in contemplating arrangements that might restrict competition.  Where such arrangements had been tried in the past, they had not been successful.  As such agreements had become unworkable, Members had moved on in other directions.  The goals of the WTO were to work towards trade liberalization, not trade restriction.  Commodity arrangements to restrict production and manage markets were contrary to the goals of the WTO.  Her delegation had also noted that the paper focused on a narrow set of commodities.  Other Members could rightly argue that the prices of a broad range of agricultural and non-agricultural commodities had, at some point, experienced volatility and decline.  She asked whether it would be prudent to consider supply-management for any or all commodities or products that had experienced substantial price volatility at one point in time.  Commodity prices that were low for a period would often reverse.  She noted for instance that cotton prices were at a record high in 2003.  Her delegation did not wish to contemplate price stabilization schemes, particularly considering previous efforts at plurilateral agreements such as those in dairy and meat.  Her delegation was thus, at that point, unable to agree to the specific proposals that had been put forward by the delegation of Kenya on how to proceed, although her delegation understood and the concerns expressed.  Also, there was no ongoing process in the negotiating groups on which to build at that point.  It was therefore inappropriate to forward any work to the negotiating groups whose work had been suspended.  More fundamentally, her delegation was not convinced that that was a particularly productive way of proceeding.  
&& The representative of  Canada said that her delegation had similar reservations as those expressed by the representative of the United States about the particular approaches proposed in the paper presented by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda.  Notwithstanding that, her delegation did believe that it did contain some issues which were worth consideration in the CTD.  Her delegation supported the idea of an inventory of documents.  That was an important first step as a large number of documents existed on the topic.  The Committee should however not decide immediately to hold a special session until it had considered the issue further as well as what was being done elsewhere.  A session would be organized at UNCTAD the following day to consider the "Report of the Meeting of Eminent Persons on Commodity Issues".  A large session was planned between UNCTAD and the International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) for later in 2003.  With respect to the transfer of documents to other WTO bodies she said that her delegation considered it pointless to refer documents to bodies which were not operating at that time. 
&& The representative of Australia said that her delegation was sympathetic to the message behind the paper submitted by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda on the serious problems that low commodity prices were causing and the implications for development.  It was for that reason that her Government continued to be a strong proponent of further international trade reform through the agricultural negotiations of the DDA.  There was little doubt that a fairer and market-oriented agricultural trading system would provide significant benefits to all Members, and to developing countries in particular.  She noted that the paper mentioned many issues that should be discussed in the agricultural negotiations.  Her delegation was therefore prepared to consider the paper in further detail.  However, her delegation also shared some of the concerns that had been voiced by the delegation of Canada such as where in the WTO the issue should best be raised and that Members needed to be mindful of what the WTO could and could not do.  The suggestion made by the representative of Kenya for an inventory of documents was an important first step that should be considered as a way forward.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation was not in a position to agree to the proposals that had been made by the representative of Kenya.  Nevertheless, his delegation nevertheless recognized that there were issues in connection with trade and commodities that might merit further discussion and analysis within the framework of the CTD.  His delegation had no objection to pursuing such work in the coming months.  However, the CTD had to be clear about the scope and objectives of any discussions it envisaged, as well as how discussions in the WTO, and in the CTD specifically, could provide added value to efforts made by other international organizations, some of which had already been mentioned such as UNCTAD, the World Bank and the IMF.  For that reason, the CTD needed to reflect on how to proceed.  In doing so, the Committee needed to address questions relating to the focus of the discussions.  His delegation joined other delegations in expressing reservations against reintroducing market management instruments which had been attempted in the past and not been successful.  It was more a question of competitiveness, diversification and of how to develop downstream industries building on commodity strengths.  What would be interesting was to treat questions such as encouraging investment an diversification down the production chain.  Members had to be certain about the focus they wished to give the discussion in the CTD and what contribution they believed the CTD could make.  Further clarification was needed to identify which commodities the Committee was to consider.  Some commodities had in the past experienced declining terms of trade.  That could have had a negative impact on export earnings of particular developing countries.  The situation was however not identical in each individual market.  Members therefore needed to decide whether they were to consider agricultural or mineral commodities, food-related commodities or non food-related commodities, tropical products or non tropical products or whether the commodities should be considered on a case-by-case basis or at a general level and whether the proponents had in mind something more limited in mind in terms of the scope of the discussion.  The outcome of the Cancún Ministerial Conference had not provided Members with any additional political guidance on how to handle the issue in the future.  He said that, in his view, that meant that the CTD, at that moment, had to proceed on the basis of its own resources rather than in cooperation with other WTO bodies.  The CTD nevertheless had to be conscious about what was being done by other organizations in that field and what would fall within the scope of the WTO negotiating groups on agricultural and industrial products when those were reactivated.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that the problem raised by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda was an essential problem for developing countries and for the world economy.  The CTD should not consider the problem of short-term price fluctuations, although it was true that prices for some products had increased in the previous months, but consider the long-term structural problem of declining revenue for developing countries.  He said that he did not believe that it made sense to talk about substance and Members' own convictions regarding the solutions before Members had agreed that the problem was important enough for the trading system and developing countries and for the WTO to become a forum for such discussions.  His delegation believed that the WTO was such a forum as some of the issues were part of the negotiating agenda.  He believed that the CTD could follow the consensus reached in the draft Cancún Ministerial Declaration as that paragraph had not given rise to any problems.  Members could therefore assume that there was a consensus for the CTD to continue to consider the issue.  When considering how to deal with the issue it was clear that some of the proposals made by the representative of Kenya were too far reaching.  The Secretariat should continue its work on the issue and should make an inventory and try to find focus which could be presented to the CTD for discussion.  The focus had to be restricted in terms of the types of commodities treated as well as to the types of instruments that the WTO could consider.  However, that did not exclude the CTD from discussing instruments which would have to be dealt with elsewhere.  The CTD should nevertheless not refer the issue to other WTO bodies which at that time did not have any mandate to continue their work.  The issue was part of the DDA and Members should use the time available to take a step forward.
Resumed Meeting on 23 October

&& The Chairman said that the meeting had been suspended on item E of the Agenda.  The delegation of Kenya had then made a number of suggestions to the Committee, for it to review the problems that primary exporting countries encountered and asked the Secretariat to elaborate background documentation, including an inventory of documents and reports prepared by other organizations.  The delegation of Kenya had further proposed the organization of a special session of the CTD to consider the questions mentioned in their paper and during which the Committee could decide to transmit the paper to other WTO bodies.  In response to the suggestions made by the delegation of Kenya, some Members had expressed their reservation regarding the transmission of the document to other WTO bodies in light of the fact that, among other reasons, the work of those bodies had been suspended.  Some members however did express an interest in having the Committee request the Secretariat to draw up an inventory of documents and reports which could be useful for a discussion in the CTD in order to avoid duplication of work undertaken by other organizations.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that his delegation supported the request made by the representative of Kenya and believed that a background document by the Secretariat could do justice to the topic and bring out some of the salient issues mentioned and some of the reservations made by other delegations.  His delegation also supported the idea of convening a special session of the CTD with a view to consider the transmission of the issue to other WTO bodies.
&& The Chairman asked for Members' views on the proposals to convene a special session of the CTD and to refer the issue to other WTO bodies.
&& The representative of India said that Members needed to recognise the seriousness of the long-term decline in commodity prices which had been flagged by the representative of Kenya.  It also had to be recognized that the subject was a legitimate concern of the WTO, and of the CTD within the WTO.  The mandate of the WTO in that regard was explicit in Articles XXXVI and XXXVIII of GATT 1994.  In addition, the terms of reference of the CTD left no doubt that what the Committee was considering was well within the ambit of the subjects that the CTD was supposed to deal with.  In terms of how progress could be made, his delegation believed that there was a need for more analytical work by the Secretariat.  A first step in that direction could be the preparation of an inventory of research papers and other documentation that had been prepared by other international organizations.  He said that it would also be useful for the Secretariat to liaise more actively with other organisations such as UNCTAD and FAO which were working on the subject.  His delegation also supported the idea of a special session of the CTD, but the timing was a matter that could be discussed depending on the progress the Committee could make and the background material the Secretariat could prepare.
&& The representative of Japan said that, having acknowledged the concerns of developing countries, in particular the countries dependent on a few export commodities, his delegation wished to continue discussions on the matter.  However, his delegation believed that there was still a wide gap between the proponents and the other members on how to proceed with future work on the issue.  He said that his delegation therefore expressed its reservation against the establishment of a special session based on the proposals put forward by the representative of Kenya which still contained some controversial points as mentioned by the delegations of the United States, Canada and the European Communities.  It would nevertheless be useful to compile documentation related to the matter for Members to get a clearer picture of the situation and consider options for future work.  His delegation therefore supported the ideas mentioned by the representative of Kenya to ask the Secretariat to make such a compilation for the further discussion.  His delegation considered that such an exercise would be helpful before embarking on a substantial discussion on the proposals contained in the non paper.  As suggested by several delegations at the last session of the Committee, it could continue the discussions in an informal setting.
&& The representative of Cuba reiterated her delegation's support for the proposal made by the representative of Kenya and stressed the relevance of the CTD considering those proposals.  Her delegation supported the proposal for a special session dedicated to trade and commodities.  That was an issue which had been left outside of the multilateral negotiating agenda and it was an important subject for a large number of Members who had seen a constant decline of their share in world trade over the past years due to their structural dependence and the drop in commodity prices for reasons that were known to all.  Her delegation also supported the proposals for an inventory to be prepared by the Secretariat and the referral of the paper by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda to other WTO bodies.  She also highlighted the importance of cooperating with other organizations that had already undertaken analysis on commodities such as UNCTAD.
&& The representative of Kenya thanked other delegations for their views and comments on the proposal made by her delegation.  She said that her delegation wished to respond to and possibly clarify some of the issues and concerns raised.  Regarding the legal basis for work in the WTO, and particularly work in the CTD on the stabilization of commodity prices, she said that, as was pointed out in paragraph 33 of her delegation's paper, Article XXXVIII of Part IV of the GATT specifically encouraged Members inter alia to negotiate and adopt international arrangements providing inter alia "measures to attain stable, equitable and remunerative prices for exports of primary commodities."  That provision further provided that such arrangements provide for collaboration in matters of trade and development with UN bodies such as UNCTAD and other international financial institutions.  That was a view that was shared by many Members given the inclusion of the paragraph on commodities in the draft Cancún Ministerial Declaration.  That was a paragraph on which there seemed to be consensus.  The main responsibility for overseeing the implementation of the provisions of Part IV of the GATT rested with the CTD.  The CTD therefore had a clear mandate to discuss and agree on the measures that could be taken at the international level for the stabilization of prices for primary commodities.  In undertaking such work the CTD could further request other WTO bodies, including negotiating groups, to examine the issues falling under their respective mandates and report back to the CTD on the progress made and the results achieved in their deliberations.  Her delegation agreed that, under ordinary circumstances, it would be desirable for prices to be determined by free market forces.  Economic theory however recognized that Governments had a legitimate obligation to intervene where there was market failure.  Such market failure could occur when there was imbalance between demand and supply which was responsible for price volatility.  Such situations had in the past made it necessary for interested countries to enter into arrangements for supply management by negotiating commodity agreements in which both consuming and producing countries participated, or in the alternative, by negotiating agreements or arrangements in which only producing countries participated.  Her delegation agreed that past experience had shown that commodity agreements had not been successful in stabilizing prices of commodities.  The economic clauses which authorized international commodity organizations like those of coffee, cocoa and sugar to intervene in the market had been suspended.  While there could be many reasons for the failure of those commodity agreements, most importing processing industries in developed countries continued to benefit from the low prices and their governments had not generally been enthusiastic about allowing the buffer stocks in agencies to enter into the market with a view to averting or controlling declines in prices.  As the non-paper explained in paragraph 22, the approach of developed countries on that issue appeared to be undergoing a change.  It could currently be argued that there was an increasing willingness on the part of developed countries to intervene in the market to control production on a mutually advantageous basis in industrial raw materials which they produced such as steel, aluminium, and some industrial chemicals.  Informal agreements to control the production of aluminium appeared to exist at present amongst major aluminium producing countries.  With regards to steel, she said that negotiations for the control of production through, inter alia, the acceptance of an enhanced discipline for the use of subsidies with a view to reducing structural oversupply were underway in the OECD.  In the developing world, the serious problem posed to trade and development as a result of declining prices had made producing countries give serious consideration to arrangements for supply management among producing countries.  The UNCTAD Report of the Meeting of Eminent Persons on Commodity Issues noted the positive results that Malaysia and other rubber producing countries had been able to achieve following the adoption of an agreement for supply management.  She said that she briefly wished to comment on the point made relating to the consistency of price stabilization measures which might involve restrictions on imports and exports with the overall objective of the WTO of promoting free trade through the elimination of barriers to trade.  In her delegation's view, the objective of the WTO was to promote trade liberalization subject to the condition that it promoted development and assisted poor countries in alleviating poverty in line with the preamble to the Marrakesh Agreement.  Measures taken to ensure that farmers producing primary commodities secured prices at remunerative rates in order to improve their living standards was therefore fully consistent with the objectives of the GATT and the WTO.  That was specifically recognized in Part IV of the GATT which contained provisions relating to the role of trade in promoting development.  
She continued by saying that concern had been raised that the paper confined itself to a narrow range of commodities to which specific reference had been made.  The non-paper dealt with coffee, cocoa and sugar as those were some of the main commodities which African countries produced and exported.  However, the non-paper dealt in general terms with problems faced in trade in other commodities. Her delegation expected that requests for discussions on other products would be held in due course as the CTD commenced its discussions with interested producing countries.  In conclusion, she said that her delegation believed that at that meeting Members should take a decision on the way forward in terms of how the CTD should deal with the issue of commodities  Her delegation proposed that, as a starting point, the CTD request the Secretariat to prepare an inventory or bibliography of relevant documents, including a compilation of relevant work carried out by the WTO and other relevant organizations.  That work would facilitate a substantial discussion in the CTD to identify long term solutions, as envisaged in the non-paper.  It was in that regard that her delegation suggested that the CTD should hold a special forum.  Her delegation was not aiming at the creation of a negotiating body but proposed a one day special forum for such discussions.  In order to provide sufficient time for the preparation of background documentation, her delegation suggested that the special forum be held after the forthcoming CTD meeting in November 2003, or perhaps early in 2004.
&& The representative of Rwanda said that his delegation supported the suggestions made by the representative of Kenya on the issue of commodities which was vital to developing country economies.  The representative of Kenya had listed some commodities for which their prices had tragically declined.  He mentioned the case of coffee which was important to producers in Rwanda.  More than half of the export earnings of the Rwandan economy depended on the export of coffee.  Coffee prices had declined and continued to do so.  The question had been raised during the 50th Session of the Trade and Development Board of UNCTAD and it would soon be discussed by the United Nations in New York.  As the representative of Switzerland had mentioned, the WTO could not ignore that important issue.  He said that the proposals made by the representative of Kenya were plausible and warranted discussion.  It was therefore important that there was a forum within the WTO to discuss the question.  Members could then take decisions on how to treat the issue.
&& The representative of Benin said that his delegation associated itself with the intervention made by the representative of Kenya.  The question of declining commodity prices was crucial for developing countries and for African countries in particular as most of those countries were producers and net exporters of one or more commodities.  The evolution of the world economy and Africa's share in world trade showed that urgent action had to be taken.  The proposals contained in the paper by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda were wise, reflected the realities in the field and merited careful consideration for appropriate and sustainable solutions to be found.
&& The representative of Indonesia said that his delegation supported the proposals made by the delegations of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda as well as the suggestion of having the issue discussed at a special forum.  The reason why his delegation supported consideration of the issue of declining commodity prices in developing countries was what the authors had mentioned in paragraph 3 of their paper.  He agreed with the observations made by other international organisations that some developing countries who were heavily dependent on primary commodities were becoming poorer and poorer and had become characterised as "heavily indebted poor countries" (HIPCs).  The reasons behind the decline in the prices of primary commodities had been explained in the paper.  If the CTD, or other WTO bodies, focused a discussion on the issue, Members would be able to find solutions to the problem of falling commodity prices.  Developing countries should not have to depend exclusively on international loans.  That would make even more countries heavily indebted.  He said that he agreed with the observations that had been made by other Members that the declining prices of primary commodities should be seriously considered at the next meeting of the CTD.  Developing countries would no longer depend on international loans if that problem could be resolved.
&& The Chairman said that there seemed to be consensus about the importance of the issue.  However, there were still differences of opinion regarding the approach to be taken to remedy the situation, particularly regarding the proposal to convene a one day special forum to discuss the issue as well as its transmission to other WTO bodies.  He suggested that the Committee take note of the statements made and requested the Secretariat to draw up an inventory of documents on the issue and work already done by other international organizations in other to assist Members' consideration of the issue.  He further suggested that the Secretariat prepare that document for the next meeting of the Committee and that the item be kept on the agenda.  He would, in the meantime, undertake informal consultations on how to proceed.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was prepared to join a consensus on the preparation of an inventory of documents and reports on the topic of trends in commodity prices.  However, her delegation believed that that literature review should be a balanced compilation of materials that focused on trade-related aspects of commodity trends.  The Secretariat should be instructed to gather objective analysis from research institutions not directly affiliated with Member Governments and the focus of the literature should be consistent with the trade-liberalizing aspect of the WTO mission.
&& The representative of Kenya said that, while his delegation took note of the intervention by the representative of the United States, his delegation believed that the WTO Secretariat should not be restricted from searching for information.  A compilation of the largest possible range of documents would assist Members in making informed decisions.
&& The Chairman asked if Members could agree to his proposals. 
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES FOR REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that there had not been any new submission regarding the notification procedures for regional trade agreements among developing countries.  However, he reminded Members that the Secretariat had been asked to prepare a legal note on the notification requirements for regional trade agreements.  That note, which had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/114 had been considered at the 45th Session of the Committee where Members had decided to revert to the matter at its next meeting.
There were no interventions by delegations.

PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
-	Presentation by the Market Access Division
&& The Chairman said that the item relating to paragraph 51 on sustainable development of the Doha Ministerial Declaration was a standing item on the agenda of the Committee.  The CTD had, during its 44th Session, decided to invite Secretariat staff to inform the Committee about the work carried out in their respective areas of competence.  The Committee had also decided to invite somebody to speak about the developmental aspects of the negotiations on non-agricultural market access, following the presentation of the agricultural negotiations.
The Secretariat said that it was pleased at being invited to make a presentation to the CTD on developmental issues in the non-agricultural market access (NAMA) negotiations.  The Negotiating Group on Market Access (NGMA) had held intense negotiations during several months in the  lead up to the Cancún Ministerial Conference, and developmental issues had constituted a large part of those negotiations and discussions.  The Secretariat had prepared a paper outlining the developmental issues of the NAMA negotiations which was available to Members in the room.  The paper was based on the Chairman's draft texts on elements for modalities (TN/MA/W/35 and Rev. 1) as those texts reflected the proposed modalities being considered by the Group. She said that she intended to give Members a short overview of that paper, highlighting the main developmental issues and how they had been addressed within the Group.
She continued by saying that the NGMA had been established by the TNC at its meeting of 1 February 2002. The Doha Ministerial Mandate provided that the negotiations aim to reduce or as appropriate eliminate tariffs, including the reduction or elimination of tariff peaks, high tariffs, and tariff escalation, as well as non-tariff barriers, in particular on products of export interest to developing countries.  It also provided that the negotiations fully take into account the special needs and interests of developing and LDC participants, including through less than full reciprocity in reduction commitments.  The modalities to be agreed would include appropriate studies and capacity-building measures to assist LDCs to participate effectively in the negotiations.  The Negotiating Group had started its formal meetings in August 2002 and a target date of 31 May 2003 had been set by the Group for reaching agreement on modalities.  In preparation for that, the Chairman had issued his paper on "Draft Elements of Modalities for Negotiations on Non-Agricultural Products" (TN/MA/W/35) on 16 May 2003, but the Group had not reached agreement by the target date.  The Chairman had circulated a revised draft (TN/MA/W/35/Rev.1) in August 2003.  The three substantive elements contained in the Draft Elements text were (a) tariffs;  (b) non-tariff measures;  and (c) appropriate studies and capacity building.  The proposed modalities also included additional provisions to take account of special and differential treatment for developing countries and LDCs.  The general feedback from the Group was that the Chairman's draft text contained all the elements needed for reaching agreement on modalities, while there still needed to be further work or refinement on many of the issues.
&& The Secretariat went on to say that developmental issues had been, and continued to be, a major part of the NAMA negotiations.  The substantial number of submissions from developing countries and LDCs indicated the level of engagement that existed among developing countries with regard to the NAMA negotiations, especially with regard to the need for special and differential treatment and less than full reciprocity, even though there might be differences between individual proposals on how best to provide those elements.  The Chairman's proposed formula, applied on a line-by-line basis, would take fully into account the special needs and interests of developing and LDC participants.  Firstly, by using the participants' own tariff average as a core element of the formula, participants with relatively higher tariff averages (developing countries) would have lower reductions.  Secondly, for unbound items, reductions would start from rates of twice the 2001 MFN applied rates.  The other main element of the formula, coefficient B, would have an impact on the magnitude of the tariff cuts and so represented the level of ambition regarding the tariff reduction through that modality.  The level of "B" was still to be determined by the Group.  In addition, the draft modalities proposed that, essentially, 12 countries having low binding coverage (less than 35 per cent) would be exempted from making reductions via the formula.  Instead their commitment would be to bind 100 per cent of tariff lines at an average level not exceeding the overall average of bound tariffs of developing countries (27.5 per cent).  The sectoral tariff component was another key element to achieving the objective of the elimination of tariffs, in particular on products of export interest to developing countries.  The Chairman's Draft proposed sectors where developing countries had significant exports and where real possibilities existed to increase those exports through liberalization of other markets.  It would be up to the participants to specifically identify the product coverage in each sector and to finally agree on which sectors would be selected.  The proposal was that sectoral elimination would start from the bound rates after full implementation of current concessions, or in the case of unbound items, from the MFN applied rates in 2001.  The elimination would then take place in three phases of equal length, but at different rates for developed and developing countries.  Developed countries (and others who so wished) would eliminate tariffs at the end of the first phase while developing countries could do so at the end of the third phase.  The main issue for developing countries was how to define participation in such an approach; whether  participation would be mandatory or whether it could be undertaken on a voluntary basis, depending on each country's level of development.  Discussions on that issue had pointed towards developing countries harmonizing tariffs instead of eliminating them, in order to give full meaning to the concept of less than full reciprocity (LFR).  The draft elements for modalities provided additional provisions for developing countries and LDCs, on top of the flexibility provided in the formula.  Those provisions proposed that: 
Developing-country participants would have longer implementation periods for tariff reductions and up to [5] per cent of tariff lines could remain unbound or not be subject to the formula cuts, provided they did not exceed [5] per cent of the total value of a Member's imports.  That flexibility should not be taken in more than 1 per cent of tariff lines and not exceeding 1% of Members' imports for one HS chapter, to avoid sheltering a whole sector from tariff reductions.

LDCs would not have to undertake reduction commitments but they would be expected to substantially increase their level of binding commitments

Developed countries and other participants who so decided, would grant on an autonomous basis duty-free and quota-free market access for non-agricultural products originating from LDCs by a certain date to be agreed.

She further said that newly acceded Members would have special provisions for tariff reduction in order to take into account their extensive market-access commitments undertaken as part of their accession and the fact that staged tariff reductions were still being implemented in many cases.  The proposed measures were:  a higher coefficient in the formula;  a longer implementation period;  or a "grace period", for tariff reductions.  With regard to supplementary modalities such as request/offer, zero for zero, additional sectoral elimination and sectoral harmonization which had been raised in the Group, she said that it was proposed that those should be kept open pending agreement on core modalities.  Developed countries and other participants who so wished had been asked to consider the elimination of low tariffs.  Non tariff barriers (NTBs) were recognised as an integral part of the NAMA negotiations and it was proposed that the NGMA maintain overall responsibility for addressing NTBs as part of the mandate in the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  The proposed NTB elements for modalities focused on first identifying and examining the various types of NTBs and, as a next step, aiming to categorise them into NTBs which (a) would be dealt with by the NGMA and (b) those which would be referred to other bodies and Negotiating Groups within the WTO, as appropriate under the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  For reasons of transparency, information on the progress of NTBs in other bodies and Negotiating groups should be reported to the NGMA.  The special and differential treatment elements of the NTB section reflected many of the concerns raised by developing countries.  There was no concrete language or proposal at that time due to the fact that the types of NTBs to be addressed and the modalities to do so still needed to be determined.  Participants that had not submitted notifications of NTBs were encouraged to do so.  She reminded Members that the target date was 31 October 2003 and that there was a new format for the exercise.
She continued by saying that the issue of "erosion of preferences" and "high tariff revenue dependency" in the modalities had been highly debated in the Group and there had been a significant divergence on how they should be addressed, whether they should be taken up by other international organizations, such as the World Bank and the IMF for example or whether they should be dealt with in the NAMA negotiations. While those issues had not been addressed in the Chair's "Draft Elements of Modalities", they had been taken up in the draft Cancún Ministerial texts.  The modalities provided for appropriate studies and capacity building measures to assist LDCs to participate effectively in the negotiations.  A number of such initiatives, in a broader sense, had already been undertaken, and that work would continue.  For example, the NGMA held a Market Access Seminar on 29-31 May 2002, covering modalities for negotiations, special and differential treatment, the art of negotiating, and the use of databases for negotiations.  The WTO Secretariat had also prepared a number of background papers and other materials relevant to the negotiations.  In addition, a number of TA missions had been carried out as part of the WTO Annual TA Plans for 2002 and 2003.  While it would be up to participants to initiate proposals, the Secretariat would continue to initiate such activities when it undertook work relating to the NGMA.  In conclusion the Secretariat said that within the NGMA, developmental issues were linked to the level of ambition sought by participants from the overall negotiations and to the NAMA negotiations, in particular.  The Chair's "Draft Elements for Modalities" contained elements of less than full reciprocity and special and differential treatment as required in the mandate, to take into account developing countries and LDCs' special needs and levels of development.  Refinement of those elements would advance as participants got closer to an agreement on modalities.
&& The representative of the United States said that, in the document the Secretariat had provided there was a sentence stating that "There was general consensus for the technical elements of the formula but the treatment of unbound items resulted in a difference of views."  She said that she was uncertain whether that referred to the overall formula itself or not.  She did not believe that there necessarily was a general consensus.  Members were still struggling to find the general consensus.  That might simply be a question of drafting but Members had certainly not agreed on all the elements of the formula as laid out in document TN/MA/W/35.  There was still a fair amount of work do be done.  There had, during the discussions, been consideration of providing additional treatment for those countries eligible for IDA funding.  There were a number of different proposals on the table for how that might be done.  She understood that it had not been included in the document circulated by the Secretariat as that document related to document TN/MA/W/35 which did not contain that.  However, for the information of the Membership, that was an issue that was still being debated and whereby a number of other developing countries which were not LDCs, but which had serious revenue, income and developmental constraints would get special treatment.
&& The representative of Canada said that the document was useful in providing an overview of the developmental elements of the discussion.  She said that as she did not normally attend the meetings of the NGMA she wondered whether in regular meetings of the NGMA there were discussions about TA needs.  She asked if the NGMA itself did decide what needed to be included in the types of seminars or what needed to be provided in terms of TA for regional groups.
&& The representative of Kenya said that he wished to hear from the Secretariat how growth and development in developing countries such as Kenya would be stimulated by the formula approach, the sectoral tariff approach and the additional provisions for developing countries and LDCs.  Without knowledge about the value of coefficient B, it was difficult to know how growth and development would be affected by the formula.  He noted that, under the formula approach, the binding of tariffs seemed to be considered as special and differential treatment.  He was not certain that the binding of tariffs was to be considered as special and differential treatment.  Exempting some countries from the formula approach was nevertheless a good special and differential treatment.  The Secretariat had mentioned the deadline for the submission of notifications on NTBs.  However, given that the work of the negotiating groups had been suspended he asked whether the deadline was still applicable.  Few Members had followed the discussions in that particular group and not many Members had submitted notifications because of the technical nature of the report that was supposed to be submitted.  He further requested more information about the issue of exemptions for IDA-only countries as had been mentioned by the representative of the United States and asked whether that was something that the NGMA would bring into future discussions.
&& The Secretariat said that that there had been discussions on TA in the NGMA.  However, the NGMA did not agree on terms of reference for TA or anything of that kind.  It was rather a general discussion of Members' needs.  What the NGMA had done was to arrange for informal TA meetings over lunchtime to explain all the technical elements of the modalities.  Regarding the deadline for submitting notifications on NTBs the Secretariat said that it was a target date in order to facilitate future work and advance work on NTBs.  Members first had to identify NTBs, then examine and categorize them.  That would require much time.  The Secretariat therefore encouraged Members to try to submit notifications on NTBs by 31 October 2003 and reminded them that a fax with that requirement had been sent to Members on 9 September 2003 which showed a link to the Cancún Ministerial Conference but the decision had been taken at the last meeting of the NGMA in August 2003.  With respect to the question posed by the representative of Kenya regarding how tariff reductions would benefit Kenya she said that that was an assessment that every member had to make for itself. 
&& The representative of Senegal said that it was important for the Committee to consider the mandate it had been given in paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  He considered that the contribution made by the Secretariat in the document provided on the NAMA negotiations was descriptive, but he was uncertain of whether that was what the Secretariat had been requested to do.  The document painted a picture of the current status of the NAMA negotiations.  However, in the CTD Members had to consider how the ongoing negotiations could contribute to sustainable development.  Following the mandate given to the Committee on Trade and Environment, that Committee was expected to consider all environmental aspects of the negotiations.  The discussions of sustainable development in the CTD had to go beyond the environmental aspects.  If Ministers had asked the CTD to consider the issue, it was because they wished the CTD to consider sustainable development from the developmental angle.  The representative of Kenya had raised the important issue of possible revenue losses for developing countries following the negotiations.  The work of the CTD should consider such issues.  The Committee should focus on a few elements which would show what implications the NAMA negotiations might have on sustainable development.  That should show the capacity of developing countries to respond to their developmental needs in terms of revenue and with respect to revenue losses and the adjustments they would be required to make a response to tariff reforms.  The issue of preferences and their erosion was also an important one for some developing countries.  It was up to the CTD to consider what implications the NAMA negotiations could have on sustainable development.
&& The Chairman said that the objective of inviting the Secretariat to the CTD was for it to inform the Committee about the developmental aspects of the ongoing negotiations in other WTO bodies.  The Secretariat could only inform Members about the content of the negotiations.  It was then for Members to consider the implications of the negotiations on sustainable development.
&& The representative of Canada said that the representative of the United States had made a point which she had seconded regarding the question of IDA-only treatment to which the Secretariat had not responded.  Her delegation wished to hear a few words on that idea and whether it could be included in the future.
&& The Secretariat said that there had been a proposal for exempting IDA-only countries from reduction commitments proposed by the delegations of the United States, the European Communities, and Norway.  It was to be discussed in the NGMA.  It was for Members to consider whether or not they could build on that proposal.
&& The Chairman asked on what subject Members wished to hear a presentation at the following meeting.
&& The representative of India suggested that the next presentation be on the developmental aspect of the services negotiations. 
&& The representatives of Pakistan supported the request made by the representative of India.
&& The representative of Tunisia supported the request made by the representative of India, keeping in mind the comments made by the representative of Senegal.
&& The representative of Kenya supported the request made by the representative of India and requested the Secretariat to indicate, during its presentations, how the issues discussed in other WTO bodies would impact on development rather than provide a summary of the negotiations.  The CTD was supposed to treat the issue of what impact the negotiations would have on development.
&& The representative of Canada said that, although she agreed with the representative of Kenya that the CTD ultimately tried to consider the developmental impact of the WTO, that was not something the Secretariat could be requested to do.  The role of the presentations by the Secretariat was to portray what was happening.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the representative of Kenya did not seem to have proposed a judgment call by the Secretariat.  The CTD was dealing with development issues and a brief summary did not add much value to the work of the Committee.  The agenda item related to developmental aspects of the negotiations and that was what Members were interested in.  The NAMA, agricultural, services and other negotiations were important from a developmental perspective.  His delegation's interest was in the impact the negotiations would have on development.  He said that he understood the apprehension of the representative of Canada and would himself not wish the Secretariat to make value judgements.  However, an objective analysis would be beneficial for the CTD.
&& The representative of Senegal said that the Secretariat should remain neutral to the negotiations.  However, that did not prevent it from going beyond the descriptive aspects and attempt to explore different lines of thought by showing how different aspects of the negotiations were linked to sustainable development.  Developing countries had certain constraints and the discussions of sustainable development should bring something new.  The discussions in the CTD were not intended to deal with development in general as had been done in the past.  It would be useful for Members to receive documents related to sustainable development, not necessarily prepared by the Secretariat, to stimulate the discussions.  Documents containing analyses by other international organizations on the link between sustainable development and the ongoing negotiations could be made available to the members of the CTD.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that his delegation had sympathy with both sides of the argument.  The Secretariat's role was not to consider the impact of specific negotiating modalities.  There was unfortunately an absence of such considerations in the negotiations as a whole.  On the other hand, if such discussions could not take place in the CTD, the question was why Members should listen to factual reports by the Secretariat.  Such information could easily be read elsewhere.  A solution might be for the statement by the Secretariat to be distributed before the meeting of the CTD so that the time available at the meeting could be used for comments by delegations regarding the developmental impacts of the modalities discussed in the negotiations.  The Committee might thereby contribute positively to the negotiations which took place elsewhere.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation found itself in a similar position as that of the delegation of Switzerland.  It was unfair for the CTD to request experts in the areas of work of other WTO bodies to provide the CTD with elements which were outside the purview of the body they worked with.  It was however relevant, after having heard the summary of what was happening in other bodies, that the CTD identified particular issues raised that it considered needed further examination.  The CTD could then request more work on a particular issue.  The CTD would nevertheless have to prioritize the issues as so many issues related to development.  It was difficult for the Secretariat, at a stage where Members were negotiating modalities without attaching numbers to those modalities, to give any assessment of what the outcome would be.  The modalities were a means to an end but the objectives had to be defined.  However, the objectives had not been defined in the agricultural and NAMA negotiations in an agreed manner with a specific agreement on the approach.  Members therefore had to be cautions and consider where work by the CTD could add value and what workload the Committee could reasonably undertake.
&& The representative of Canada thanked all delegations which had followed up on her remarks.  The Committee could pick up on what had been said by the representatives of Senegal, Pakistan, Switzerland and the United States.  What the Committee should consider was how to make better use of the time it had during its meetings.  The suggestions made by the representative of Switzerland were useful in that respect.  The CTD might also consider inviting the research staff of the Secretariat to be present if Members had questions or wished further research to be carried out.  The invited speaker from the Secretariat might not be able to respond to the wider aspects of sustainable development but there might be others who could contribute with the wider picture such as the environmental side of the issue which the CTD did not bring in to any large extent.
&& The representative of Mauritius asked the Secretariat to express its views on the proposal made by the representative of India. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation had been interested in a proper discussion as foreseen under paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration on the developmental and environmental aspects of the negotiations.  His delegation had attempted to promote such a discussion some time ago and was pleased to see some signs of willingness on the part of other Members to hold such a debate, even if Members currently were talking more process than substance.  His delegation's experience of the discussions in the Committee on Trade and Environment had been disappointing as other delegations had been reluctant to engage in a debate.  Similarly, the discussions in the CTD on agriculture and NAMA had been low key and Members had not debated the developmental aspects of South-South liberalisation which was an issue which had been identified as being important, including research carried out by the WTO Secretariat and circulated before the Cancún Ministerial Conference.  While he was pleased that other delegations seemed more inclined to debate various aspects of the negotiations, all the CTD could do was to consider how it could fulfil the mandate given to it under paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  The CTD could not substitute itself for a negotiating group and certainly not for a negotiating group whose work was suspended at that time.  His delegation nevertheless supported the idea mentioned by the representative of Switzerland that when the Committee prepared future discussions under paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration the Secretariat be asked to provide a factual background sufficiently in advance for delegations to get time to reflect on elements they wished to bring to the debate.  That would give the Committee a better chance to hold an exchange of views on the substance of the matter and a continuing debate rather than a one off exchange.  The Committee might at some future stage even consider a general discussion of the entire negotiations, although it first had to proceed step by step and not be more ambitious than the Membership as a whole.  He considered the discussion held at that meeting to be promising for a more substantive debate in the CTD in the future of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.  The job of the Secretariat was to present Members with factual elements of what was being negotiated.  It was for Members to speculate on what the results might be in light of their own analysis of their respective interests that they would bring to the negotiating process when it resumed.
&& The representative of Kenya said that when he had suggested that the CTD should consider the developmental impact of the negotiations he had meant that it should be done in light of the mandate given in paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  The CTD should not consider that paragraph in isolation but in light of the entire Doha Ministerial Declaration.  Paragraph 2 for example placed development at the core of the WTO's activities which meant that developmental aspects had to be born in mind whatever was done in the Organization.  It was in that spirit that he had suggested that Members needed to reorient themselves for the CTD to be able to provide an input to the other WTO bodies.  He did not mean that the Secretariat should provide its own views.  However, the analysis should be based on what Members had contributed to the discussions.  The idea was to enhance the operation of the CTD and to ensure that it fulfilled the mandate in paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.
&& The Chairman suggested that the Secretariat be asked to make a presentation on the developmental aspects of the negotiations in services at the next meeting of the CTD.  That presentation should be as objective as possible but cover aspects of the negotiations which were linked to development and sustainable development.  He further suggested that the Secretariat provide Members with a written version of the presentation in advance of the meeting, if possible. 
It was so agreed.
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman said that paragraph 34 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration requested the General Council to consider the most appropriate institutional arrangements for handling the Work Programme on e-commerce and to report on further progress to the Fifth Session of the Ministerial Conference.  The Committee had therefore, at its last session, asked the Secretariat to prepare a brief, factual report summarizing the work the CTD had carried out with respect to e-commerce since the Doha Ministerial Conference including references to relevant parts of the minutes of the meetings at which the issue had been discussed and reference to the reports of the seminars.  From that report, which the Committee had adopted on a non-objection basis, and which had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/47, it was clear that Members had not recently made any specific proposal for how to proceed with the issue of e-commerce in the CTD.  He asked if Members had any suggestions for how the Committee should take the issue forward.
There were no interventions by Members on this agenda item.
&& The Chairman reminded Members of the importance of e-commerce and new information and communication technologies for the prosperity of humanity.  Preparations were ongoing for the first phase of the World Summit on the Information Society which would be held in Geneva on 10-12 December 2003 and the second phase which would be held in Tunis on 16-18 November 2005.  Among the themes for that Summit was the application of information and communication technologies for trade and development.   A high-level regional meeting had been organized in June 2003 in Tunis at which almost all African countries had participated.  That meeting had resulted in the adoption of an action plan for how information and communication technologies could be used by developing countries for the development of international trade.  He suggested that it might be useful for the Committee to be informed about the content of that action plan which highlighted how efforts could be made to use electronic commerce.  He suggested that that document be made available to Members at the next meeting.
It was so agreed.
OTHER BUSINESS
There were no interventions under the item on "Other business".

__________



 WT/COMTD/W/117
 Issued as United Nations General Assembly document A/58/401 on 2 October 2003.

WT/COMTD/M/46 Page  PAGE 46



	WT/COMTD/M/46 	Page  PAGE 45





