WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/25
16 August 1999

(99-3452)


Committee on Trade and Development
Twenty-Fifth Session



NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 4 JUNE 1999

Chairman:  H.E. Mrs. Absa Claude Diallo (Senegal)

ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA
&& The Chairperson welcomed Members to the  25th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD).  The draft agenda (WTO/AIR/1087/Rev.1) was adopted.
&& The Chairperson proposed that the draft agenda be adopted.  
It was so agreed.

ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairperson thanked the outgoing chairman of the Sub-Committee, the Permanent Representative of Denmark, Ambassador Hans Henrik Bruun, for his able leadership of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries.  Ambassador Bruun had successfully led the Sub-Committee's work last year.  During his tenure as chairman, two issues were brought forward by the Sub-Committee through the Committee on Trade and Development to the attention of the General Council;  market access for least-developed country exports, and difficulties faced by least-developed countries in implementing WTO Agreements.  It was also on his initiative that the Secretariat was asked to begin to compile information on the market access barriers facing least-developed countries' exports.  She was confident that Ambassador Bruun would continue to participate actively in the work of the Sub-Committee.
&& The Chairperson said Ambassador Bruun had asked her to convey to the CTD that he deeply regretted that his absence from Geneva on the day did not allow him to participate in this meeting of transfer of chairmanship.  He also asked the Chairperson to convey his gratitude for the confidence that the CTD showed in selecting him as chairman of the Sub-Committee a year ago, as well as the support constantly given to him by all the Members as well as the Secretariat staff.
According to Rule 12bis of the Rules of Procedure for Meetings of the CTD, the CTD was obliged to elect the Chairperson for the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries from among the representatives of the Members at its first meeting of the year.  She regretted that this had not been possible in the light of the consultations that had to be undertaken, which had been announced by her predecessor at the 24th Session of the CTD.  These consultations had yielded truly excellent results.  She was pleased to inform Members of the CTD that consultations had made evident a consensus in favour of H.E. Mr. Benedikt Jónsson, Ambassador of Iceland, to be the next Chairman of the Sub‑Committee.
Ambassador Jónsson had, and continued to have, a distinguished career in diplomacy.  Since his graduation with honours from University College, Dublin in 1982 he had worked at his country's embassies in Paris and Moscow, and had served as Deputy Permanent Representative to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the United Nations Educational, Social and Cultural Organization.  In 1998 he was Deputy Permanent Representative of Iceland to the Council of Europe and most recently he worked at Iceland's Ministry for Foreign Affairs variously as Minister-Counsellor, Head of Department and Ambassador.
&& The Chairperson proposed that the Committee on Trade and Development elect Ambassador Benedikt Jonsson, as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries by acclamation.  It was so agreed.
&& Ambassador Jónsson expressed his appreciation for the confidence shown in him. He said he was deeply gratified to take on the position of chairman of the Sub-Committee, adding that there was a certain tradition amongst Nordic countries to look after the concerns of developing nations, and that he therefore looked forward to the task ahead. He hoped that the Sub-Committee would resume work prior to the summer recess.

APPLICATIONS FOR OBSERVER  STATUS IN THE CTD
&& The Chairperson  recalled that at the previous Session of the CTD, the Committee agreed to accord ad hoc observer  status on a meeting-by-meeting basis to nine Intergovernmental Organizations (IGOs).  Since that decision, the Committee had received two more applications for observer  status in the Committee, from the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  these applications had been circulated to Members on 15 March 1999.  && The Chairperson had consulted with Members on the two applications on 1April 1999, and it was understood that these two IGOs should, beginning with the CTD's 25th Session, also be accorded ad hoc observer status on a meeting-by-meeting basis.  Pursuant to the understanding by Members on 1 April 1999, (WIPO) and ECOWAS had been invited to this meeting.
&& The Chairperson therefore proposed that the CTD should invite WIPO and ECOWAS to participate at this meeting as observers on an ad hoc basis and that the CTD agree to invite to its next meeting on an ad hoc and on a meeting-by-meeting basis the 11 following IGOs:
	(i)	Arab Maghreb Union; 
	(ii)	Economic Community of West Africa States (ECOWAS);
	(iii)	Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO);
	(iv)	Inter-Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;
	(v)	Islamic Development Bank (IDB);
	(vi)	Organization of African Unity (OAU);
	(vii)	Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC);
	(viii)	South Centre;
	(ix)	South Pacific Forum (SPF);
	(x)	West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and
	(xi)	World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)

It was so agreed.
&& The Chairperson invited comments from the IGOs and from Members. 
&& The Deputy Secretary-General of the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO), said it was the first time that his organisation was attending a meeting of the WTO.  ECO comprised ten countries of West and Central Asia, of which six were economies in transition.  It was mandated by its basic charter to pursue objectives leading to the removal of trade barriers between member states and the smooth integration of its members into the global economy. Presently, three of the ECO states – Pakistan, Turkey and the Kyrgyz Republic – were full members of the WTO.  Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Iran had applied for WTO membership, while Tadjikistan and Turkmenistan were considering applications.  Although moves towards trade liberalisation occurred at a slow pace and intra-regional  trade remained modest at 7 per cent, the organisation was directing its members towards free trade and the acceptance of multilateral rules and disciplines.  He said the status of Observer  to the CTD, and hopefully later to the General Council, placed ECO in the mainstream of multilateral decision-making on trade, and would help ECO provide more input into intergovernmental deliberations and decisions of its members, which would in turn provide for more feedback and action by member states. It was on this understanding that the second WTO Seminar for the ECO region held in Antalya, in Turkey, envisaged a more concrete role for ECO in the provision of assistance to allow members to better accommodate trade rules whilst pursuing development objectives through trade expansion. A third joint WTO-ECO event is on the agenda of the ECO.  He said that ECO believed that the Secretariats of the ECO and the WTO should cooperate closely to formulate proper ways to dismantle trade barriers and expand trade within the region. Finally, he thanked the chairperson and all Members of the CTD for inviting ECO to attend the 25th Session of the CTD.
&& The representative of Korea congratulated  the organisations granted ad hoc observer status on a meeting by meeting basis.  His delegation wished to make two comments.  Considering the difficulties faced in granting observer status to applicants, he said that the case-by case procedure taken should be used in future.  This approach was clearly referenced in General Council guidelines formulated several years before.  Second, considering the difficulties faced, his delegation was of the view that the guidelines and criteria used for granting observer status should be revised.  His delegation understood that the delegation of the United States had circulated proposals in the General Council for revision of  these guidelines.  He therefore hoped that on the basis of these and other proposals, the matter would be discussed in the General Council.
&& The representative of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) thanked the Director-General of the WTO for the recognition given to ECOWAS through the granting of ad hoc observer status to meetings of the CTD.  He said ECOWAS was often viewed as an organisation the function of which was peace-keeping and conflict resolution, as evidenced in Liberia and Sierra Leone.  It  was the view of ECOWAS that there could be no free movement of persons and goods, no commercial trading, no economic growth or development, without peace.  However, far from being an organisation exclusively devoted to the conflict resolution and peacekeeping, ECOWAS was first and foremost an economic community of 16 West African states, whose objectives were to promote economic cooperation and integration within the context of an economic union for West Africa, with the purpose of raising the standards of living of its people, of maintaining and increasing economic stability, strengthening relations between members states, and contributing to development on the African continent.  To achieve these objectives, the Community sought to create a common market through trade liberalisation amongst Members.  It sought to establish a common external tariff and a common trade policy amongst members.  The removal of obstacles to the free circulation of good, persons, services and capital, along with rights to residence and establishment were integral to the concerns of ECOWAS.  He said ECOWAS was intent on achieving economic union through the adoption of common economic and financial policies, notably in the context of monetary union, and also adopting common policies in cultural and social affairs.  He said the WTO and ECOWAS were heading in the same direction, and that closer cooperation was necessary to ensure the integration of West Africa into international trade flows. ECOWAS was the only African community in which individuals could freely circulate from one member state to another without a visa. Customs papers and systems for the designation and codification of goods from 16 member states had  been harmonised.  As of 1 January 2000, products accepted for the ECOWAS free trade system would have a zero tariff across all member states. He recalled that ECOWAS was the cradle for automated system for customs data, a system for the processing of trade data, which was currently utilised by customs administrations in more than 50 countries across the world.  ECOWAS had implemented a vast programme for the promotion of trade and raising awareness of economic operators about the trade potential in the region.  Programmes were underway for land and telecommunication links, for road construction and rehabilitation, and a programme for monetary cooperation whose purpose was the creation of a single monetary zone.  The legal framework was being updated so as to create a sound investment environment. He reiterated that the WTO and ECOWAS had to collaborate as partners who were mutual in their support of growth in trade and investment with a view to furthering development in West Africa.
&& The representative of Turkey said his delegation extended its warmest welcome to all IGOs granted ad hoc observer  status on a meeting by meeting at the CTD. He hoped that the CTD would be able to grant permanent observer  status to the IGOs concerned as soon as possible. 
&& The representative of the West African Economic and Monetary Union thanked Members of the CTD for granting it ad hoc observer  status on a meeting-by-meeting basis. WAEMU comprised eight countries of West Africa which had as a common currency the CFA franc. The countries were Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Togo. These countries in 1994 decided to transform their monetary union into economic union with five main objectives:  the establishment of a common market  based on the free movement of goods, services, persons, and capital; the establishment of a common trade policy vis-à-vis third countries; to ensure the convergence of political policy through a multilateral surveillance procedure; harmonisation of taxation policy and coordination of sectoral policy. Significant progress had been made since 1994 especially with regard to the common market;  as of 1 January 2000, products from the Union would circulate at free of duty.  For products from third countries, a common external tariff would also be implemented as of 1 January 2000.  The tariff set the highest level of customs duty at 21 per cent;  prior to 1997, member States had rates of between 38 and 65 per cent, and the rate of 21 per cent therefore represented an important effort in participating in globalisation.  In the area of taxation, a harmonisation process had been developed, and was to be progressively applied in consideration of constraints faced by member States.  Regarding economic policy coordination, criteria of budgetary surveillance had been put into place, and were considered half-yearly to examine how policies can be harmonised.
&& The representative of Bangladesh, returning to Agenda Item 2B, said he wished to place on record the appreciation of the contribution made by Ambassador Bruun to the work of the Sub‑Committee on Least Developed Countries.  He welcomed Ambassador Jónsson to the stewardship of the Sub Committee.  His delegation had been heartened by && Mr. Jónsson's succinct statement reiterating the commitment of his country, and Nordic countries generally, to developing countries and LDCs specifically.  He said he wished to remind Mr. Jónsson of the three main areas around which the work of the Sub-Committee would revolve in the coming days.  First, activities under the Integrated Framework on Trade-Related Technical Assistance, regarding which the Sub‑Committee may have to provide some input to the forthcoming Ministerial Conference.  The second item was UNCTAD X, to be held in February 2000.  Third, was the third UN Conference on LDCs, scheduled for 2001.  The representative of Bangladesh assured Mr. Jónsson, and the Chair of the CTD, of the utmost cooperation of his delegation in working towards the welfare of the least developed peoples of the world. Finally, he welcomed the IGOs that had been granted ad hoc observer status on a meeting by meeting basis and assured them of the best cooperation of his delegation.
&& The representative of the Arab Maghreb Union thanked the CTD for accepting the Union as an observer  to the CTD on an ad hoc meeting by meeting basis.  The Union had been founded in 1989, with an ambitious programme of economic integration based on three guidelines:  the liberalisation of trade in goods and services between member countries; an investment programme within the area; and infrastructure development.  Trade liberalisation was based on the removal of tariff and non tariff barriers, and the establishment of a free-trade area between member countries.  Two members, Morocco and Tunisia, had signed an agreement which would enter into effect in July 1999.  The Union envisaged that the free trade area between members  would be done in coordination with the association agreements of the European Union, creating bilateral free trade agreements with each of the countries in the Union.  Maximum encouragement and promotion of the investment was given through the provision of national treatment and MFN, as well as various financial and juridical incentives. The AMU hoped to collaborate closely with the WTO and the CTD particularly, in order to harmonise its efforts in the interest of the disciplines of the WTO.
&& The representative of the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO), thanked the CTD for granting it observer status on an ad hoc basis. She recalled the cooperation agreement between WIPO and the WTO that came into effect on 1 January 1996.  Since then, WIPO and the WTO had enhanced cooperation in order to avoid duplication and in order to assist developing countries members.  She recalled that the WIPO was an Observer to the General Council and the TRIPS Council, and reiterated WIPO's commitment to assist developing countries in all fields of intellectual property, and to collaborate with the CTD in this regard.
&& The representative of the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), thanked the CTD for granting the IDB ad hoc observer status on a meeting by meeting basis.  He said the IDB was a leading development institution, with 53 countries as members.  Apart from development financing, the bank earmarked a substantial proportion of funds for trade financing with the objective of promoting intra trade.  In addition, the bank had recently started its training programme concerning WTO‑related matters, in close cooperation with the WTO, UNCTAD and the ITC.  He believed that the IDB's presence as an observer  to the CTD would facilitate its objective of promoting intra‑trade.
&& The representative of the United States wished to clarify that that the granting of Observer  status to the eleven IGOs was on an ad hoc, meeting by meeting basis, and that this arrangement should continue until such time as revisions to guidelines to the handling of observer status were finalised. She said her delegation associated itself fully with the  statement made earlier by the Republic of Korea.

REVIEW OF THE APPLICATION OF SPECIAL PROVISIONS IN THE MULTILATERAL TRADE AGREEMENTS AND RELATED MINISTERIAL DECISIONS IN FAVOUR OF DEVELOPING COUNTRY MEMBERS, IN PARTICULAR LEAST-DEVELOPED MEMBERS: STATUS REPORT BY THE SECRETARIAT
&& The Chairperson recalled the decision by the Committee at its 22nd Session on 2 November 1998, requesting the Secretariat to prepare a Background Note compiling information on the difficulties, if any, that Members may have experienced either in the implementation of these provisions and/or in making use of these provisions.  The completion and circulation of the Note had been delayed because of the exceptionally low rate of returns to the Questionnaire first circulated by the Secretariat on 12 November 1998 with an initial deadline of the completed questionnaire fixed for 25 January 1999.  To date, only five Members had completed and returned the questionnaires.  These were:  Hong Kong, China;  Japan;  Madagascar,  Norway and Singapore.  This is unchanged from the situation at the informal consultations held on 5 May.  She recalled that it was agreed that this review of S&D treatment provisions in WTO Agreements, Declarations and Understandings, would be conducted on the basis of the questionnaire circulated by the Secretariat and completed by Members.  She said Members would agree that a meaningful compilation of the difficulties encountered by Members could not be based on the five returns so far.  The Secretariat, on its part, had conduct its search of information available within the Secretariat, and was awaiting a reasonable number of returns to the questionnaire from Members.
&& The Chairperson called on the Director of the Development Division to draw attention to what had been done so far by the Secretariat, and emphasised further what needs to be done to enable the Secretariat complete its background Note in compliance with the CTD decision of 2 November 1998.
&& The Director of the Development Division said that, unfortunately, there had been no new replies since the meeting of 5 May, despite the expressions of willingness that had been made.  Replies that had been given by five countries – Hong Kong, China;  Japan,  Norway,  Madagascar and Singapore – gave a picture of what had been done and what remained to be done regarding the implementation of provisions on Special and Differential Treatment.  He drew the attention of the CTD to the reply by Madagascar – an LDC – which made links between several special and differential provisions and the need for technical assistance. In terms of information in the Secretariat, requests had been made to each division to provide information relating to the special and differential provisions or development related provisions of each of the WTO agreements of understandings for which they were responsible.  A substantial amount of information had been provided based on discussion in the relevant Committees, and this information was being analysed and reviewed for completeness.  Discussions held in the context of the General Council Intersessional process were not dealt with, these discussions being covered by checklists that  had been circulated periodically by the Ministerial Sessions Division.  The main areas where difficulties in the application of Special and Differential provisions had been reported by  developing countries included Dispute Settlement, SPS, TRIMS, Textiles and the Net‑Food Importing provisions of the Agreement on agriculture.  He added that there were some areas in which difficulties reported in other fora, such as the Intersessional process, had not been raised strongly, if at all, in Committee meetings.  Such areas included the Committee on Balance-of-Payments Restrictions, the Committee on Import Licensing and the Committee on Market Access.  In addition to these sources of information, the Trade Policy Review Mechanism had, in its reviews, shown a number of areas where the treatment of developing countries had been seen by themselves as having been inadequate.  Areas cited included the operation of GSP schemes;  the treatment of countries under anti-dumping procedures, difficulties in the operation of balance-of-payments provisions, problems related to standards and SPS, backloading of liberalisation under the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing, the ability of small members to participate effectively in the DSU, and the clearly identified need for technical assistance in the fields of customs valuation, standards and tariff negotiations.
&& The Director of the Development Division said it would be very difficult, if not impossible, to give  a meaningful answer to the question of difficulties in implementation of special and differential provisions on the basis of the few replies that had been submitted by members.  One possibility would be to present, as an informal paper initially, the essence of the replies received by the five delegations – and any others, were they to submit replies – and also the essence of the material collected from within the Secretariat.  The possibility existed, once delegations had provided further input on the basis of the informal paper, to present a formal working paper of the CTD.  He concluded by reiterating that information by members was one of the essential elements for the completion of the paper, and he appealed to all members to present answers to the questionnaire circulated by the Secretariat.
&& The representative of Morocco thanked the Secretariat for the information provided and the efforts made in the preparation of the document.  He said that it would be useful to recall the framework within which the decision had been taken by the CTD to prepare the questionnaire.  His delegation had, at the CTD meeting of June 1998, agreed to work on three aspects  in order to make operational the discussion of Special and Differential Treatment within the CTD.  The first aspect was the assessment of problems encountered by developed, developing and least developed countries in the implementation of Special and Differential provisions.  The second aspect was the evaluation of economic and commercial effects of the implementation, or non-implementation, of special and differential provisions since the conclusion of the Uruguay Round.  The third aspect consisted of the evaluation of the concept of special and differential treatment itself, in order to revitalise and operationalize it for the benefit of WTO Members.  The questionnaire on special and differential treatment circulated by the Secretariat thus fell within the first of the three aspects.  He noted that the questionnaire method had proved to be problematic in a number of international organisations, mainly due to the fact that some countries lacked the capacity to respond in detail to the questions asked.  He said his delegation believed that while the CTD should persevere with the questionnaire, it should also reflect on alternative methods of evaluating difficulties in the implementation of Special and Differential provisions.  His delegation found the suggestions made by the Director of the Development Division were acceptable, and could go along with them.
&& The representative of Morocco said his delegation wished to propose formally that the CTD reflect on the holding of a seminar, which would offer delegations and officials from capitals the opportunity to reflect on: difficulties in the implementation of provisions for special and differential treatment; the economic and commercial impact of the implementation or non implementation of special and differential provisions;  and exploring ways of making special and differential treatment more operational for the benefit of WTO members.  He hoped that the three proposals his delegation had made in June 1998 would not effectively be buried;  it was the conviction of his and other delegations that these proposals represented the  way forward if the concept of special and differential treatment was to be meaningful.
&& The representative of Egypt began by expressing the deep appreciation of his delegation to Ambassador Bruun for his work as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on Least Developed Countries, and welcomed Ambassador Jónsson as the new Chairman, assuring him of the full cooperation of  the Egyptian delegation.  He also welcomed the IGOs that had been granted ad hoc observer  status to the CTD, and thanked the delegations which had agreed to the granting of ad hoc observer status.  He hoped that this arrangement could continue until a final decision was made.
&& Egypt fully supported the statement made by the delegation of Morocco, and the proposal for the convening of a seminar on special and differential treatment.  His delegation was extremely disappointed that the contribution of the Secretariat in relation to the issue of special and differential treatment had not been forthcoming.  His delegation had indicated on numerous occasions that responses to questions should not be a precondition to the preparation of the paper.  One year had passed since the proposals made by the delegation of Morocco, and an analytical paper on aspects of special and differential treatment was still awaited.  His delegation had pointed to a number of sources of information on special and differential treatment, but that nevertheless the paper had not been forthcoming.  His delegation had on a number of occasions said that technical assistance activities, Trade Policy Reviews, minutes of meeting and other sources could be used.  In addition, his delegation had indicated that the paper on special and differential treatment it had submitted to the General Council and to the CTD, as WT/COMTD/W/49, was to be considered the Egyptian contribution to the discussion of special and differential treatment, and to the paper to be prepared by the Secretariat.  Much discussion had taken place in the General Council, and a number of papers had been submitted, including one by the delegation of India.  There had also been an extensive discussion of special and differential treatment  in various committees in connection with various agreements.  His delegation took note of the statement made by the Director of the Development Division, thanked him for it, and expressed the hope that the note would be circulated as soon as possible. The issue of special and differential treatment was very important for a number of developing countries, and his delegation hoped that it could be addressed with the urgency it deserved.
&& The representative of Mauritius said his delegation noted with concern that the response to the questionnaire was not  encouraging, and that this was regrettable.  He said that the statement made by Morocco deserved to be noted, and that his delegation associated itself fully with that statement.  His delegation were to a  large degree on agreement with the views expressed by the Egyptian delegation, though his delegation did not wish to blame the Secretariat for not having completed the paper on special and differential treatment.  He said that implementation issues recurred as a  leitmotif in the CTD  and other committees.  The lack of an encouraging response was in part due to the fact that members were wary of what precisely could be done.  He said that the compendium of statements made at the Ministerial Conference provided information on implementation difficulties.  There was an abundance of sources of information which should be put to good use, and hence the lack of response to the questionnaire did not have to be taken to be a problem.  It was important that statements made and papers submitted be utilised, lest they remain as mere papers without further use.
&& The representative of the European Communities thanked the Director of the Development Division for his ideas on ensuring progress on the paper, and indicated that his delegation were agreeable to those ideas.  Second, his delegation were of the view that the various papers submitted regarding implementation issues should not be confused with the exercise that was being carried out by the CTD.  What was required was concrete evidence regarding difficulties in the implementation of provisions for special and differential treatment, whereas most of the submissions made in the General Council debate were of a more generic nature that did not identify, by agreement or by country, specific difficulties in the implementation of special and differential provisions.  Third, regarding alternative means of reflecting on special and differential treatment suggested by Morocco, he indicated that one members State of the Communities was discussing with the Secretariat the possibility of holding a seminar on the implementation of special and differential treatment before the summer break.  More information would be provided to the CTD once dates had been finalised.
&& The representative of Pakistan expressed the support of his delegation for the statement made by the delegation of Morocco, and extended that support to the proposal of holding a seminar on special and differential treatment.  Such a seminar would do much to enable capital based authorities to develop a fuller understanding of the concept of special and differential treatment. 
&& The representative of Cuba thanked the Director of the Development Division for his ideas regarding the completion of the paper on special and differential provisions, and expressed the support of her delegation for the idea of circulating an informal paper for Members to comment on.  She said her delegation supported the proposal made by Egypt that the Secretariat examine alternative sources of information in order to complete the paper on the implementation of special and differential treatment provisions, as well as the proposal made by Morocco to hold a seminar on the evaluation of special and differential treatment.
&& The representative of the Republic of Korea said his delegation were of the view that the low level of responses to the questionnaire stemmed in part from the vagueness of several special and differential provisions.  There were several different types of provisions:  some specified transition times for the implementation of agreements, while others stated that implementing countries should make best efforts to take into account the interests of developing and least developed Members.  His delegation shared the view expressed by the European Communities that the implementation of special and differential treatment had not been discussed elsewhere on a point by point basis.  He added that the discussion of the implementation of provisions for special and differential treatment on a point by point basis could be taken up under Agenda Item 2:H dealing with possible inputs into the Seattle Ministerial Conference.
&& The representative of Mauritius said his delegation wished to place on record its appreciation of the European Communities for having so quickly anticipated and responded to the preoccupations of the delegation of Mauritius.
&& The representative of Japan supported the remarks made by the European Communities.  From the outset, there had been a recognition of the lack of specific resources, which is why the Secretariat had requested member states to provide input as to the difficulties they faced under specific agreements. He recalled that former Deputy Director‑General, Mr. Hoda, had stated that  it was difficult to provide a correct analysis without member-specific input.  It was therefore not appropriate to blame the Secretariat for not having completed the task, but that responsibility lay more with delegations.  He supported the proposal made by the Director of the Development Division that an informal paper be circulated, as this would elicit comments and contributions from delegations.
&& The representative of Uruguay said the question of special and differential treatment had been discussed extensively in the General Council, along with other issues affecting developing countries.  While some of the statements made in the General Council had been of a general nature, the statements made by his delegation, and others,  had been very specific, identifying concrete problems under specific agreements.  He noted that a number of checklists had been prepared in connection with the General Council process.  These documents were informal documents, and could constitute the basis of work to be done by the Secretariat, as they contained a wealth of information on a number of topics discussed by delegations.  This information could be extracted and utilised; it was important that there be no duplication of work by the Secretariat.  He recalled that his delegation had submitted a proposal which set out, in relation to the checklists, a methodology which enabled the identification of different themes discussed, and the establishing of a certain order to questions raised and answers thereto.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said the issue of special and differential treatment was of great importance to his delegation.  He shared the views of the delegation of the Republic of Korea to the effect that the unclear nature of provisions for special and differential treatment made their implementation difficult.  Special and differential treatment amounted to no more than a sugar coating of the WTO agreements, and had proved to be of little substance.  He felt, however, that there was still time for Members to remedy existing lacunae in these provisions, which were of an autonomous nature, whose implementation depended on the good intent of developed country partners, and which were not enforceable.  There was a lack of urgency surrounding the implementation of provisions for special and differential treatment.  Members should address this problem of special and differential treatment rather than delve into the particularities of individual agreements. Given that the WTO was entering a new phase in which the Marrakesh agreements were being reviewed, and given the recognition by the international community of the development needs of developing countries, the issue of special and differential treatment could be examined in its entirety in the forthcoming negotiations, with a view to developing provisions that were less autonomous, more enforceable, and could translate into binding commitments.  His delegation supported the proposal by the European Communities that there be a seminar on special and differential treatment as early as possible.  A seminar would bring out issues for discussion and would provide guidance as to areas of work that would enable the development of more substantive and implementable provisions for special and differential treatment.
&& The representative of Norway thanked the Secretariat for the update provided and the proposal to circulate an informal paper.  While he did not contest the view expressed by the representative of Egypt that its was possible make progress on the completion of the paper without further contributions, his delegation felt that the document would be more representative and comprehensive if more responses were given, particularly from developing countries.  His delegation agreed with the delegation of Japan, and echoed by the European Communities, that responses to the questionnaire would provide detailed information not readily accessible in other WTO fora.  The seminar would be useful as a supplement to the questionnaire, but that this should not detract from the importance of the questionnaire.
&& The representative of Switzerland said his delegation supported the proposal made by the Director of the Development Division as a way out of the current deadlock.  He said his delegation did not wish to blame the Secretariat and recalled that the WTO was a "Member-driven" organisation in the first place.  He said that one reason why there were only a few replies was the fact that the subject of special and differential treatment was very broad, covering a range of agreements, and thus the completion of the questionnaire demanded considerable resources.  The seminar could be a useful way forward for the time being, but that this did not make the completion of a questionnaire unnecessary, especially as the information required in response to the questionnaire would have to be provided in order to prepare for the seminar.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the representative of Uruguay had made a useful point regarding the use of checklists.  However, the process of identification of issues was an evolving process.  The purpose of answering the questionnaire was different, as it sought to provide an opportunity to delegations which felt that there were shortcomings in the implementation to point to specific agreements where  a provision existed, but had not been implemented.  She emphasised that the concept of implementation was not a generic concept but one that had legal implications, and hence it was necessary to point to specific examples of non implementation.  It was important to differentiate clearly between lack of implementation of specific provisions under specific agreements, which could be addressed in a concrete manner with a view to finding solutions, and a general assessment which may lead to further negotiations and thence to changes in agreements once agreed.
&& The representative of Egypt said it was not the intention of his delegation to blame the Secretariat, but rather to indicate that his delegation had been awaiting the paper on the implementation of provisions for special and differential treatment for a very long time, and that it was not necessary to await further information in order to make progress on the paper.  He agreed that the work of the Secretariat would be facilitated if more responses from developing and developed Members were forthcoming.  Regarding the point made by the European Communities on the identification of specific examples of non implementation, he said that the paper WT/COMTD/W/49 contained a number of examples.  One such example was in relation to Article 10.6 of the TBT agreement, which indicated that the Secretariat of the WTO should draw the attention of developing countries to notifications relating to products of particular interest to them.  This was also to be found in paragraph 9 of annex B  of the  SPS agreement.  He said that this provision was not implemented in a systematic manner, and that this issue had been raised in the Committee on SPS.  A second example concerned Article 9 of the SPS agreement which stated that "Where substantial investments are required in order for an exporting developing country Member to fulfil the sanitary or phytosanitary requirements of an importing Member, the latter shall consider providing such technical assistance as will permit the developing country Member to maintain and expand its market access opportunities for the product involved".  There was no information as to the implementation of this provision.  If responses were not coming through the questionnaire, it should be indicated that there was no information.  If there was no information, one possible conclusion would be to change the provision of information into a notification obligation.
&& The representative of Egypt said that an example of provisions that were implemented in all their terms were provisions for transitional time-periods. There were no difficulties in implementing transitional periods, whether in relation to Customs Valuation, TRIPS, SPS or others.  Another example of areas where there were no difficulties in implementation was in relation to Annex VII(b) of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Duties, which stated that countries with a per capita income of less than US$1,000 had certain rights.  These rights were being used.  In contrast, if one considered Article 15 of the Agreement on Anti-Dumping Measures, which stipulated that special regard was to be given by developed countries to the special situation of developing country members,  no response was given to questions as to how such a provision was being implemented.  Article 15 also stipulated that  the possibility of constructive remedies was to be explored prior to the imposition of anti‑dumping measures, yet when information was requested of developed countries in relation to the implementation of this provision, the response given was that there was no obligation to respond.
&& The representative of Egypt said that there was thus a range of issues and a range of problems, and the whole subject was complex.  There were various categories of special and differential treatment with various problems: while some provisions were vague and required clarification, others were very clear, but were still not implemented as there was no legal obligation to inform Members regarding implementation.  This was precisely why a paper by the Secretariat was needed, in order to ascertain the difficulties associated with the subject of special and differential treatment, to address the problems identified, and facilitate discussion on the issue.  His delegation were concerned at the delay in the preparation of the document, especially as it had been expected that the paper would be ready by the 25th Session of the CTD, as indicated by former Deputy Director‑General, Mr. Hoda.
&& The representative of India supported the Moroccan proposal for a seminar on special  and differential treatment and the statement made by the delegation of Egypt.  Regarding the Secretariat note, it was true that responses to the questionnaire had not been forthcoming.  It was equally true that some Members had made statements in the General Council.  He said his delegation would copy their proposal relating to special and differential treatment made in the General Council to the Director of the Development Division.  While the proposal did not follow entirely the format of the questionnaire, it would provide information that could  be used in the preparation of the note.
&& The representative of India said that the problem with special and differential treatment was threefold.  First some provisions were unclear;  second, where they were clear there was no binding obligation;  and third, there was no political will to implement obligations where they existed.  The proposals made by the Indian delegation called for wholesale amendments in some areas.  He refered to the example of Article 15 of the Agreement on Anti-Dumping Measures, cited by the representative of Egypt, and said the problem lay in the fact that Article 15 began with the words "It is recognised…".  These words effectively reduced the obligation on developed countries to nil, and developed countries were thus able in all legitimacy to tell developing countries that they recognised that special regard was to be given to developing countries, but that developed countries would take no action and that, furthermore, there was nothing developing countries could do either.  Were these words "It is recognised" to be deleted, Article 15 would become a legally binding obligation which had to be enforced, and developing countries would challenge developed countries under the Dispute Settlement Mechanism in the event of non-implementation.  With weak language, and without political will, special and differential treatment would remain on paper, and for the next 40 years developed countries would continue to affirm that special and differential treatment provisions existed, but that nothing would be done to implement them.  The problem was thus a little more complicated than intimated by the Japanese delegation: it was not simply a question of replying to the questionnaire.  The issues involved were more complex, as pointed out by the representative of Norway.
&& The representative of India said that a critical phase had been reached, at which developing countries were trying to change the face of the organisation.  There was active participation, as there had been in the Uruguay Round, and there would be much more active participation at the Seattle Ministerial Conference.  With this was likely to come pressure for change.  He said that regarding special and differential treatment, the thought was there, as was the provision, but there was no legally binding obligation.  There had been in the past a gross imbalance in negotiating strength between developed and developing countries.  Offers regarding special and differential treatment were made on a "take it or leave it" basis, and developing countries often preferred that there be provisions couched in expressions such as "It is recognised that…" rather than not to have anything at all.  That situation had changed, and developing countries legitimately sought more.  He admitted that his delegation had been remiss in not providing a response to the questionnaire, and that they were willing to make available their proposals to the CTD.  He said that there was no dearth of proposals regarding special and differential treatment, and mentioned proposals submitted by the Egyptian and Pakistan delegations as examples.  His delegation looked forward to a meaningful discussion in the CTD.
&& The representative of Brazil said that the point of the CTD was to help developing countries to prepare for the Ministerial Conference.  If the Secretariat could help developing countries, well and good; if not, developing countries would be left where they were.  Brazil, as a developing country, had limited resources.  His delegation were not expecting from the Secretariat specific comments on specific provisions for special and differential treatment, with specific indications as to how to proceed.  He did not believe that the problems faced by the Secretariat were due to lack of information and added that he sympathised with the Secretariat's position.  He understood the comments made by the European Communities that the CTD should engage in a more specific debate than that which took place in the General Council.  However, he did not believe that this was what delegations wanted.  If all the Secretariat could provide was a paper with general comments on the implementation of special and differential provisions, that had to be accepted  as what was feasible.  If the paper could go further, it may then go further.  What was unacceptable was that there be no document at all.  He said the first phase was of the preparatory process was over, and the second phase was mid-way to completion, following which delegations would be involved in a negotiating and drafting phase, at which point if the paper was not ready it may as well be forgotten.  He therefore agreed that the  Director of the Development Division should circulate what  was available, adding that it was necessary to be realistic about the matter.
&& The representative of Senegal said that his delegation was undertaking an internal consultation at the level of  the different committees responsible for different subjects within the WTO, and that his delegation would communicate its responses to the questionnaire as soon as possible.  His delegation supported the proposal made by the delegation of Morocco concerning the holding of a seminar on special and differential treatment.  This would respond to a concern frequently expressed by the G.15, and this context he wished to refer to work that had been carried out in New Delhi which had brought together India, Senegal, Egypt and Jamaica.  Results from this work could feed into work undertaken in preparation for the seminar.  His delegation welcomed with great interest the proposal put forward by the Secretariat to circulate an informal note.  He recalled that the Secretariat had, following the completion of the Uruguay Round, prepared a document covering subjects of interest to developing countries.  Given that special and differential treatment was one such subject, it was normal that after five years that one should examine the contents of the concept, as well as its scope and coverage; whether the concept had been operational; and improvements to be made in terms of rights available to developing countries and obligations for developed countries.  Hence his delegation hoped that the proposed seminar could be held as soon as possible.
&& The representative of Senegal concluded his statement by congratulating the eleven IGOs for their presence as observers on an ad hoc, meeting by meeting basis, and made specific mention of the two West African Organisations, namely ECOWAS and WAEMU.  He said this demonstrated a constant desire of CTD members that developing countries participate actively in the work of the WTO.  This was a signal that pointed to the role of developing countries at the Seattle Ministerial, and it was thus wholly legitimate that they concerned themselves with special and differential treatment.  There was no doubt that when subjects like the GATS or the Agreement on Agriculture were broached, the subject of special and differential treatment would acquire much greater interest.
&& The Director of the Development Division thanked delegations for their views and concerns, saying that it was indeed the intention of the Secretariat to produce a paper on  basis of information in its possession. He took note of the offer made by the representative of India to submit to the CTD a copy of the proposal it had submitted to the General Council.  He took note of the Egyptian delegation's point about the paper it had submitted earlier to the CTD, and also of the request for a seminar. He said that discussions needed to be held with delegations who proposed the holding of the  seminar, and other delegations, regarding the timing and content of the seminar.
&& The Chairperson said that the CTD took note of the statements and proposals made by delegations, including the proposal made for the holding of a seminar.
&& The representative of Morocco said he wished to draw a distinction of importance for the work of the CTD.  He said that delegations needed to avoid confusing proposals made in the context of the preparatory process for the Ministerial Conference on one hand, with proposals relating to the substantive work of the CTD on the other.  Thus when it was proposed that a seminar be held on the subject of special and differential treatment, one had to be clear in one's mind whether this was specifically in the context of the preparatory process for the Ministerial Conference or whether this concerned the substantive work of the CTD. This distinction needed to be kept in mind with respect to all items on the CTD's agenda.  He emphasised that the CTD had a special responsibility in the context of the preparatory process for the Ministerial Conference, as had been the case in 1996, because questions related to development needed to be discussed within the CTD.  As far as possible, information regarding the implementation of different agreements needed to be provided to the CTD that it may evaluate this information, and thus contribute to the application of paragraph 8 of the Geneva declaration.  Whereas it was typically the role of the General Council to provide an overview of the organisation and its agreements, the CTD now had the possibility to provide such an overview and transmit it to the General Council.  In order that this happen, the CTD should mandate the Chairperson to request from the Chairs of different committees information on the implementation of different agreements.  Every effort should be made to ensure that developing and least developed countries have proposals for the Seattle Ministerial Conference.  At the same time, a collective assessment was required from the CTD as an input into the Seattle Ministerial Conference.
&& The Chairperson thanked the representative of Morocco for his statement, and recalled that there was  a specific item on the Agenda regarding possible inputs into the 3rd Ministerial Conference.

WTO WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
(a)	Presentation by the Economic Commission for Europe on Electronic Commerce
&& The Chairperson recalled that at the 24th Session of the CTD on 2 March 1999, it had been decided that the CTD should invite the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) to this Session of the CTD to provide a presentation on electronic commerce.  She welcomed Dr. Carol Cosgrove-Sacks, Director, Trade Division in the ECE, to the CTD and invited her to make her presentation.
&& Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks began by stating that the purpose of her presentation was to address some development implications of electronic commerce and examine how electronic business could be used by developing and transition countries to build capacity.  She wished to address three key issues:  first, the fact that electronic business consisted of international supply chains;  second, the importance of trade facilitation to ensure smooth movement of goods across borders, so that the efficiency gains from electronic commerce were effectively realised;  and third, the importance of capacity building to allow developing countries to participate in electronic commerce.
She said that UN/ECE spanned North America and the whole European continent, an area that accounted for two‑thirds of world trade.  For over 30 years UN/ECE experts had been developing instruments such as standards and norms to facilitate international business.  In order to be effective, such standards and procedures needed to be global, which in turn required cooperation on a global scale.  This realisation led to the establishment of the United Nations Centre for Facilitation of Procedures and Practices for Administration, Commerce and Transport (UN/CEFACT). While UN/CEFACT was based in the UN/ ECE, it had close and intensive links with the other United Nations regional economic commissions, and worked closely with the WTO.
&& Dr. Cosgrove–Sacks said that trade was part of an international supply chain, which ran from the initial trade enquiry to the delivery of the product.  At various stages of the international supply chain, there took place activities which did not add any value, but which did cause costs to increase. Such activities were related to storing, handling, inspection, certification, and so forth.  In all of these instances, there was tremendous potential for electronic commerce, and scope for improving the efficiency of the international supply chain.  In the case of a food export supply chain, it was estimated that there were as many as 27 processes among 40 different parties, so that even a fairly rapid transaction took 12 weeks for completion.  The question therefore was how to use the technologies and techniques of electronic commerce to reduce the length of the process, to generate more income and to enhance the participation of developing countries in international trade.  It was necessary to examine the paradigm shift caused by electronic commerce in ways of doing business.
&& Dr. Cosgrove–Sacks refered to the CTD note "Development Implications of Electronic Commerce" (WT/COMTD/W/51) and said that UN/CEFACT were convinced of the analysis contained therein, namely that the benefits of electronic commerce were only possible if it was possible to reduce the physical, economic, juridical and policy constraints in doing business internationally.  It was necessary to look, in the first instance, at the benefits of electronic commerce and assess how to reduce the costs of international trade procedures, and thus to focus on the role of trade facilitation.  In this context she said that UN/CEFACT were pleased that some Members had proposed that trade facilitation be included in a possible millennium round of talks.  Second, it was necessary to reduce transaction costs by building an effective global supply chain, and to integrate developing and transition countries into this global supply chain.  Third, the investment in human and physical infrastructure that enabled participation in this new way of doing business needed to be addressed.
&& Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks said that electronic commerce had had its principal impact in the software and services sectors since it was possible to deliver the product through the same channels as by which the product had been ordered. However, when trade in goods was considered, one had to be concerned with how one delivered the goods and how one ordered and traded goods.  Electronic commerce was thus about the synergy formed by the use of digital information, computerised business practices and the Internet.  Electronic commerce was defined by UN/CEFACT as doing business electronically, through, inter alia, the sharing of standardised unstructured or structured business information by electronic means, and the use of such tools as electronic mail or messaging, the World Wide Web, smart cards, electronic funds transfers, automated data capture and bar codes, and electronic data interchange.  The importance of electronic commerce was due to the fact that it resided in the overlap between business processes, institutions, and networks.  The deliberations of international organisations should accordingly focus on the overlap  between these three areas.
&& Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks said the concept of electronic commerce could be structured either by type of business relations or by type of commercial activity, and presented a matrix that structured the type of relations between three categories of partners (individuals, business, and government) which sent or received data and information electronically.  The center of the matrix covered business‑to‑business and business‑to‑government communications, where the exchange of data by electronic means  was of supreme importance.  Business‑to‑business relationships had become, financially, the most important part of electronic commerce.  All of these relationships depended on the provision of good communication links, and one of the challenges for developing countries lay in the inadequacy of their telecommunications infrastructure.
As stated before, a central challenge was the integration of developing countries into the international supply chain. One possible positive step was to reduce the barriers that were put up by regulatory bodies.  This was a prerequisite not only for the development of international trade, but also for the development of electronic commerce.  This brought up, again, the importance of a commitment to trade facilitation, to ensure that such barriers to trade were reduced.  Second, it was necessary to deal with delays and uncertainties in business processes, such as legal issues, in the context of an international framework for electronic business.  All commercial enterprises needed to be concerned with the effectiveness of business process, by simplifying and streamlining their business processes.  A greater focus on electronic commerce as a means to increase revenue and value added was also needed.
&& Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks said the United Nations strove  to create an efficient environment for developing countries.  UN/CEFACT was the major source of standards and recommendations for best practice relating to business process, and was at the core of producing ground rules for the digital market-place.  UN/CEFACT worked to enhance the information infrastructure, had a memorandum of understanding with the International Standards Office and the International Electro-technical Commission (IEC), and were  concerned to build capacity through the use of standards.  It was through basic standards that UN/CEFACT provided the basic tools that enabled electronic commerce to work.  UN/CEFACT also sought to build capacity by ensuring a real participation in international supply chains, and encouraged developing countries to "learn by doing".  Finally UN/CEFACT advocated capacity building through technical assistance, and drew attention in this respect to the work of other regional UN agencies and UNCTAD.
&& The Chairperson thanked Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks for her presentation and invited Members to comment on the presentation or raise questions.
&& The representative of Mexico thanked Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks for her presentation. His first comment had to do with access, and specifically the fact that connection charges were high in developing countries.  Small and medium enterprises (SMEs) preferred to acquire what was essential before embarking on electronic commerce.  A fundamental need was to lower access costs in order to ensure that  SMEs had access and therefore participate in international trade.  A second point was that protection of content was unequal, in that developing countries were recipients of contents and not producers.  For instance, countries like his which sought to produce catalogues reflecting their own culture and language were not able to do so. Third, there were questions of confidentiality and security in electronic business.  Fourth, there was a lack of an "electronic business culture" or ethos, and the development of such a culture needed to be supported by international institutions.  Fifth, he recalled Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks' statement that the future of electronic commerce would be dominated by business-to-business transactions, and said that a greater knowledge was needed of the view of firms on as to how such transactions took place.  Finally, he noted that the presentation touched on the facilitation of trade, and pointed out that there was a clear distinction between electronic commerce and trade facilitation, and that it was quite mistaken to  say that  the two were one and the same thing.
&& The representative of Panama recalled that Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks had mentioned in the course of the presentation that one of the problems experienced in electronic business was that of reengineering business processes, and raised the question of whether there was any example of countries where businesses  had reengineered their processes in order to implement the SAP industrial process.  He wished also to know what  UN/ECE were doing to facilitate the reengineering process in developing countries, especially in the light of difficulties experienced in developed countries in the execution of reengineering.
&& Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks said she agreed entirely that the core problem lay in fostering an electronic business culture in developing and transition economies, adding that this was an issue on which  institutions concerned with capacity building should focus.  The UN/ECE had a limited role in capacity building, insofar as its essential focus lay in the promotion of standards and norms, and the promotion of best practices in electronic business and trade facilitation.  The UN/ECE did work with other regional UN commissions, but left to UNCTAD, the ITC and other capacity-building organisations the bulk of the work in promoting an electronic business culture.  Referring to the distinction drawn by the representative of Mexico between trade facilitation and electronic commerce, Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks said that there was clearly a difference between the two, and that the point she had made was that there was only a limited value in speeding up the process by which goods were ordered (by means of electronic commerce) if the delivery of products still took an inordinately long time to reach their destination on account of various barriers, notably non-tariff barriers.  This was the reason why electronic commerce highlighted the urgency of facilitating trade flows, and explained why there was a fundamental link between the two concepts. Referring to the question raised by the representative of Panama about the work done by UN/ECE in facilitating the reengineering of business processes, Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks said that UN/CEFACT was working closely with the delivery mechanisms of technical assistance and capacity building to help developing countries and major enterprises to understand what needed to be done.  At the same time, it was necessary for governments around the world to had to consider the implications of electronic commerce.  She cited the example of Switzerland, where had government initiated a process in order to raise awareness of electronic commerce at all levels of business, to enable Switzerland to take a strategic advantage in electronic commerce. She also cited the government procurement services of the United States, which used United Nations rules for Electronic Data Interchange for Administration, Commerce and Transport procedures in their activities.  She urged delegations to make contact with UN/CEFACT if they wished further information regarding  assistance  activities in trade facilitation.
&& The Chairperson thanked Members for their questions and thanked Dr. Cosgrove-Sacks and the Economic Commission for Europe for their valuable contribution to this agenda item of the CTD.  She said the CTD took note of all comments made by delegations. She  suggested that the CTD proceed to the second part of this item, namely:
(b)	Consideration of the Contribution of the Committee's WTO Work Programme on Electronic Commerce
&& The Chairperson recalled that at the informal consultations conducted on 5 May 1999,  a final deadline of 25 May was set  for submission by Members, who desired to do so, to the Secretariat of any further written contributions to the compilation of points.  She said that since the informal consultations of 5 May 1999, no additional comments had been received from any Member.  The compilation of points therefore, remained unchanged from when Members last discussed the paper on 5 May 1999.  She remained convinced that the compilation of points provides a good basis for finalising the contribution of the CTD to the General Council in fulfilment of the Terms of Reference for the CTD on the WTO Work Programme on Electronic Commerce.  She wished to have Members' comments on the compilation of points with a view to finalising the contribution and adopting it as the contribution of the CTD to the WTO Work Programme on Electronic Commerce.
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation were curious to know why the first item of the issues paper regarding points raised in the CTD contained a reference to Article XX.  She also noted that paragraph 19 contained a reference to the handling of domain names by the ITU, whereas it was  her understanding that domain names were being handled  by WIPO.
&& The representative of Panama said the compilation was useful and could be used as a proper guide to future discussions on the matter of electronic commerce.  He drew attention to paragraph 9 of the compilation which stated that "the essential nature of electronic commerce and cyberspace would make moot the issue of Movement of Natural Persons", and said that while this was true to some aspects of business transactions, notably processes which could be handled through electronic means, that these were only a limited part of the activities of the firm.  It was possible that even though a firm conducted its work by electronic means, it could also have offices in a number of countries, which would require staff travel, thus ensuring that Movement of Natural Persons remained relevant.  He said that the question of Movement of Natural Persons was also relevant to the point made in paragraph 13 of the compilation regarding the training of human resources, as this could require that an office transfer staff from one office to another for training purposes.  Regarding paragraphs 15 and 16, he said that the policies and regulations adopted by developed countries affected the development of electronic commerce at the world level.  He cited as examples certain export controls on technology, and certain prohibitions on information exports if certain confidentiality requirements are not met.  Such policies could have a tremendous impact on the transfer of information  and the conduct of business by electronic means across frontiers.  Regarding paragraph 18, and the principle of avoiding duplication in the work conducted by international institutions, he said that that in the exercise of avoiding duplication of effort, care must be taken to devote sufficient resources to covering the existing needs of developing countries.  Regarding paragraph 49, he noted that it was not simply access prices to the Internet that were an important obstacle, but also the initial costs of securing a presence that would provide access to the Internet highways.  It would be useful to have an exchange of ideas regarding the various methods being developed to increase access to electronic networks.  Finally, he noted that there were some further barriers to the development of electronic commerce, such as legal systems which established monopolies or closed markets, such as telecommunications or the ticketing systems of airline seats.
&& The representative of Uruguay drew the attention of the CTD to paragraph 19, and said that at the last informal meeting, his delegation had suggested inserting the phrase "legal issues in UNCITRAL", given that UNCITRAL was the organisation that had first dealt with these issues.  Also in connection with paragraph 19, he said that Domain Names were the concern of WIPO and not ITU.  Third, he questioned the inclusion of the section on points made in the seminar.  Finally, he said that delegations were still awaiting the document mentioned in paragraph 43 of the Secretariat Paper WT/COMTD/W/51, regarding the economic implications of electronic commerce.  He recalled that at the end of 1998, his delegation had requested the circulation and discussion of the document in the CTD, and that request had been reiterated in the meeting of 2 March 1999, with the support of  the EC, India, Hong Kong, China;  Cuba, and others.  He said that since the document was mentioned in the Secretariat paper, delegations had the right  to read it.  He therefore reiterated  the request he had made Finally, regarding the format of the report to the General Council, he wished to know whether  the report would consist of a list of  points or whether a more substantive report would be prepared.
&& The representative of Brazil recalled that his delegation had expressed the view that the compilation of points was difficult to work with, and that it suffered from inadequacies in terms both of format and content.  His delegation had been expecting major changes to the document, but these had not materialised.  He recalled that his delegation, and several others, had requested that the points raised in the seminar be struck out. His delegation had agreed to the holding of the seminar on the understanding that this was a separate initiative with no  linkage to the work of the CTD, and  saw no utility in attaching the list of points raised in the seminar in this or any other document reporting to the General Council on the work programme on electronic commerce.  Regarding the points raised in the CTD, he understood that while there was a disclaimer at the start of the document that the points compiled do not necessarily reflect agreed positions, his reading of the document led him to believe the compilation did not reflect views expressed.  For instance, regarding paragraph 2, he said that while some delegations had indeed argued that stronger organic links and a more coordinated approach should be established among the areas of WTO competence, others had argued that this was premature.  This view, however, was not reflected in the paper, and it was possible that an uninformed reader could gather the impression that there existed an emerging consensus on the points made in paragraph 2.  In paragraph 3, it was stated that aspects of electronic commerce were relevant under a number of Agreements in the WTO, including the Agreement on Government Procurement and ITA‑I and II.  While some delegations had argued in that such agreements were of relevance, others had argued to the contrary.  These views, however, were not reflected. Regarding paragraph 6, while some delegations had indeed argued that the growth of electronic commerce raised important trade policy and trade facilitation issues, others had argued that trade facilitation had no bearing on the discussions of electronic commerce.  Regarding paragraph 9, some delegations had argued that electronic commerce would make moot the question of the movement of natural persons, while others had argued to the contrary, but this was not reflected in the compilation.  Regarding paragraph 23, which stated that investment in infrastructure will be encouraged through regimes that guarantee non‑discriminatory treatment among investment, he said that there were no relevant WTO disciplines in this domain.  Regarding paragraph 24, while some delegations had argued in favour of low or zero‑duty access for computer and telecommunications equipment, others had argued that this was a question of national policy and that members had the right to determine access, but that this was not reflected in the compilation.  The representative of Brazil said that he could make similar points in regard to all the paragraphs of the report.  While he did not disagree with the content of the compilation of points, he said that different views had been expressed in the course of the CTD discussions, and that this balance was not reflected in the compilation of points.  It was therefore difficult to use the compilation of points, as it stood, as a basis for a report to the General Council. Given that there was a time constraint, he suggested that a factual report be prepared which would report that discussions had been held in the CTD, and simply state the main headings listed in the compilation of points.  He added that he  was also open to the Chairperson submitting a report, on her own responsibility, to the General Council.
&& The representative of  Egypt said his delegation associated itself with the statement made by Brazil, adding that his delegation shared the views expressed by Brazil, Uruguay and Panama.  He said that the paper was useful as a compilation, but that its utility was limited to that.  The paper should be an evolving document which included the statements, remarks and concerns of different delegations.  In addition to the points  the representative of Brazil had cited as examples where the balance of views needed to be more adequately reflected, the representative of Egypt drew the attention of the CTD to the following points.  Regarding paragraph 4, he considered the use of the word "phenomenon" in connection with electronic commerce to be strange, though he agreed that  electronic commerce was here to stay.  The main issue was to ensure that developing countries could participate effectively in electronic commerce.  It was important to identify different concerns and conditions to allow this.  Regarding paragraph 5, he shared the view that electronic commerce had positive effects on growth and development, but was concerned that if developing countries were not able to participate in electronic commerce in an effective manner, this could affect their participation  in international trade.  Regarding the question of movement of natural persons addressed in paragraphs 8 and 9, his delegation were of  the view that electronic commerce should not be used as an excuse to avoid further liberalisation in the area of movement of natural persons, or as a substitute for such liberalisation.  Regarding paragraph 12, his delegation believed that there were various aspects to infrastructure investment, and that this was not limited to the private sector.  The use of public funds, development assistance requirements, and other elements, should not be ignored.  Regarding the section on constraints faced by developing countries, it was important to refer to some of the innovative ways in which developing countries have addressed these  constraints.  Regarding paragraph 17, he said that the role of government need not be minimal, pointing to the issue of taxation as one where the government had an important role.  He added that one often spoke of the right macroeconomic framework, but not necessarily about hospitable policy environments, and that there was a need to refine some of the aspects refered to in this regard, and a need for more precise language.  Regarding paragraph 19, he said reference  needed to be made to the role of the ITC and UNCTAD.  Regarding paragraph 23, he said his delegation participated in the working group on trade and investment, and that the determinants of foreign investment and where foreign investment goes are more complex than reflected by the paragraph.  His delegation believed this paragraph was one where more balance could be introduced, along with details regarding various  aspects  of the determinants of foreign investment.  Regarding paragraph 24, his delegation shared the views expressed by Brazil that low or zero duty access, was not the only solution to the questions addressed in paragraph 24.  The questions raised in the illustrative list were important and pertinent, and that the Secretariat should complement the paper prepared earlier on electronic commerce with an analytical paper that would attempt to respond to some of the questions.  He noted that, in particular, questions 34 to 39 and 41 to 43, were important questions that could form the basis of a future paper by the Secretariat.  Regarding paragraph 31, he said that the issues of infrastructure and technical assistance should be separated.  Regarding paragraph 33, he said that reference to "unrestricted, unregulated electronic commerce" was too sweeping, since some elements of electronic commerce had implications which affected health, safety and other matters where regulations and restrictions were important.  Finally, regarding the seminar, he acknowledged the view expressed by Brazil that the points raised in the seminar should be contained in a separate document, and that his delegation was willing to go along with this proposal.  His delegation were nevertheless of the view that the paper on points raised in the seminar should be much more substantial and much more detailed, since there were a  number of points raised in the seminar which could be used as inputs for discussions in capitals and for further deliberations by the CTD.  He cited the example of the Symposium on Trade Facilitation, following which a document containing papers submitted and statements made by participants was produced, as a possible model.  In conclusion, his delegation wished to add another aspect to discussions regarding electronic commerce, in the belief that the issue of electronic commerce required a much more integrated approach was required by international organisations, especially those based in Geneva, along the lines used in connection with issues relating to LDCs.  His delegation believed that important work was being conducted by UNCTAD on the development aspects of electronic commerce, and at the ITC regarding the role of the private sector and electronic commerce.  The WTO was working on rules and the their implications for electronic commerce, WIPO was addressing various aspects of intellectual property rights in relation to electronic commerce, and ITU is addressing various issues in relation to telecommunications and infrastructure.  The presence of all these organisations allowed them to play an important role in an integrated manner in order to ensure that activities are not duplicated, and that some coherence exists in addressing issues connected to electronic commerce.  The participation of relevant non‑Geneva based  organisations, such as UNCITRAL, UNDP and the World Bank, could be investigated.
&& The representative of Mexico agreed with Brazil that the Agreement on Government Procurement was not a multilateral agreement, and that this would have to be specified in the text, or reference to it removed altogether.  He said that the point made by Egypt regarding investment in infrastructure was most important. Mention needed to be made of public investment, in order to bring greater balance to the text.  Regarding the illustrative list of questions, he said that mention should be made of the main aspects of development to be addressed in terms of electronic commerce.  Regarding paragraph 18, he agreed that greater cooperation between the institutions listed was necessary, adding that greater coordination amongst the institutions was necessary as well, especially in connection with technical assistance.  He cited as an example the possibility of cooperation between the WTO and the UNCTAD, given the work undertaken by the latter, especially in connection with human resources.  Regarding paragraph 27, he asked what it meant in practice to enhance the role of small and medium enterprises in electronic commerce, and suggested that this would involve technical assistance programmes in connection with UNCTAD.  The WTO should examine the experiences of UNCTAD in this field to stimulate greater participation of SMEs in electronic commerce.  He noted that there was no specific reference to technical assistance in the illustrative list of questions, and said that technical assistance was important if developing country access to infrastructure was to be improved, and their empowerment in the domain of electronic commerce realised.  Finally, he said that the document submitted by the CTD to the General Council should list only comments made in the CTD.  He said that it was not relevant to refer to the Seminar, and indeed that any relevant points made in the Seminar had been made before the CTD.  Such points included the high price of access to the Internet, the predominance of English, the chain of confidence, the issue of human resources.  He agreed with the statements made by Brazil, and said that the format in which the statements were presented should indicate that the statements did not reflect agreed positions.
&& The representative of Korea said his delegation was surprised that the discussion that had taken place was similar to the discussion held in the informal consultations.  He said it was important to send a summary that fully reflected points made in the CTD.  Given that the CTD had to send a report to the General Council by 30 July, his delegation proposed that a final deadline for written submissions.  He said that it was important to include in the submission the points made in the Seminar, since the holding of the seminar was decided by the CTD, and because participants at the seminar were similar to the participants in the CTD.  Given the technical nature of electronic commerce, his delegation did not consider the points made in the seminar to be less relevant than points made in the CTD.
&& The representative of Argentina said his delegation's views were along the lines of those expressed by Panama, Brazil, Egypt, Mexico and Uruguay.  Regarding paragraph 16, he recalled that his country was not a party to the ITA, and said that his delegation was not of the view that the ITA, and specific commitments under the GATS, could facilitate the access to IT goods and services.  His delegation supported the view expressed by Brazil saying that a factual report was needed reflecting the various comments made in the CTD, and supported keeping separate from the document the main points made in the seminar.
&& The representative of India said that in his view the remarks made by Brazil, Egypt and others regarding the compilation of points were devastating.  He identified two types of problems.  First, errors of omission, inasmuch as when one view was expressed, the opposing view was not.  He said there might be some reason for this, insofar as the inclusion of diametrically opposite views would leave the  reader in doubt as to what the view held by the CTD was.  He said the truth of the matter may be that the CTD had no view on the matter since it was  an evolving and new area.  Second, his delegation were also concerned about errors of commission.  He refered to paragraph 8 and 9 which dealt with the movement of natural persons, and said that the statement that electronic commerce would make moot the issue of the movement of natural persons had no basis in reality.  He cited as an example the high demand for Indian software specialists in the United States and Europe, in connection with the Y2K problem, and the fact that this demand could not be met owing to travel restrictions.  It seemed, therefore, that contrary to the statement made in paragraph 9, electronic commerce accentuated the question of the movement of natural persons.  It was therefore obvious that the report in its present form was problematic.  Possible solutions included a summary by the Chairperson on her own responsibility, or a factual summary.
&& The representative of Japan, commenting on the views expressed by Egypt and India, said that the holding of the seminar was useful in educating the CTD, and added that the proposal made to hold a seminar on special and differential treatment was a good one, to which his delegation had a positive attitude.  However, the holding of a seminar without  any concrete outcome was not very productive; some outcome was necessary, whether the seminar be on electronic commerce or special and differential treatment.  He said that one possibility, regarding the seminar on electronic commerce, would be to separate the list of points made in the seminar and present it as an annex to the compilation, adding that it was useful  to present a record of points made in the seminar to the General Council.  He said his delegation could go along with the comments contained in the compilation, but that if some delegations did feel unsure about comments made, his delegation was willing to be flexible.  Echoing the suggestion made by India, he said the compilation could be presented as a Chairperson's summary on her own responsibility, if there was no consensus within the CTD concerning the document.
Returning to the section on points made in the Seminar, the representative of Japan said it was a pity that no reference had been made to the work carried out by the WTO's Economic Research and Analysis Division on the impact of electronic commerce on customs tariff revenue, which had been refered to in paragraphs 130 and 131 of Secretariat document WT/COMTD/W/18.  He said that the compilation should reproduce the contents of paragraph 131, which stated that "the study estimated the customs tariff revenue loss in case all these goods were traded on-line to be US$200 million for developing countries and US$600 million.  This amounted to less that 0.1 per cent of total world tariff revenues.  The broad conclusion of the report was that for most countries, tariff losses from the on-line trade of digitised products were liable to be negligible".
&& The representative of Canada said her delegation was of the view that there had been, within the CTD, very constructive discussions on electronic commerce and development, and that it was important to find a way of reflecting these in the report.  Her delegation believed the compilation of points was useful and that provided the list could be revised to incorporate comments from the present Session and the informal consultations of 5 May, it would form an important part of the report.  She said that if other delegations thought that these discussions could be reflected in a factual summary, her delegation were willing to show flexibility. Regarding points raised in the seminar, she said the reviews of the seminar had been good and that discussion in the seminar had been interesting, and that it was important that these points remained in the report.  Her delegation were flexible as to whether points raised in the seminar should remain part of the list, prefaced by a "chapeau" explaining the context of that part of the report, or alternatively, that the points made in the seminar be turned into a separate document altogether.  Finally, she said she believed Egypt had  made a good point concerning the work of other organisations and the need for coordination, and that mention should be made of this in the report.
&& The representative of the European Commission said he shared the mild surprise expressed by the representative of Korea. about the debate that had been held.  He said that informal discussions had been held, that his delegation had enquired from the Secretariat as to whether any written submissions had been made, and had been of the impression that the paper had been settled and could go forward.  Unfortunately, this did not seem to be the case, and he said the question was how to ensure that there would be an input from CTD into the General Council process, adding that it was  very important that there be such an input.  He did not want to pronounce on how this should be done, the but necessary steps should be taken to have another discussion and another document, with sufficient time to discuss the document.  His delegation were willing to discuss substantive points and did not want to prejudge any question which had been raised.  It was important that there be a faithful reflection of what had been done in the committee.  He expressed concern about the time frame for the completion of work and said his delegation were open to suggestions from the chair and the Secretariat on how to proceed.
&& The Chairperson, responding to a question raised earlier by the representative of the United States regarding a reference made in paragraph 1 of the compilation to Article XX exceptions, said the point had been made by the representative of the Republic of Korea, in the meeting of 6 March 1998.
&& The representative of the United States thanked the Chairperson for her swift response.  She said that her delegation agreed with comments made by Japan and Korea, that the list of points made in the seminar be retained in some shape or form, not necessarily as a submission to the General Council but perhaps as an annex.  She agreed with Egypt that there were several items discussed in the seminar that would be useful for discussion in the CTD, recalling that the seminar had been initiated by the CTD, that there had been substantial input into the seminar from delegations, and that the representation at the seminar had been quite formidable.  A broad spectrum of views had been expressed, and therefore she did not understand why the list of points made in the seminar should be treated as if it contained something repugnant.  She recognised that there should be a distinction between statements made by Members and those made by individuals in the Seminar.
Concerning objections made to the list of points made in the CTD, the representative of the United States said many delegations had raised the need for the list to reflect views not in agreement with the views already contained in the list.  She said that objections to specific statements should be included, though the statements should not be deleted, in recognition of the fact that the statements reflected views held by delegations.  Regarding the points made by Mexico concerning technical assistance,  she drew the attention of the CTD to the paper her delegation had circulated earlier, which contained a section on development, and which stated that, in addition to initiatives such as the ITA and basic telecommunication, the United States suggested that Members consider development assistance initiatives that fostered the growth of infrastructure, access to information technology and technical know-how.  She therefore requested that the United States notation be included in the revision of the list.  Regarding the comments made by India, she said that it was an Indian representative who had said during the Seminar that the question of the movement of natural persons may be minimal.
&& The representative of Venezuela supported the delegations of Brazil and Egypt in search of a more balanced text, adding that her delegation found it difficult to take on board paragraphs 3, 7, 23, and 24.  In particular, she recalled that her delegation had stated  a very definite position concerning public policy in investment matters.  Her delegation wished to support the Uruguayan proposal to extract from the compilation all points made in the seminar.  This did not negate the value of the seminar, and her delegation were willing to show flexibility in searching for a means to reflect the seminar.  She believed that the opinions stated by some delegations, notably Egypt and Brazil, were of sufficient importance for there to flexibility regarding time-frames for the presentation of written comments.  She suggested an informal approach be taken that would allow substantive modifications to the documents. she also asked whether the representative of Japan could repeat his proposal, which she had not fully understood.
&& The representative of Korea said he took the floor to respond to the question raised by the United States.  As the statement had been made by his predecessor, his delegation  would undertake further work and contact the United States delegation bilaterally.
&& The representative of Japan said the point he had wished to make was that the point made in document WT/COMTD/W/18, paragraphs 130 and 131, regarding research undertaken by the WTO Secretariat on the impact of electronic commerce on customs revenue be included in the report on points made in the Seminar.
&& The representative of Uruguay said that his understanding had been that the preliminary report would be a note sent by the chair to the General Council.  The preliminary report  had not yet been considered by the General Council, but would be on 15 June 1999.  Therefore the compilation  of points under discussion would form the basis for the definitive submission to the general Council for consideration by 31 July 1999.  He said that there was therefore two months for the definitive report to be finalised by the CTD.  If this was so, his delegation did not see why there should be a hurry to consider something as definitive when there were two months left at the disposal of the CTD.
&& The Chairperson said the discussions had been fruitful and thanked delegations for their comments and criticisms regarding the document.  She recalled that the points contained in the compilation were neither negotiated nor reflected consensus.  Taking into account all that had been said, she said she would endeavour to find a date that would be convenient for all in order to have further informal consultations, prior to the next CTD meeting scheduled for 7 July 1999.  In the meantime, the Secretariat would take into account statements made during the meeting and revise the document accordingly.  It was hoped that the this would be done in time for the informal consultations, which would be the last meeting during which there would be further discussion on the question, which would be the submitted to the CTD at its meeting of 7 July, during which a definite decision would have to be taken, if it was intended that the contribution of the CTD to the General Council be made  by the end of July, as had been planned.  She hoped that Members would be agreeable to this proposal, and said that in the meantime she would address a letter, in her capacity as chairperson of the CTD, to the chairman of the General Council, informing him that the question of electronic commerce continued to be discussed in the CTD.  An indication would be made of the main issues raised in the CTD, along with the fact that there was no consensus on most of these issues, and that  these issues would be further discussed at the informal consultations and at the next formal meeting of the CTD.  She believed this would provide an indication to the Chairman of the General Council of the importance given by the CTD to the subject of electronic commerce.  She said the Secretariat would communicate to Members the date and time of the next informal consultations on electronic commerce.
It was so agreed.

PRESENTATIONS
-	Jointly by the ITC, UNCTAD and WTO on the Joint Integrated ITC/UNCTAD/WTO Technical Assistance Programme in selected Least-Developed and other African Countries;  and
-	By the Administrative Unit of the Integrated Framework on the Integrated Framework for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least-Developed Countries
&& The Chairperson said that a number of WTO technical assistance activities were undertaken as part of a programme or of a framework jointly with other organizations.  Examples of this were the Joint Integrated Technical Assistance Programme for Selected Least-Developed and Other African Countries (JITAP);  and activities undertaken by the WTO in the least-developed countries under the umbrella of the Integrated Framework for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least-Developed Countries, outcome of the High Level Meeting for Least-Developed Countries which was held in October 1997.  She said that JITAP was a joint programme between ITC, UNCTAD and the WTO, while the Integrated Framework was a coordination mechanism which coordinates trade-related assistance activities in least-developed countries of six agencies: ITC, IMF, UNCTAD, UNDP, the World Bank and WTO.  She was sure that while all delegations had heard about these two initiatives, it had seemed to her that there was a general interest among delegations to receive more information about them.  Moreover, the initiatives also involved bilateral development partners, which added an additional reason to taking up these two initiatives in the Committee.
She welcomed Mr. Dagata, Director, Division of Technical Cooperation Coordination, Mr.Vijay, Chief of the Office for Least-Developed Countries and Africa, and Mr. Ben Fadhl, Senior Trade Promotion Adviser/Chief Technical Coordinator in the Office for Least-Developed Countries and Africa, all three from the International Trade Centre, who will give us a presentation on the JITAP.  This would be followed by a presentation on the Integrated Framework for Trade-Related Technical Assistance to Least-Developed Countries by Mr. Francesco Geoffroy, of the Administrative Unit of the Integrated Framework.  The Administrative Unit represented the six agencies involved: and was located in the ITC.  The presentations would help to explain the linkage between the Integrated Framework and JITAP.
&& Mr. Dagata said that JITAP was the joint WTO/UNCTAD/ITC Integrated Technical Assistance Programme in Selected Least Developed and Other African countries.  He said his presentation would try to shed light on JITAP's origins;  its programme concepts and elements;  its management and implementation modalities;  and its relationship to the Integrated Framework for Trade-related assistance to  LDCs.  JITAP was concerned with technical cooperation for trade development, aimed at enhancing the participation of African countries in the multilateral trading system. JITAP was broad in scope, covering upstream policy and downstream practical solutions to country needs.  Yet it was limited to meeting the most critical needs for trade-related technical assistance.  It was country-based, with inter-country linkages.  It depended on partnerships, among the three Geneva-based institutions, with and among eight African countries,  and with 13 donor countries.  The participating countries were Tunisia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Benin, Ghana, Côte d'Ivoire and Burkina Faso.  Four of these countries were least‑developed countries.  Its rationale was to help African countries benefit from the Uruguay Round Agreements.  On the occasion of UNCTAD IX, in 1996, the three agencies announced their intention to jointly respond to African needs with integrated activities in selected countries.  By end‑1997, teams of Geneva-based technical staff, working closely with African national officials, had carried out needs assessments and designed individual projects with the eight participant countries.  It became clear that critical country-level needs were predominantly common and that the programme response in each of the countries was becoming a common set of activities.  When the prospect of pooling donor resources became evident and the benefits of simultaneous implementation were considered, individual country projects were transformed into the JITAP programme. Implementation had begun in 1998.
&& Mr. Dagata said that needs identified during country assessments fell under four headings:  first, the need to understand the implications of the new multilateral  trading system for Africa's trade;  second, the need for help in implementing WTO membership obligations and other undertakings; third, help in identifying new trade opportunities and potential problems  for enterprises.  And finally, a need to help exporters and importers respond to those opportunities and concerns.  JITAP was first and foremost a capacity-building  programme.  Its distinctive features were joint participation of the three Geneva organisations; a single, or generic, programme with selected activities to address critical common needs, based on individual country needs and responses; organisation of scores of implementation actions in clusters of programme elements, with each cluster covering all partner countries, allowing for the simultaneous implementation across all eight countries, cluster-by-cluster; and finally a communication and discussion facility to facilitate networking among partner countries and between them and the Geneva organisations.  This system, once in place, would greatly facilitate implementation and should easily be extended to other organisations.  The distinctive features of JITAP contributed to enhancing  synergies among partner countries and the Geneva organisations, as well as among programme activities;  the use of resources through economies of scale in management and programme implementation; sustainability through networking and other capacity-building features; and replicability of the JITAP programme in other countries if and when it were decided to expand the programme.
&& Mr. Dagata said that coordination at the national level was through a steering group of involved institutions, donors and the three Geneva organisations.  A senior official in the trade ministry was the focal point.  Financial contributions for JITAP were brought together in a Common Trust Fund (CTF) administered by the ITC.  Window One received unearmarked contributions, and Window Two for country-earmarked contributions.  The total cost of the programme in the eight countries was estimated at US$10 million.  Contributions to date were well over US$8 million;  the funding gap was mainly in Kenya, and to a lesser extent in Côte d'Ivoire.  There was a broad donor base, with 13 donors, including Côte d'Ivoire itself which had pledged to make a substantial contribution to the CTF for its own activities.
&& Mr. Vijay said he would describe the programme content of JITAP and explain how the clusters that reflected that content had been set up to realise the three objectives of the programmes, namely building knowledge of the multilateral trading system;  conforming to the multilateral trading system;  and  enhancing the readiness of the country's exporters to take advantage of opportunities offered by a liberalised economy.  As explained earlier the technical work undertaken by the three organisations during the programming phase led to the identification of a number of activities that needed to be undertaken to realise the three objectives of the programme.  During the programming phase, it was found that to optimise the use of resources and to derive synergy and economies of scale benefits, the activities were best undertaken in groups.  This led to the adoption of a cluster approach. Groups of generic activities were called clusters.  These generic activities or clusters were undertaken to satisfy the identified needs of each country.  In each cluster, there were sufficient commonalities across the countries to allow for simultaneous delivery  of a number of outputs in a group of countries.  By using this approach, it was possible to undertake scores of activities involving over 1,000 implementation actions in eight countries through 15 clusters.  The 15 clusters were best understood in terms of four families and could be classified as follows: knowledge of the MTS and its implications; reforms to meet MTS obligations; enterprise readiness; and support.
The first family of clusters was aimed at strengthening the capacity  of countries to understanding the multilateral trading system amd its  implications for external trade.  The essence of the activities in this family was to help countries in comprehending the emerging trading environment and to define the field in which businesses truly operated. Within the first family, there were two clusters:  the first dealt with developing a knowledge of the multilateral trading system and its implications while the second dealt with the impact of the multilateral trading system on the national economy and adaptation of external trade policy.
The second family addressed the issue of adjusting the national trade legislation so that it conformed to the multilateral trading system and regulations, and also had two clusters.  Under the first of these, technical assistance was given on all matters  relating to customs, while under the second, assistance was given for adjusting the legal framework of a country's external trade so that it was in line with the rules of the multilateral trading system.
The third family dealt with enhancing the export readiness of enterprises.  It was, by the nature of work that needed to be done, a large family.  It sought to lay the foundation for development of exports from a country and to give practical help at the enterprise level.  To understand the third family, it was best to see it as comprising  two components.  The first dealt with providing support at the strategic level while the second dealt with building capacity at the operational level, so that enterprises actually involved in exporting goods and services could compete effectively in the rapidly globalizing world economy.  The strategic component itself had three clusters.  Under the first cluster, export supply and market potential, the trade prospects of counties were analysed on the basis of their national export performance and the evaluation of international demand and supply.  Under the second cluster, training for strategy formulation, countries received help in order to identify for themselves products that could be exported and markets in which they could be sold.  Under the third cluster, sectoral strategies were prepared for the main export subsectors and product groups, and technical advice was to be given to exporting enterprises to enable them to define company‑specific business strategies and plans.  At the operational level, work was undertaken in four clusters. In the first two clusters, namely trade information, national enquiry points and quality management, support was given to create an enabling environment for the enterprise to operate so that they have access to necessary business infrastructure to conduct their business efficiently and effectively.  Under the last two clusters, namely trade secrets and export financing, efforts were directed at the enterprises themselves giving them support in areas of critical importance, in for instance, how to approach export markets and finance their export activity, negotiate with banks and so forth.
The fourth family provided the support to ensure that the capacity built under the other three families is maintained even after the programme came to an end.  This family also had four clusters.  The "programme management" cluster had a number of activities undertaken to ensure that various components of the programme were synchronised and activities and outputs were delivered jointly in a timely manner in accordance with the programme plan.  The "reference centre" cluster ensured that up to date technical information on the multilateral trading system was readily available to various users such as government ministries, national institutions, and private sector enterprises.  The cluster that dealt with networking of partners facilitated the smooth flow of information among programme partners on JITAP's various components using the latest technology tools;  and in the human resource development/capacity building cluster activities were aimed at ensuring that appropriate training material is developed and made available to all users, and that required skills are developed in the concerned institutions.
&& Mr. Vijay said that taken together, all clusters and families gave simultaneous and sequential actions at three levels in order to achieve the three objectives of the programme.  The capacity developed under the three families was sustained by the work done under the fourth family – support family – where each of the three organisations namely the ITC, the WTO, and the UNCTAD, were involved.  The fourth family acted as a backbone for supporting the entire programme which derived its main synergy benefit from it.  There were links between clusters.  For instance, work done in the export supply and market potential cluster was used in the cluster dealing with sector/product strategy.  This was an example of links between clusters of the same family.  However, there were many linkages between clusters belonging to different families.  For instance, work done under the export supply and market potential cluster fed directly into the cluster dealing with the impact of the multilateral trading system on the national economy, which in turn provided inputs into the sector/product strategy cluster.  Likewise, work done under the cluster "adjustment to trade laws and regulations" informed tasks undertaken under the impact of the multilateral trading system on the national economy and vice versa.
&& Mr. Vijay said that work done by the ITC under the cluster relating to trade analysis provided inputs to the cluster dealing with the impact of the multilateral trading system on the national economy, which provided a key input to the national symposium in the field, in which all parties were involved to identify strategic trade options.  Revised trade policies in line with WTO rules were developed in order to create an enabling environment in which enterprises could flourish and help in formulating appropriate sector strategies, which then provided an input into the strategies and business plans of the enterprises which were actually involved in exporting.  JITAP generated information both of a qualitative and quantitative nature on a massive scale.  To ensure that synergistic benefits accrued in a cumulative manner and valuable lessons learnt by some participants were readily available to all when needed, an innovative Internet-based communication and discussion facility was to be set up under JITAP.  Mr. Vijay handed the floor to Mr. Ben Fadhl to present this facility.
&& Mr. Ben Fadhl said that the JITAP was quite complex, given the large number of players and the heavy information flows generated by programme partners and network of trainers.  The problem was compounded by numerous communication difficulties and high operating costs.  These challenges had to be overcome by networking and using modern communication technologies, to create a tool for management and information exchange, that can be used readily by all parties  concerned, and this was the Communication and Discussion Facility (CDF).  The CDF had four modules:  the exchange of documents module, which provided access to information by JITAP partners; the question-answers module, which enabled any participating user to raise a question on the web site and have a reply by an appropriate resource person; the online discussion module, which was a JITAP chat-room where day-to-day technical issues were discussed; and the newsgroup module, where JITAP teams periodically initiated thematic discussions or exchanged ideas on selected subjects.  The address was JITAP.ORG.  Once the home page was reached, one would have the choice of surfing in French or English, though at the moment the prototype operated only in English.  Once one had entered the CDF, one could choose between functions that were grouped in four sections:  key information dealt with the programme and  participating countries; CDF modules ‑ the already mentioned; links to relevant sites; and utilities. If one visited "key information" a number of documents which could be reviewed or downloaded were available for each country.  The visitor of JITAP.ORG could review the implementation plan for that country, obtain a list of National Steering Committee members and their contact addresses, and so forth.  It was possible to examine information under implementation under various clusters.  The question and answer module enabled to post a question  or review answers given.  The module on documents exchange allowed the transmission of documents electronically, rather than faxing them or sending them by courier.
&& Mr. Dagata concluded by reviewing the key characteristics of the JITAP as compared with the Integrated Framework for LDCs.  JITAP was a distinctive, concrete programme of assistance while the Integrated Framework was mainly a structure and a set of processes to co-ordinate assistance, although it did lead to a coordinated group of activities.  JITAP was at present an Africa programme, while the Integrated Framework covered the world.  JITAP covered both LDCs and non-LDCs in Africa while the Integrated Framework was by definition restricted to LDCs.  The three Geneva institutions were currently the only JITAP executing agencies, and they also participated in the integrated framework with other core agencies.  There were four JITAP LDCs which also fell within the scope of the Integrated Framework.
&& Mr. Dagata proceeded to introduce the Integrated Framework.  The Integrated Framework for trade-related technical assistance to LDCs was endorsed by the October 1997 High-Level Meeting on LDCs.  The core agencies were the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the UNDP, and the three Geneva institutions.  They formed an interagency working group, under the chairmanship of the WTO, supported by the Administrative Unit housed at the ITC.  Other multilateral and bilateral partners active in trade-related assistance were now participating the Integrated Framework process to arrive at a truly comprehensive, cooperation framework.  The 48 least-developed countries were heavily concentrated in Africa, but there were a large number in Asia as well.  A website ‑ LDCS.ORG – supported the IF process.  The site was a key and unique information tool providing transparency for the process. The starting-point of the IF process was the country's needs assessment.  The core agencies addressed those needs in an integrated response.  Other  multilateral  and bilateral agencies had been invited to broaden the integrated response, and several had done so.  Subsequently, the LDC should schedule a trade-related Round Table meeting, where it presented in a strategic setting, its needs assessment , the integrated response, and requested assistance.  At the meeting, development partners should officially announce their interest in supporting elements of a multi-year country-specific programme of trade-related assistance.
So far, 40 needs assessments and the corresponding Integrated Responses had been prepared.  Over 20 countries were planning  for a trade-related Round Table and were in various stages of preparation.  One Round Table had been held in December 1998 in Uganda.  It had become clear that  the round table process was not moving as quickly initially expected.  Accordingly, the Administrative Unit was asked early this year to develop a model Round Table document, which had now been disseminated to all LDCs.  Without compromising ownership, the agencies were now taking a more proactive approach to getting round tables set up, including facilitating launch workshops and the national preparation of round table documents.  Thirteen Round Table Meetings were currently scheduled for 1999, though this was understandably subject to change. In Angola, preparations were at an early stage, and the UNDP was helping.  In Bangladesh,  the World  Bank was helping to organise a launch workshop in Dhaka on 23 June 1999.  The next meeting of the Inter‑Agency Working Group was also scheduled to be held in Dhaka after the workshop.  In Bhutan, help in preparing the meeting was principally from UNDP and ITC.  In Djibouti, following preparatory missions by the WTO, the UNCTAD and  the ITC, the Round Table Meeting could take place in the autumn.  In Ethiopia, a Round Table document had been circulated;  the World Bank was providing support.  In Gambia, the meeting would take place within a broader UNDP-supported meeting, also focussing on private sector development and agriculture.  In Guinea, the meeting was planned in conjunction with a meeting on private sector development.  A joint mission of the Bank, the UNCTAD and the UNDP would help prepare it.  In Haiti, consultants under a UNDP/UNCTAD project were helping to prepare documentation.  In Mozambique, preparations were still at an early stage.  Nepal would also attend the launch workshop in Dhaka.  In Niger, a broader UNDP Round Table would include discussions on the trade sector and private sector development.  In Tanzania, a meeting was being pursued with the support of the World Bank, following recommendations of a consultative group meeting in may.  In Zambia, discussion was under way with core agencies. Finally, there was interest  in having a meeting in Malawi.
&& Mr. Dagata said that another measure of progress was what the six core agencies had accomplished in carrying out their respective parts of the integrated responses. Agencies had already addressed  almost half of the 2,000 needs they agreed to pursue in the Integrated Responses.  These responses typically included IMF missions to review and update customs legislation, ITC buyers‑sellers meetings, UNCTAD consultancies on trade policy issues, World Bank advisory missions to improve national frameworks, and WTO specialised national and regional workshops.  Progress had also been made in reducing the overlap and fostering synergies among core agencies.  Several of the integrated responses were joint responses involving two or more agencies.  Less tangibly, the Integrated Framework had also sensitised partners to the importance of trade-related assistance, and had given it more visibility on the development agenda. this was resulting in enhanced effectiveness in the delivery of technical assistance.  All of this would be considered in an eventual evaluation of the value-added of the Integrated Framework approach.
&& Mr. Geoffroy of the Integrated Framework Administrative Unit briefly presented the Integrated Framework website.  He said the website  had been prepared with very simple graphics, so as to facilitate the downloading of information in LDCs. The site became operational in September 1998, and had received almost 9,000 hits at an average of 50 hits a day.  The upper left part of the front page contained the main menu, while the core information on the process for every single LDC was contained under the heading "Country-Specific Programmes".  Once a participating country had been selected, a full menu was accessible with rubrics such as the national focal point, needs assessment and so forth.  The national focal point was normally a senior official within a relevant Ministry of the LDC.  The needs assessment paper contained the country's economic analysis covering all trade development constraints and identified the technical assistance needs.  The integrated response page was divided into three columns;  the left column stating the technical assistance needs listed in the needs assessment page, the middle column gaving the name of the core agency meeting the need identified, and the right hand column briefly describing the response of the core agency.  The Status of Implementation page reflected the status of implementation in the LDC.  Updating of the report on implementation was made regularly by the agencies every 6-8 months and communicated to the Administrative Unit for its electronic dissemination.  The page on communication by other development partners listed the trade-related assistance the country was receiving from other multilateral partners and bilateral agencies.  The page "Status of Preparation of Round Tables" provided information on the timing of the meeting, the venue and the lead agency assisting the country in preparing for the event.  The Round Table document was disseminated in advance to all interested parties in real time through the website.  Returning to the main menu, the page "programme participants" provided information on the main group of actors, that is the LDCs, the six core agencies, and other development partners.  The page "core group of organisations" made available information on six core agencies.  The section "other development partners" contained information on multilateral and bilateral partners.  Under the multilaterals sub-heading, information on 12 agencies active in trade-related technical assistance to LDCs was presented.  Under the heading Inter-Agency Group, the coordinates of the focal points of the six core agencies was provided.  Under the heading official document, a selection of the most important Integrated Framework documents was provided, and under the headings "process at a glance", "coming events" and "what's new?", information on the most important steps for participating LDCs was provided in a summarised way.
&& The Chairperson thanked Messrs. Dagata, Vijay and Ben Fahdl for their interesting presentations.

REPORT ON TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING 1998
&& The Chairperson invited Mr. Jean-Maurice Léger, Director, Technical Cooperation Division to make an important statement on the present critical financial situation, which has potentially serious effects for WTO technical cooperation activities.  She said  the subject of his statement should be of concern to every Member of the CTD.
&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division said the purpose of his presentation was to give a review of the technical cooperation activities that took place in 1998, and also the budget situation, as of 31 of May 1999, for the year 1999.  There had been a fourfold increase in the number of technical cooperation activities between 1995 and 1998.  In the first five months of 1999, 141 activities had been conducted.  This rate of increase was not sustainable, owing to financial and human resource constraints.  Furthermore, the preparations for the Seattle Ministerial Conference, and the ensuing negotiations, would require that WTO would have to be present in Geneva to service these negotiations.  He also recalled that the workload of operational divisions consisted primarily in servicing working groups and committees;  dealing with dispute settlement panels; providing day to day technical assistance to delegations in Geneva;  and only  when time and resources permitted the undertaking of technical assistance missions outside Geneva.
&& Mr. Léger presented information on the geographic distribution of technical assistance activities for 1998, and noted that Africa continued to account for the largest number of activities.  The 58 per cent increase in 1998 over 1997 resulted from activities under the Integrated Framework and JITAP, and  also from the decision to establish WTO reference centres in LDCs.  The numbers for Europe for both 1997 and 1998 were inflated insofar as they included all activities that took place at WTO headquarters, which activities covered developing countries  in all regions.  He said that the footnote pertaining to North America referred to short term trade policy courses that were geared to developing and least developed countries, that took place in Washington D.C., and that were financed by the Organisation of American States.  Insofar as the Middle East was concerned, the increase was closer to 50 per cent, reflecting greater involvement of countries  in this area of the globe, and also because there were a number of countries in the process of accession in this area.  The WTO worked closely in the Middle East with the Islamic Development Bank, which had financed a number of activities.
&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division said that whenever modes of delivery were discussed, attention needed to be given to the evolving nature of the multilateral rules based system, and in this context the need for at least three levels of activities.  The first level consisted of the general dissemination of an overview of the WTO  and its agreements.  The second level represented more in depth upgrading of developing countries human resource skills in order  to further improve their capacity to participate in the WTO and the decision-making  process.  The third level consisted of specialised knowledge required for the implementation of WTO agreements.  Examples in this respect included the training of customs officials in customs evaluation methods, establishing enquiry points and conformity assessment procedures as required by the TBT, and risk  assessment techniques under the SPS.  It was also important to bear in mind that there was  a continuous renewal in developing country administrations, with new government officials, thereby requiring repeats of WTO training programmes.  Looking specifically at the figures, there had been an increase in regional seminars from 42 to 71, and a decrease in national seminars from 44 to 41.  These results were in line with Members' requests to emphasise regional seminars.  Although regional seminars reach a larger number of countries and permit the establishment of contacts with the authorities of participating countries, the cost of regional seminars was very much higher than the cost of national seminars. The cost of an average regional seminar in 1998 was CHF150,000, while the cost of the average national seminar was CHF20,000.  Furthermore, the synergy that resulted from regional seminars was usually limited owing to the small number of national participants.  Given that developing countries were increasingly concerned with implementation issues, it was likely that the number of national  seminars would increase.  National seminars served to identify more readily concerns at the country level, and the larger number of participants ensured a greater synergy once the activity had been completed and facilitated the assessment of the implications of agreements.  The huge increase in technical seminars from 55 to 90 reflected the establishment of WTO reference centres, and also resulted  from specific request from Members to conduct specialized activities rather than general ones.  The increase in workshops and symposia from 78 to 106 denoted the fact that the WTO had been increasingly in demand to participate in these events.
&& Mr. Léger added that two-thirds of all planned missions assigned for 1998 under the three‑year plan were executed, compared to 50 per cent in 1997.  However, activities coming under the three-year plan constituted only a third of all activities conducted in 1998.  Although the three‑year plan was of help, more rigorous planning was required by members.  The number of activities not coming under the three-year plan (196) was in part explained by the fact that this was the first full year of operation of the three-year plan.  Finally, the activities of the three-year plan not executed (58) were due to cancellation by host countries, or postponement for a variety of reasons.  It needed to be made clear that many actors were involved in the conduct of a technical cooperation mission: the Technical Cooperation Division as the chief executing unit, the host country, funding resources, and in the case of the regional seminar, the beneficiary countries.  The interaction between these various actors was an important factor in the cancellation or postponement of activities.
&& Mr. Léger said that of the 140 activities fully organised by the WTO (which represented less than 50 per cent of all activities in which the WTO was involved), over half were undertaken by divisions other than the Technical Cooperation Division, though the latter acted as coordinator.  By "other institutions" was meant those that were part of the JITAP process, those that were part of the Integrated Framework, and others.  Activities to which the WTO was invited numbered 110, representing more than one-third of all activities in 1998.  In a number of cases, costs – transportation costs and local expenses - were frequently borne by the WTO, and more was being done to have host organisations absorb these costs in the future.
&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division noted that the activities of the Division covered a number of subjects, which could be classified into 11 categories, including general seminars;  goods;  services;  dispute settlement;  intellectual property;  trade and environment;  implementation issues;  regionalism;  electronic commerce;  and so forth.  General seminars were defined as those where general dissemination of the WTO and its agreements took place.  The number of activities under general seminars in 1998 numbered 80, reflecting a heightened interest in the activities of the WTO and the multilateral trading system.  Activities on specific subjects were covered usually in workshops, specific seminars and technical missions.  The total number of activities was greater than the total number of missions, given that in any one mission, it was possible that more than one activity be covered.  Missions on accession reflected the increased demand for technical cooperation by countries in the process of accession to the WTO.  The number of activities under information technologies for development, 37, reflected the installation of WTO reference centres.  Activities on market access were mainly on the explanation and identification of market access conditions at the product and tariff line levels, and incorporated two training courses on trade negotiations skills.  The large number of missions on customs valuation reflected the implementation date of the agreement by the year 2000.  A number of countries in 1998 required assistance on the transposition of tariff schedules into the HS 1996 system. For reasons of cost efficiency, the Integrated Data Base had been dealt with in seminars on market  access issues.  Agriculture, textiles and clothing were important subjects for developing countries, and SPS and TBT were treated together in one single activity.  In the area of rules, it was noteworthy that more requests for assistance were being received by the Secretariat.  This was an area where the division concerned devoted a sizeable amount of time to technical assistance at headquarters, responding to daily questions and concerns by delegations.  As already indicated, servicing committees and working groups, along with dispute settlement panels, constituted the priority area of work for the Secretariat in this domain.  The main subject that was beginning to be covered substantially in technical assistance was the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.  Particular attention was given to the issue of disciplines in notification requirements.  In the area of trade in services, the Agreement was explained in general, as well as at the sectoral level, particularly with respect to financial services and telecommunications.
Technical aspects of the scheduling of commitments were also dealt with in the course of technical assistance activities.  Activities on TRIPS reflected the implementation date of the agreement in January 2000, and also the joint programme conducted with the WIPO.  Activities under Dispute Settlement Understanding numbered 17, of which four were regional or sub-regional courses, while the others were at the national level.  Activities under trade and environment reflected the holding of regional and sub-regional seminars announced in 1997 by the WTO.  Regarding implementation issues, a number of requests had been made for legal advisors to screen national legislation to verify compliance with WTO agreements.  Regarding notification requirements, specific seminars had been held.  Regional integration was also a subject of increasing interest to developing countries, particularly those involved in negotiations on a regional, sub-regional or bilateral basis. Attention was given to the issue of consistency between regional, sub-regional and bilateral  arrangements with WTO commitments.  One activity had been  held under the rubric of electronic commerce, though more were expected in the near future.  There was interest in the role of electronic commerce within the WTO framework,  as well as progress to date made on the work programme on electronic commerce.
&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division said that in keeping with the Singapore Ministerial Declaration, the services of the division had been made available to developing country Members in the areas of trade and  competition policy, and trade and investment.  These activities had been conducted in connection with the UNCTAD and the World Bank,. there had also been a symposium on trade facilitation in 1998, and a number of missions had been conducted on transparency in government procurement.  Lastly consultation with other international organisations covered JITAP and the Integrated Framework.  The WTO was also in contact with a  number of other agencies with a view to develop  joint programmes.
With regard to the Integrated Framework, Mr. Léger drew attention to the input of the WTO.  In 1998, 52 activities were held, 32 of which consisted in the establishment of national reference centres, seven national seminars, three meetings of the inter-agency working group, three meeting in the Round Table process, three regional seminars (one in Zambia for English-speaking African LDCs, one in Djibouti for French-speaking African LDCs, and one in Bangladesh for Asian and Pacific LDCs), and two short term policy courses for LDCs.  Regarding the WTO contribution to the JITAP programme, there had been 23 missions, mostly concerning sessions on notification, implementation issues and the establishment of WTO reference centres.
&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division presented the budget situation as of May 1999.  The figures presented excluded the regular training courses of three months each amounting to CHF1.5 million.  They also excluded donations from the United Kingdom for the consolidated tariffs schedule database, and for the financing of one position for one year in the Technical Cooperation Division to cover technical evaluation.  His presentation assumed the disbursement of 1999 instalments yet to be disbursed by donors.  He drew attention to the fact that the line "WTO regular budget" could only be used to cover travel and per diem expenses of WTO staff members.  The regular budget, along with programme support fund, and the trust fund donations of CHF5.2 million for gave a total funding of CHF6.775 million.  It could be seen therefore that roughly 10 per cent of technical cooperation activities were projected to be financed through the regular WTO budget.  Regarding projected expenditure, close to 60 per cent of projected expenditures had been firmly committed.  A number of reasons for this development could be posited, including the upcoming deadlines for the implementation of several agreements, the carryover of a number of activities from 1998, the extension of WTO reference centre programmes to small island economies, increasing requests for TBT and SPS seminars, general concerns related to the Singapore work programme, and preparations for the forthcoming Seattle Ministerial.  Some request for regional seminars had already been refused: one was on trade and development for middle-eastern countries, in Malta; one was for-English speaking LDCs  on rules, in Malawi; and so forth.
&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division said that the current problem lay in the fact that because it was not known in advance what funds would be available for a particular year, the approach that was followed was one of first-come, first-served, though efforts were made, to the extent that was possible, to consolidate requests into regional seminars.  Ad hoc requests received amounted to 57, at a  cost of CHF947,000.  TPR reviews accounted for CHF500,000.  Additional funding was for TPR reviews of least-developed countries, notably Chad, Mozambique and Mauritania, as well as Malawi, Central African Republic and Madagascar.  Regarding short term trade policy courses, the task force report on enhanced technical cooperation called for eight short‑term trade policy courses.  The estimate in the budget provided for four at CHF150,000 apiece.  The final result of the technical assistance budget for 1999 was a projected deficit of CHF2.6 million.  He indicated his intention to call an informal meeting with donors to evaluate the current situation, and to see whether a positive response could be elicited to this situation.
&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division said that the future orientation of technical cooperation could be dealt with under three sub-headings.  First, the question of funding OF activities.  As indicated previously, 90 per cent of current financial requirements were met through extra-budgetary resources, making it extremely difficult for the WTO to efficiently plan technical cooperation activities.  The regular WTO budget for technical cooperation needed urgently to be revisited, if technical cooperation was to continue. Second, it was necessary to identify possibilities for outsourcing. In this context the task force on enhanced WTO technical cooperation circulated recently to Members identified possibilities.  Areas where WTO expertise could be supplemented included intellectual property rights (WIPO), customs matters (WCO), TBT (ISO), SPS (Codex), preparations for post-Seattle negotiations (the World Bank); trade and investment and trade and competition (UNCTAD), training information technology (ITC).  The paper also identified a number of organisations at the regional level, including UN regional commissions, the Joint Vienna Institute, with which memoranda of understanding could be negotiated.  Finally, the elaboration of multi-year programmes of interest to developing countries would permit a more structured approach to technical assistance, but was dependent on a strengthened regular budget. What could be anticipated as priorities were overview of WTO agreements, followed by  an upgrading of human capacity to enable better participation in the WTO, and finally  specialised knowledge to  enable the implementation of WTO  agreements. 
&& The representative of the Republic of Korea thanked the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division for his presentation, and referred to paragraph 85 which detailed technical cooperation activities by region.  The representative of Korea wished to know what factors explained the difference between the growth rates in technical cooperation activities held in the Asia‑Pacific region and those held in Europe, given that there were more developing countries in Asia than in Europe.
&& The representative of Morocco thanked the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division for his presentation, which filled in some of the gaps left in the written report.  His delegation were pleased to note the increase, by about a third, in activities from 1997 to 1998, and wished to see this trend continue.  His delegation reiterated the importance it accorded to the technical cooperation activities of the WTO, which should accompany in an effective way all the activities of the organisation, and which should keep pace with the  evolution of the multilateral trading system.  His delegation reiterated the importance it accorded to the Integrated Framework for trade-related technical assistance, and noted with regret delays in its implementation, particularly with respect to the convening of round table meetings. Without such meetings, decisions taken at the High‑Level Meeting would remain ineffectual. He also reiterated the importance of the JITAP process, and said that it should be extended to other African countries.
&& The representative of Morocco said that there were certain analytical aspects missing from the written report. notably regarding the budget and the distribution of expenditure.  The approach that had been adopted on the basis of the number of activities provided an approximate indication of the value of the activity, but a budgetary breakdown would provide a clear indication of the value of activities, as well as an indication of the distribution of resources, thus enabling an identification of priorities, on a thematic basis.  The next report should have a section dealing with coordination and cooperation with other competent agencies.  The approach adopted in the report reflected in a fragmented fashion  the question of cooperation and coordination.  A more integrated section would provide a clearer  indication of the approach followed by the Secretariat in the sphere of coordination and cooperation with other agencies.
&& The representative of Morocco said he would not comment on the evaluation of technical cooperation given that his delegation had made known its views on a number of prior occasions. Addressing the issue of financing, he said that his delegation was very concerned about the financial crisis that affected technical cooperation activities.  He noted that the fraction of costs covered by the regular WTO budget had been 20 per cent and 1998 and was projected at 10 per cent for 1999.  His delegation supported the recommendations of the Task Force on Technical Cooperation that the funding of technical cooperation from the regular budget be increased.  He said that there should be increased predictability of funding from extra-budgetary sources, as both a gesture of solidarity and a commitment on the part of the organisation as a whole.
&& The representative of the European Communities thanked the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division for his presentation, and said he agreed with most of what had been said by the representative of Morocco.  He made the following suggestions concerning the report:  first, it would be useful if the budget section of the report was clearer, for instance by indicating who paid for what.  This would increase transparency and may be an incentive for others to pay for more.  Second, the forward-looking section was important to encourage discussion of future activities, and this section should be expanded accordingly.  He said that the Task Force had more importance for future activities than was reflected in the report.  There was also a strong link  to the ongoing debate about coherence.  He urged that this subject be dealt with in a comprehensive manner, particularly in regard to cooperation with other organisations.  He noted the possibility of cooperation with other organisations that would be able to fund activities undertaken. He also suggested that it would be useful if points raised in the presentation made to the CTD could be made to the Budget Committee in order to raise awareness.
&& The representative of Egypt thanked the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division for his presentation, and said he shared the views expressed by the delegations of Morocco and the European Communities regarding several issues.  He said that when technical assistance had been reviewed in 1997, his delegation had indicated that there had been five positive elements regarding technical assistance activities in 1997.  These had been: the increase in the level of technical assistance activities;  increase in the level of extra-budgetary resources; increase in Africa's share of technical assistance;  increased coverage of WTO agreements;  and increase in activities in relation to the High‑Level Meeting.  A number of these observations were still valid, and his delegation welcomed the continuation of those trends.  With regard to the report submitted to the CTD, he said there were again five positive elements.  These were:  the slight increase in budgetary outlay for technical assistance;  the increase in technical missions; the use of information technologies – particularly the increased  availability of training packages through the Internet; the JITAP process; and the fast pace of implementation of technical assistance activities.
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation had two serious concerns.  The first, as pointed out by the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division himself was the small and falling percentage of technical cooperation activities funded through the regular budget.  The second concern related to the projected shortfall in financing, and he indicated that his delegation would participate in the informal consultations held by the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division in this regard.  Egypt was also concerned with the capacity of the Secretariat to deliver technical assistance.  His delegation had several ideas on the matter, in relation to strengthening the Technical Cooperation Division, strengthening other Secretariat divisions responsible for the delivery of technical assistance, and addressing issues of finance and relations with other international organisations.  He concluded with the following questions:  first, his delegation would like a breakdown of the budget, as requested by the delegations of Morocco and the European Communities, adding that the breakdown should go back to the establishment of the WTO, in order to obtain a comparative view of developments since the establishment of the WTO to the present.  This would facilitate a discussion of financial issues in the context of informal consultations.  Second, page 24 of the report refered to the evaluation of technical assistance in the first quarter of the year 2000.  His delegation hoped that an assessment of JITAP could take place at the same time.  The third request related to the translation of basic WTO documents into Arabic.  His delegation had been informed at a previous meeting by Mr. Hoda that consultations on this subject would be necessary, and the representative of Egypt requested that the Secretariat get back to his delegation regarding that point.  In addition to these question, the representative of Egypt noted that, in relation to JITAP, page 32 refered  to a table on budget outlays. However, this table did not appear in the document, and he requested that it be issued.  With regard to page 14, which referred  to conditions attached to funds provided by donors, he recalled that his delegation had previously requested information on donor conditionality, and awaited a response.  Finally, the issue of outsourcing needed to be addressed, and particularly what was required on allowing the WTO to undertake outsourcing when capacity shortfalls did not allow the delivery of technical assistance.
&& The representative of Norway thanked the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division for his presentation, and began by observing that in 1998, the WTO spent CHF7 million in technical assistance, and that this figure would increase to 9.4 million in 1999.  This was a small amount of money.  He said the way technical assistance had been financed in the past years had been less than satisfactory.  The growth in technical assistance in recent years had been made possible by extra‑budgetary funding by a small group of countries. Technical assistance was a right enjoyed by developing Members, and therefore a core activity of the WTO, and should therefore be financed through the regular budget.  All Members needed to take this collective responsibility.  He noted that some delegations had said that the continuous increase in technical assistance activities posed a threat to the organisation, that the WTO should not be a technical assistance organisation, and that the Secretariat should not devote an excessive amount of time to technical assistance.  He said his delegation understood these concerns, and added that these should be addressed by outsourcing to other international organisations most or all technical assistance activities which did not have to be conducted by WTO staff.  He recognised that there were some activities that had to be conducted by WTO.  He said that the CTD had approved such an outsourcing process in its meeting in November 1998, and the Secretariat had prepared a note on its plans for outsourcing through the Task Force on Enhanced Technical Cooperation.  The crux of the problem, however, lay in the fact that one could not expect other international organisations to undertake technical cooperation activities for the WTO without receiving payment.  Therefore, even if as much outsourcing was done as possible, some action  was needed in regard to financing.  As pointed out by  the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division, the Secretariat would be unable to finance technical cooperation activities as of the autumn of 1999 owing to lack of funds.  The representative of Norway said that furthermore, funding from extra-budgetary sources was not a long term solution.  It was a paradox that the WTO, which was in the process of preparing a new round, had to struggle with such a trivial issue.  All that needed to be done was to augment the regular budget so as to fund technical assistance activities in the same manner as other activities of the Secretariat.  A solution should be found by the time of the Seattle Ministerial Conference, and once a solution was found, extra-budgetary funding could be phased out. In conclusion, the representative of Norway said that the concerns of those not wishing to make the WTO a technical cooperation organisation could be addressed.  This left the issue of financing, which could be resolved by increasing the regular budget.  Finally, he said that the informal consultations the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division was to hold should be open to all, and not just donors, as the financing of technical cooperation was a collective responsibility.
&& The representative of Switzerland thanked the Secretariat, and particularly the Technical Cooperation Division for the workload it had carried out in 1998.  He said his delegation had been rather taken by surprise by the gloomy budgetary situation, and added that the report should have a forward-looking chapter.  Second, his delegation believed that the section on evaluation of technical assessment needed to be more concrete and provide some indicators on qualitative aspects.  His delegation looked forward to with great interest to the evaluation report which was due in early in 2000.  Only then would one be in a position to draw conclusions about the future orientation of the Technical cooperation Division.
&& The representative of Barbados thanked the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division for his presentation.  She said she had understood from the presentation that owing to the demands for technical assistance in connections with negotiations launched at the Seattle Ministerial, the number of missions to capitals in the year 2000 was likely to be reduced.  For countries such as hers with small economies, technical cooperation needs were liable to increase exponentially with the commencement of negotiations, especially if negotiations covered issues other than those of the "built‑in agenda".  It was therefore necessary to find some very creative solutions to in order to provide increased technical cooperation activities.  The outsourcing of technical cooperation activities was one such possible solution.
&& The representative of Senegal thanked the Secretariat for its work in the area of technical assistance as well as donors for their contributions.  He said that many organisations were involved in technical cooperation and that this could enable the WTO to rationalise and focus its technical assistance.  He said noted that some agreements were more specialised than others, and suggested the exploration of training programmes for trainers.
&& The representative of Hong Kong, China thanked the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division, and echoed the concerns raised by others on the predominance of extra-budgetary sources  of funding for technical cooperation activities.  The present situation was most unsatisfactory, and action should be taken forthwith.  Her delegation welcomed  bringing the issue to the attention of the Budget and Finance Committee.
&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division responded to questions raised by delegations. In response to the question by the representative for Korea, he said that the rate for Europe reflected technical assistance activities held in at the WTO Headquarters.  If these activities were excluded, it could be seen that a greater number of activities were held in the Asia/Pacific than in Europe.  Regarding the question raised by the representative of Egypt regarding Memoranda of Understanding with donors, he said that he did have information on the basis of responses from the 10 donors contacted in writing.  Seven of these donors indicated their willingness to share information, while three others indicated their willingness to issue a background paper regarding their Memoranda of Understanding. Regarding the issue of outsourcing, he said that some activities had already been outsourced.  Memoranda of Understanding were being finalised with Institute for Latin American and Caribbean Integration, the training arm of the Inter-American Development Bank, and ESCAP.  A large regional seminar was to be handled by  the Joint Vienna Institute at the end of June, who were also prepared to handle accommodation, transport, visas, medical insurance and other administrative concerns.  Similar arrangements were being negotiated with ESCAP.  Efforts were being made to coordinate the holding of short term trade policy courses, and the outsourcing of these courses. was envisioned for the future.  Some types of activities, such as those requiring specialist knowledge, could probably never be outsourced, short of implementing the proposal made by the representative of Senegal for training trainers.  He agreed with the representative of Norway that informal consultations should be open to all.  Regarding the comments by the representative of Switzerland that his delegation would have liked some advance indication of the budgetary situation, Mr. Léger said that  a document had been circulated to the Budget Committee on 25 March 1999, indicating the situation facing the financing of technical cooperation activities. At the time, a deficit of 2 million had been projected, as compared to the current  projection of 2.6 million.  He would speak to the Director of the Finance and General Services Division, to examine the possibility of presenting to the Budget Committee the budgetary preoccupations surrounding technical cooperation activities.  In connection with the statement made by the representative of Barbados, he said that the launch of new negotiations would mean that most of the Secretariat would be involved with the servicing of committees and working groups, the writing of papers, and so forth, thus limiting the amount of time they could devote to conducting seminars and other such activities on the field.  He said that the demand for technical cooperation activities was likely to increase, while supply was likely to decrease, which made the gap even larger than at present. He did not have a solution, as yet, to this problem. The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division thanked all delegations for their comments, adding that in its next report the Secretariat would endeavour to include more details on financing as well as some paragraphs on qualitative indicators.
&& The Chairperson thanked all Members for their participation, and the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division for his remarks.  She  said that technical cooperation was essential to the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system.  She said that it was her impression that the views of the CTD regarding the financial crisis and the need for extra technical assistance activities should be presented to the Budget Committee.  If Members agreed, she would send a letter to the chairman of the Budget Committee.
&& The Chairperson noted that it had not been possible to exhaust all topics on the agenda.  She thereby proposed that the work of the CTD be suspended, and that the CTD resume its work on 16 June 1999.

RESUMPTION OF THE SESSION ON 16 JUNE 1999
&& The Chairperson welcomed Members to the resumption of the 25th Session of the CTD which had been suspended on Friday, 4 June 1999.  There were two items left for discussion on the adopted  agenda contained in WTO/AIR/1087/Rev.1.  These items were, respectively, the possible input by the CTD to the Third Ministerial Conference and "other business".
&& The Chairperson proposed that before discussed the two remaining items, she wished to recall the importance that Members attached to the issues raised by Mr. Jean-Maurice Léger, Director, Technical Cooperation Division, at the CTD Meeting of 4 June, in the presentation of the Report on Technical Cooperation and Training in 1998, which focussed, inter alia, on the financial crisis confronting the delivery of WTO technical assistance.  Following the exchange of views by members, it was agreed that  The Chairperson should address a letter to the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration.  The Chairperson had done so, and copies of the letter had been circulated to Members.
&& The Chairperson said that Mr. Léger had requested that the CTD take up the issue again, informally, and she therefore proposed that the CTD break into informal session at the end of the meeting.
It was so agreed. 
POSSIBLE INPUT BY THE CTD INTO THE 3RD WTO MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE
&& The Chairperson recalled the valuable and constructive exchange that Members had had on this item informally on 5 May 1999.  Following that exchange, it had been agreed to revert to this item at the 25th Sessions, and that the Secretariat should prepare an informal note that summarised the informal consultations and that framed the discussions of the CTD on the item for the present meeting.  The Secretariat had done so in its Informal Note contained in Job No. 2940, which was circulated to Members on 21 May 1999.  The Chairperson hoped that Members had had the chance to consider the Informal Note by the Secretariat.  She invited Members to comment on the Informal Note by the Secretariat, to exchange views on the item, and to offer suggestions on the procedure that the CTD should adopt in dealing with the item.
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation had been unable to attend the informal session, and thanked the Secretariat for the Informal Note summarising the positions taken by various delegations.  His delegation felt that the direction taken by discussion was not the most appropriate.  It appeared from the note that discussion had taken place on issues which were the sole responsibility of the General Council.  Discussion on whether to have a Round or not, whether to adopt a single undertaking approach, discussion surrounding the modalities of negotiations, and so froth were the responsibility of the General Council.  The CTD should focus on issues within its mandate to help developing countries in their preparation for the Ministerial Conference, and the mandated negotiations in various areas.  His delegation proposed a number of areas in which the CTD could make a positive contribution to the Third Ministerial Conference.  First, a preparation of a paper on the participation of developing countries in international trade.  This paper had been prepared by the CTD on an annual basis, and the first year it had not been prepared was in 1998.  The last paper produced had been WT/COMTD/W/31, in November 1997, and a constructive discussion had taken place in the CTD.  A new version should consequently be produced, and should take into account the comments made by Members when the previous version had been discussed.  Second, the CTD should address the issue of the distribution of benefits of the multilateral trading system on the basis of a Secretariat paper.  He recalled that the Geneva Ministerial Declaration stated that Ministers agreed that more needed to be done to ensure that the worlds people shared more fully and equitably in the achievements of the multilateral trading system.  Third, the Secretariat should begin analytical work on developing indicators to measure the integration of developing countries in the multilateral trading system.  He noted that despite frequent references to the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system in meetings and in declaration, there was no clear idea of how this could be measured or evaluated.  The fourth area concerned difficulties experienced by developing countries in the implementation of Uruguay Round Agreements.  The Secretariat could contribute in this area  by compiling difficulties experienced by developing countries, including in the area of market access for products of export interest to them.  The issue of special and differential treatment had been discussed under a separate agenda item, and this was also an area where work could be undertaken. Another area of prime importance was that of technical assistance.  The topic needed to be addressed to find ways and means of improving technical assistance in the WTO to address the difficulties, concerns and requirements of developing countries in regard to human  and institutional capacity building.  Another area was follow up to the High‑Level Meeting on LDCs.  The delegation of Egypt had proposed that the Secretariat prepare an analysis of market access offers made to LDCs in connections with the High Level Meeting, and examine the contribution of such offers to the trade of LDCs.  Yet another area where analytical work may be required was that of credit for autonomous liberalisation.  This was an important issue of which the development aspects could be usefully analysed by the CTD.  Still another area of interest to developing countries was revenue implications of trade liberalisation.  An analysis of this issue could be usefully addressed by the CTD.  A final point, not covered in the Informal Note, was to have some relation between discussions taking place in the CTD and those taking place in the Committee on Trade and Environment.  He concluded by reiterating the view that Members should refrain from attempting to gain negotiating points in the CTD by addressing issues which were best left to the General Council.
&& The representative of Morocco associated himself completely with the statement made by the representative of Egypt, and particularly regarding the fact that a number of questions discussed in the informal meeting and covered in the Informal Note were best left to the General Council.  He said the CTD should focus instead on a substantive and technical contribution to the Third Ministerial Conference which would allow the latter to bring out concretely the concerns of developing countries.  In this respect, the representative of Morocco supported entirely the list proposed by the delegation of Egypt. He said he wished to emphasis certain issues.  First he said the CTD should adopt a proactive approach  to implementation issues, and try to bring out the difficulties experienced by developing countries, and in addition evaluate globally implementation by developing countries and the impact of implementation on their economies.  He noted that a number of evaluations were being conducted on a sectoral basis by other committees, and by country, in other international institutions.  Regarding the issue of special and differential treatment, he recalled that his delegation had proposed the holding of a seminar.  The CTD should contribute to the process of implementation of special and differential provision.  There should be a should be a pragmatic and practical link between the seminar and the work of the CTD.  The representative of Morocco said that the follow up to the High‑Level Meeting on LDCs was crucial.  He said that so far the implementation of decisions  taken at the High‑Level Meeting was proceeding at a very slow pace and that the CTD should send a strong signal to hasten the implementation of decisions taken in favour of LDCs.  The last point he wished to take up was the subject of technical cooperation.  It was not possible to conceive of the integration and participation of developing countries into the WTO and the multilateral trading system with only limited technical cooperation activities, which often did not meet up to the requirements of developing countries, especially with regard to enabling them to appropriate the benefits of the multilateral trading system.  Technical cooperation was a fundamental element of the work conducted by the CTD, and the latter should make a significant contribution regarding technical cooperation at the Third Ministerial Conference.
&& The representative of the European Communities agreed that the CTD was not the place to discuss the scope  and modalities of future negotiations, and questions of such a nature.  He said it was legitimate for the CTD to flag issues where it could make a useful contribution.  Referring to the Informal Note, which covered a variety of subjects such as a possible work programme for the CTD, he said that it was important to clarify that the discussion undertaken concerned the input to the Third Ministerial Conference.  He said it was not immediately clear whether the lists of subjects presented by the representatives of Morocco and Egypt were related to possible inputs to the Third Ministerial Conference or the work programme of the CTD.  If the former, the representative of the European Communities said that there was much to which his delegation could agree.  Regarding implementation issues specifically, he cautioned that the CTD should not get involved in work done elsewhere in other committees, though he agreed with the representative of Morocco that there may be some cross cutting issues of a horizontal nature that needed to be addressed in the CTD.  && The representative of the European Communities recalled that the General Council, in keeping with paragraph 8 of the Ministerial Declaration, would discuss overall implementation issues, and the CTD could contribute to those discussions.  He said that, in terms of making the whole process of developing CTD inputs into the Ministerial Conference operational, it would be useful as a first stage to collect ideas, and take these back to capitals for reflection.  It would then be possible, at a later stage, to present to the General Council a menu of options.  He said it was important that the CTD be given some sort of guidance from the General Council as to the direction of its work, especially regarding the more political issues.  He concluded by saying he did not have, at that time, any specific reactions to individual proposals made, and reiterated that the purpose of the present meeting was not to comment on issues but to collect them.
&& The representative of Mexico agreed with the delegations of Egypt and Morocco  that it was necessary to clarify the issues to be handled in the future work of the CTD, and agreed that discussions regarding the scope, modalities, etc. of negotiations came under the mandate of the General Council.  He said that it was necessary to  clarify the issues which the CTD would address in preparing its input to the Third Ministerial Conference and also to establish a time-frame for the submission of its work to the General Council.  He said it was  important to avoid that the same work be carried out on two levels, within the CTD and the General Council.  To this effect, he suggested that the CTD present its contribution regarding the Third Ministerial Conference to the General Council not later than 30 September, and leave it to the General Council to work thereafter on the issues proposed.  Referring to the Informal Note, he said points 1 and 2 dealt with negotiation issues, while Point 3 and thereafter dealt with the work programme of the CTD.  He said the CTD already had a work programme, and discussions had been held already on a number of points mentioned in the Informal Note.  While the issue of coherence between institutions and policies had not been discussed in the CTD, the General Council had conducted an analysis of the question.  The role of the CTD with regard to coherence would be to stress its development aspects.  Finally, with regard to the list presented by the representative of Egypt, he said that in addition to the points  raised therein his delegation would also like to see discussed development aspects as well as the subject of revenues.  He also noted that work was being conducted on a number of points listed by the representative of Egypt.  In conclusion, he said that it needed to be established whether the CTD was to follow its work programme with a view to making an input to the Seattle Ministerial Conference by means of a contribution to the General Council by 30 September, or whether the CTD would follow its work programme and present its results in December. He said the former was the better option if the CTD was to make an input to the preparatory process.
&& The representative of Australia supported wholeheartedly the comments made by the representative of Egypt, and others, regarding the issues of process and modalities.  She said there was considerable scope for constructive work within the CTD in preparation for the Seattle Ministerial, particularly in identifying in a concrete way some of the specific problems and concerns of developing countries.  She supported the proposal made by the representative of Egypt that the study on the participation of developing countries in international trade be updated.  Her delegation believed that areas in which the CTD could make a specific input into the preparatory process included the specific challenges faced by developing countries in improving participation in world trade; responses by WTO Members to these challenges; market access issues relating to products of export interest to developing countries; and the enhancement of technical assistance for capacity building.  Her delegation was also of the view that the implementation of special and differential treatment could appropriately be dealt with by the CTD, though it was important to bear in mind work undertaken in the General Council.  The survey on the implementation of special and differential provisions that was being carried out by the CTD was very useful in this context. Finally, her delegation wished to flag a few issues: first, follow up to the High-Level Meeting on LDCs was of utmost importance, and she noted that follow up involved an extensive work programme that went beyond the single question of market access; regarding implementation, caution was needed to avoid involvement in the work of other committees, though there could be issues of a horizontal nature that could be addressed; regarding credit for autonomous liberalisation, it remained unclear as to discussions held under the mandate of the General Council; with regard to customs revenue studies, she drew attention to the study prepared by Australia regarding the benefits of future liberalisation, which noted particularly the proportionate gains to developing countries from further liberalisation;  and finally, the CTD could play a useful role in drawing attention to work conducted elsewhere such as in the World Bank or UNCTAD.
&& The representative of Canada thanked the Secretariat for the Informal Note, and said the CTD had a constructive role to play in the preparatory process for the Third  Ministerial Conference, while at the same time avoiding covering issues that fell within the mandate of the General Council.  The work of the CTD should be pragmatic and advisory, to assist delegations in their search for development friendly options.  The work programme of the CTD should be based on its capacity to deliver specific advice to the General Council, and thence to the Ministerial Conference, in a manner reminiscent of its work on the Action Plan for LDCs and guidelines for WTO technical cooperation prior to the Singapore Ministerial Conference.  Turning to the Informal Note, she said that the proposal to strengthen Part IV of the GATT regarding market access for manufactures and primary products of developing countries, as wells as stable and remunerative prices, needed to be examined as each agreement was negotiated in turn.  She said the issue of coherence was being addressed in other fora, and notably the informal sessions of the General Council.  She noted the reference in the Informal Note to a joint meeting between the WTO and the World Bank  on the results of the World Bank project on supporting the participation of developing countries in the future trade negotiations.  While the CTD should monitor discussions, it should not seek to take the lead on coherence issues.  She said that the CTD had done much work on implementation, trade-related technical assistance and special and differential treatment.  She invited the CTD to look again at these issues with a view to preparing proposals for submission to the Third Ministerial Conference.  Some consideration needed to be given to the two revised papers on implementation issues, namely WT/COMTD/LDC/W10 and WT/COMTD/LDC/W/11/Rev.1.  She said the CTD should adjust its work programme in order to have a CTD review, including representatives from UNCTAD, of special and differential treatment.  Some of the recommendations arising from the review could then be tabled to the General Council, and thence to the Ministerial Conference.  The review would cover concerns regarding market access issues and the implementation of Uruguay Round outcomes.  She said a review should be undertaken of implementation issues with specific recommendations on trade‑related technical assistance to be forwarded to the General Council, and thence to the Ministerial Conference.  The discussion could cover the implementation of the Integrated Framework for Trade-related Technical Assistance.  She said the CTD could undertake a more ambitious work programme, and could be mandated to provide advise to delegations on each agreement as it was negotiated.  She said that the proposal for joint meetings between the Committee on Trade and Environment and the CTD was useful, but invited delegations to comment as the whether this was the best use of the CTD's time given the pressing need to clarify options for developing countries.  The preference of her delegation was that the CTD retain a narrower focus on the emerging trade negotiations and options for developing countries.
&& The representative of Switzerland said that the most important role of the CTD was to raise awareness of development issues on a horizontal basis.  The goal of his delegation would be to provide the General Council with a broad overview of problems developing countries were facing.  An alternative goal would be to provide a concrete input into the Seattle Ministerial Declaration.  He said the first option was certainly valuable, though its use as an input into the Seattle Ministerial Conference was less clear.  He said the proposals made, respectively, by the delegations of Egypt and Morocco, tended in the direction of a broad overview through the preparation of background documents.  This would be valuable at a later stage once negotiations had begun.  The present focus of the CTD was, however, to prepare and input into the Seattle Ministerial Declaration.  Lengthy texts were not required, but rather concise statements to the General Council which would then be responsible for the drafting of recommendations to Ministers.
&& The representative of the Republic of Korea said that many delegations had enumerated areas where useful work could be done.  His delegation, however, was of the view that given time constraints, the CTD had to be more focused on issues concerned directly with the launch of new negotiations.  He noted that some of the i&& The representativessues raised by the Egyptian delegation were connected to work in the General Council, and that therefore discussions needed to be held with members of the General Council.  His delegation asked whether there was a distinction between the work programme of the CTD and the input of the CTD to the Third Ministerial Conference, and referred to the Informal Note, which seemed to indicate that there was some overlap between the two processes.  He suggested that if indeed there was no clear distinction between the two, that the Secretariat reorganise the Informal Note in order to enable the CTD to decide which issues were more relevant as  inputs to the Seattle Ministerial Conference.
&& The representative of Pakistan thanked the Secretariat for the Informal Note, and said his delegation associated itself extensively with the statement made by the representative of Egypt, and also that made by Morocco.  Discussions regarding scope, modalities and so forth of future trade negotiations were the to be left to the General Council, and their discussion in the CTD would detract from work on developmental issues.  His delegation were of the view that the list of issues identified by Egypt, and augmented by Morocco, should formulate the basis of any further work of the CTD, including in the preparation of inputs to the Third Ministerial Conference.
&& The representative of India noted that there some points on which there was an emerging consensus, one of them being that issues regarding to scope, modalities and so forth of future trade negotiations should not be addressed in the CTD.  Second, the point had been made that the CTD should make its contribution to the General Council.  Third, the need to update the paper on the participation of developing countries in international trade had been stressed.  His delegation fully associated itself with those who had made statements in support of these points.  Regarding the way forward, he said that there appeared to be two distinct rubrics on which the CTD should focus.  The first was some input to the General Council in view of the Seattle Ministerial Conference, and the second was the future work programme of the CTD.  His delegation were of the view that it would be useful if the CTD were to focus on three issues prior to Seattle, namely difficulties faced by developing countries in the implementation of Uruguay Round Agreements, special and differential treatment, and technical assistance.  These three issues should form the basis of the CTD's work programme prior to the Seattle Ministerial Conference.  He said the proposal made by Japan to consider one issue at a time and how to move forward on them, was a useful one.  A starting-point was to see whether there was work that had already  been done by the CTD that could be built upon.  The issue of revenue implications of trade liberalisation was one on which work had not been previously but which was nevertheless of importance.  He said that questions relating to the form of the contribution made by the CTD to the General Council could be addressed later, and that the present priority was to focus on specific issues.
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation agreed that some of the issues listed in the Informal Note were better left to the General Council and that the focus of the CTDs work should be on positive, practical contributions to the General Council.  Her delegation were of the view that the list proposed by the delegation of Egypt was a useful starting point in order to develop an input of a practical and advisory nature to the General Council.  Turning to specific issues, she said that her delegation did not necessarily share the views expressed by the Indian delegation regarding the deletion of certain words in particular special and differential provisions.  With regard to small and vulnerable economies, her delegation did not believe that any measure should be taken that would appear to create a different category of Members, but rather that the concerns of small and vulnerable economies be addressed through existing provisions for special and differential treatment. Her delegation agreed completely with the intervention by Mexico on how to proceed, and notably that points 1 and 2 of the Informal Note were not directly relevant to the preparation of possible inputs to the General Council.  She added that her delegation did not necessarily agree with all the statements presented in the Informal Note, or the assumptions that underpinned the.  Her delegation was not of the view, for instance, that there was any inherent conflict between the TRIPS Agreement and the Convention on Biodiversity.  In conclusion, her delegation welcomed the further investigation of proposals made by Egypt, Morocco, Canada, Mexico, the European Communities, and others, in order to develop recommendations to the General Council regarding the Third Ministerial Conference.
&& The representative of Argentina said his delegation wished to associate itself with the consensus that questions relating to the scope, modalities and so forth of future trade negotiations be left to the General Council.  His delegation did not as yet have specific instructions on how to proceed regarding the preparatory process for the Seattle Ministerial Conference.  It was not yet clear that the CTD needed to make a specific contribution at all to the General Council.  He said that the preparatory process for the Seattle Ministerial Conference was driven by proposals made by Members,  rather than on the basis of proposals by specific committees or councils.  If indeed the CTD were to discuss a possible contribution to the General Council, he said it was very good to bear in mind the proposal made by Switzerland that one distinguish between the preparation of background documents, and the discussion of implementation problems faced developing countries, as this would facilitate the making of decisions with regard to a  possible input into the preparatory process.  His delegation wished to support  the issues brought forward by the delegation of Egypt and Morocco, and particularly the proposal to update the document on the participation of developing countries in international trade.  His delegation was also of the view that some work could be conducted on the distribution of benefits of the multilateral trading system, along with the  question of the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system.  The CTD could also discuss difficulties in the implementation of the Uruguay Round Agreements, along with the subjects of trade-related technical assistance and the follow up to the High-Level Meeting on LDCs.  The CTD should take into account the work of the World Bank and UNCTAD on the subject of implementation to avoid the duplication of work.  He said that his delegation was a small one, and would not like issues that were discussed in one particular forum to be discussed in a number of other fora.  He cited as an example the issue of credit for autonomous liberalisation which was being discussed elsewhere than the CTD.  Regarding the work programme of the CTD, he was favourable to the idea of proceeding point by point.
&& The representative of Japan said that his capital was still scrutinising the detail of the Informal Note.  He said that the Secretariat Note was a good basis for discussion, and covered a wide range of issues discussed at the informal session.  Further work needed to be conducted on the document, possibly involving a reduction in the number of topics covered in order to keep within the mandate of the CTD.  Regarding questions of procedure, he said that a substantive issue was taking place on paragraph 9, which dealt with. inter alia, implementation issues and follow up to the High‑Level Meeting on LDCs.  Similarly, there had been an informal General Council session on the question of credit for autonomous liberalisation.  The question consisted therefore of how  to integrate the CTD's input into discussions in the General Council, and how to avoid conflict with the work of the General Council.  He noted that as of autumn, the General Council would enter the phase of drafting the Seattle Ministerial Declaration, and recalled the suggestion made by Mexico that a two-track approach be avoided and that the CTDs contribution be made by 30 September 1999.  Care was needed, therefore, in dealing with questions relating to procedures followed by the CTD as it sought to prepare a contribution to the General  Council.
&& The representative of Senegal thanked the Secretariat for the Informal Note.  His delegation associated itself with the remarks made by the representative of Egypt to the effect that the CTD should focus  on issues within its mandate.  The representative of Senegal addressed the issue of technical cooperation, and said that it was incumbent on Members to ensure that technical cooperation activities were relevant, visible, and had a concrete impact on beneficiary Members.  Ways needed to be explored to ensure that the Seattle Ministerial conference reaffirmed the importance of technical cooperation as a fundamental means of achieving the goals of the WTO, and the integration of developing countries into the global economy through international trade.  Such a reaffirmation at the highest level of the value of technical cooperation would serve as a political support for the future directions taken by technical cooperation activities.  Another issue of importance was the integration of LDCs into the multilateral trading system.  The excessive dependence of LDCs on the export of a few primary commodities to a few  markets, combined with asymmetries between their export revenue and expenditures on imports, was widely recognised as contributing to the fragility of their economies.  The deterioration of terms of trade, and  the burden of debt, were two factors which impeded the growth of LDCs, and developing countries in general.  It was therefore necessary that commitments Members had undertaken in relation to LDCs be honoured, and that new and ambitious initiatives be adopted in favour of LDCs.  He referred in this respect to a proposal made by the delegation of Bangladesh to the General Council, and indicated that his delegation would consult with the delegation of  Bangladesh as how best to take up  the proposal in the CTD.  Referring to the question of regional and sub-regional arrangements, he said that the interpenetration of economic areas was indispensable for counties like his which suffered from the fragmentation of markets and lack of scale.  He said this was a priority issue for his delegation, and said that the Seattle Ministerial Conference should be the occasion to reaffirm the importance of such arrangements, and not an occasion to throw into question what had already been established regarding this topic.
&& The representative of Mauritius thanked the Secretariat for producing the Informal Note.  He said the title made clear that the contents of the note were tentative suggestions and not hard and fast proposals.  He said that the role of the CTD was, inter alia,  to monitor all aspects of the participation of developing countries, including the implementation of special and differential provisions and the delivery of technical assistance.  It was important not to lose sight of the past work of the CTD.  For instance the CTD was recognised as having produced the work plan on LDCs for the Singapore Ministerial Conference.  He said that the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system raised a number of issues, including, inter alia, special and differential treatment, technical cooperation, notification issues, and consideration of the effects of agricultural reform on net‑food importing developing countries.  Bearing this in mind, it remained for the CTD to decide what was rational, feasible and acceptable for it to do.  He concluded by stating, in response to an observation made by the representative of the United States, that his neither his delegation nor others sought to create new categories in the WTO.  All that was sought was an examination of the concerns of small and vulnerable economies.
&& The representative of Brazil said that there was agreement that the preparatory process for the Seattle Ministerial Conference be handled by the General Council, and that there was little doubt as to the process by which this was to be done. It was  agreed that the CTD had a role to play in the WTO and that its work was of a horizontal nature.  It was also agreed that the CTD and other subsidiary bodies should discuss issues that had some bearing on the Ministerial Conference.  It was the perception of her delegation that discussions held in the CTD would flow naturally to the General Council through proposals brought by individual delegations.  As long as the CTD did not seek to innovate or inaugurate a process, and as long as the discussion centred around focussing the work programme of the CTD on preparations for the Ministerial Conference, her delegation did not perceive there to be a problem.  She suggested that a pragmatic approach be taken, with a focus on issues such as special and differential treatment, technical cooperation, anti-dumping, and so forth.  Her delegation shared the view expressed by the European Communities that the priority at that moment was to collect issues for discussion, with a view to deciding subsequently as to the specific areas on which work was to be conducted.
&& The representative of Colombia said his delegation agreed that the preparation of the Seattle Ministerial Conference came under the mandate of the General Council.  Nevertheless, his delegation viewed with sympathy the suggestion that the CTD make a contribution to the General Council.  In this perspective, his delegation looked favourably on the list of topics presented by the representative of Egypt, and the complementary proposals made by Morocco.  However, given that only six months remained until the Ministerial Conference, a pragmatic approach which would focus on a few specific issues was required.  In keeping with the suggestions made by the delegation of India, these issues were the difficulties faced by developing countries in the implementation of Uruguay Round Agreements; special and differential treatment; and technical cooperation.
&& The representative of Guatemala said his delegation was in full agreement with the statement made by the representative of Mauritius to the effect that small and vulnerable economies were in no way seeking to establish a separate category within the Membership of the WTO.  It was, rather, necessary that the limitations faced by small and vulnerable countries in the appropriation of the benefits of the trade liberalisation promoted by the WTO be properly understood, especially in the context of the forthcoming negotiations, during which these limitations should be taken into account.  The representative of Guatemala said his delegation were in agreement with the themes mentioned by the delegation of India, namely, implementation issues, technical assistance and special and differential treatment.  However, small and vulnerable economies had further concerns in addition to these, such as the restricted size of domestic markets and production; the concentration of their production in certain agricultural commodities; and their insignificant level of industrial development.  It was important that these limitations be recognised, and that joint mechanisms be sought that enabled small economies to share in the common benefits of the multilateral trading system, and not simply to incur obligation with which it was difficult to comply.  His delegation was perfectly aware that the major responsibility lay internally, and Guatemala intended to fulfil its responsibility.
&& The representative of Panama supported the statements made by the delegations of Egypt and Morocco.  Her delegation shared the view expressed  by the delegation of Switzerland that the CTD should provide a contribution to the Ministerial Conference, and in this regard should seek to prioritise themes for the Ministerial Conference.  One such priority was a contribution to the declaration.  Her delegation supported  the holding of a seminar on special and differential treatment, and concrete recommendations arising out of this could be brought to the Ministerial Conference.
&& The representative of Malaysia, speaking on behalf of ASEAN, said ASEAN could generally support the ideas put forward by the delegation of Egypt.  ASEAN agreed that the responsibility for the scope, modalities and so forth of future negotiations lay with the General Council.  It was nevertheless to recognise that the CTD had a vital role in providing inputs on developmental aspects to the Seattle Ministerial Conference.  He said that it was difficult to avoid some degree of duplication of the work of other committees given the horizontal nature of the CTD's  work.  ASEAN were of the view that the inputs of the CTD should be ready in good time in order that they be considered and incorporated before the Seattle Ministerial Conference.
&& The representative of Bolivia thanked the Secretariat for the Informal Note.  He said that his delegation had repeatedly expressed in the General Council that the General Council was the only appropriate forum to discuss preparatory work for the Ministerial Conference.  He said the contribution of the CTD should therefore concentrate on the subject of implementation, taking into account both the difficulties developing countries have experienced in implementing WTO agreements owing to shortfalls in human and institutional capacity, and also difficulties experienced in market access.  He said implementation covered the issues of special and differential treatment and technical assistance.  He said that implementation also entailed working in accordance with the Geneva Ministerial Declaration, in which concern was expressed at the marginalisation of LDCs.  He said he fully agreed with the representatives of Guatemala and Mauritius that there was no intention to create of separate categories of Members, but rather to ensure that the diversity of developing countries be recognised.  An analysis of implementation would show that there were general difficulties common to all developing countries, and some that were specific to certain countries as a function of their level of development and particularities in their trade and economic structure.
&& The representative of Barbados thanked the Secretariat for the Informal Note.  She was unable to support the proposals made by Egypt and Morocco owing to her absence from the CTD  at the time, but looked forward to learning more about the proposals.  She  said the whole issue of small economies was one of different levels of development, rather than of categorisation, and she sought to reassure the delegation of the United States in this respect.  She said that the issues of implementation, special and differential treatment, and technical assistance were of importance and should be the focus of the work of the CTD.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka thanked the Secretariat for the Informal Note.  Her delegation associated itself with statements made by other delegations that the CTD focus its work on the suggestions made by Egypt and Morocco.  She said her delegation would go along with the consensus that seemed to have emerged regarding procedure.  She said her delegation wished to flag the following substantive issues:  first,  trade facilitation, which was a subject that her delegation believed fell within the purview of the CTD, and regarding which the CTD could  make specific recommendations, particularly in the light of complications faced by developing countries in the implementation of Uruguay Round Agreements.  Second, her delegation believed that Part IV of the GATT provided the mandate for the CTD to look into trade problems faced by developing countries.  A situation had arisen where actions taken by countries had failed to address the concerns embodied in Part IV.  Her delegation were of the view that a report on Part IV of GATT 1994 be considered, given that it had been  drafted at a time when  rules covered only trade in goods, whereas presently rules covered trade in agriculture and services as  well.  Third, she said that preference margins under the GSP had been eroded, adding that her delegation, along with others, had submitted to the General Council proposals regarding this issue.  While some argued that preferences had led to an inefficient allocation of resources, Sri Lanka was of the view that preferences  had generated benefits.  Finally, her delegation associated itself fully with the statements made by the delegations of Mauritius, Guatemala, Barbados and Bolivia regarding the problem of  small economies.  The subject of small economies should be included in the list of issues regarding a possible input to the Seattle Ministerial Conference.  She drew attention to the specific issue of customs revenue, highlighting the importance of such sources of revenue to small economies for the purposes of implementing development programmes.  She said the  Sri Lankan government had undertaken research  which demonstrated the revenue implications of trade liberalisation.  She said that Sri Lanka, like other small economies, did not seek the creation of a special category within the WTO but rather the recognition of the concerns faced by small economies.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was pleased to hear that small economies were not seeking the creation of a special category.  She looked forward to hearing proposals that would maintain that perspective.
&& The Chairperson said that 24 delegations had intervened on this agenda item, demonstrating its importance.  She said the Informal Note had provided a useful basis for discussions.  On the basis of the deliberations that had been held, it was necessary to identify the points that could be submitted to the General Council in order that useful contribution to the Seattle Ministerial Conference be prepared.  It was also necessary to consider the longer term work programme.  She requested the Secretariat to produce a new Informal Note as soon as possible on the basis of a number of suggestions made by delegations, following from the statements made by the delegations of Egypt and Morocco, to facilitate discussions during the 26th Session of the CTD scheduled for 7 July 1999.  She expressed the hope that the contribution made by the CTD to the General Council would be as important as that made by the CTD prior to the Singapore Ministerial Conference.
&& The representative of the European Communities noted that one delegation had refered to the preparation of recommendations by the CTD.  The representative of the European Communities reiterated that recommendations would be prepared by the General Council.  One possibility for the CTD was to gather the points made by various delegations regarding possible inputs, and structure them according to paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 of the Geneva Ministerial Declaration.  He noted that there appeared to be a large degree of consensus regarding the issues of implementation, special and differential treatment, and technical  assistance, and said that the CTD should begin work on this forthwith.
&& The representative of Argentina underscored the point made by the representative of the European Communities that the CTD's work should focus on inputs into the preparatory process for the Third Ministerial Conference, rather than on formulating recommendations.  The representative of Argentina said his delegation supported the statement made by India to the effect that the CTD should focus on implementation issues, special and differential treatment and technical cooperation.
&& The representative of Brazil said it was the understanding of her delegation that there had been agreement that the CTD would work on and discuss issues that potentially had a bearing on the work of the General Council.  There was no agreement, however, that the CTD should present a formal contribution to the General Council.  She reiterated her delegation's view that the statements made in the CTD would also be brought up in the General Council.  Consequently, her delegation were of the view that the CTD should not make a submission to the general Council unless specifically mandated to do so.
&& The representative of Mexico said his delegation was of the view that specific recommendations were to be made by the General Council.  He said the work of the CTD cut across all aspects of the WTO, and that the CTD could make a contribution to the General Council.
&& The representative of Egypt thanked those delegations that had commented on the proposals made by his delegation.  He said that there had been strong support in favour of updating the Secretariat Note on the participation of developing countries in international trade, and said that there would not be any objection were the Secretariat to begin work on the paper.  He expressed the hope that that the paper to be produced by the Secretariat regarding possible inputs into the preparatory process for the Seattle Ministerial Conference would take into account the discussion Members had had in the  25th Session of the CTD.  He requested that informal consultations be held prior  to the 26th Session of the CTD so as to allow Members to seek agreement on the analytical work to be carried out by the CTD in connection with the preparatory process. 
&& The representative of Mauritius said that the General Council had mandated the CTD to carry out certain tasks, and he requested that information on these tasks be made available to Members.
&& The representative of Morocco said, with reference to the statement by the representative of Brazil, said that if the work  undertaken by the CTD was to be of any use, it needed to be presented formally through the General Council to the Third Ministerial Conference.  He refered to the Singapore Ministerial Conference, for which the CTD had made a specific proposal concerning the Action Plan for Least Developed Countries through the General Council, and urged the delegation of Brazil to go along with the idea that the CTD present a formal contribution.
&& The representative of Brazil said she wished to further explain the position taken by her delegation.  Her delegation had already taken a similar position on the Council on Trade in Services, where it had , made known its view that no specific tasks were to be undertaken in subsidiary bodies and presented to the General Council in the context of preparations for the Ministerial Conference.  Nothing precluded delegations from bringing to the General Council specific proposals that were the result of work carried out in subsidiary bodies such as the CTD.  However, unless the General Council specifically mandated the CTD to undertake a specific task regarding the preparation of the Ministerial, her delegation were of the view that the CTD should not attempt to make such a contribution, as this would create a precedent which could lead other subsidiary bodies to do likewise.  This would be problematic for developing countries who typically had small delegations and who consequently would not be able to control  work across a number of different subsidiary bodies.  She said that the Geneva Ministerial Declaration clearly mandated the General Council with the task of preparing the Third Ministerial Conference, and hence the work should be conducted in the General Council, at which all delegations could be present all the time.  She said that the CTD had an important role, and should discuss issues pertaining to the Third Ministerial  Conference, and should help developing countries to prepare their positions for the Ministerial Conference.  Delegations could then bring to the General Council their proposals that stemmed from the discussion of the CTD, but her delegation could not agree to a formal, structured proposal on the part of the CTD.
&& The representative of the United States said that the Brazilian delegation had made a compelling point which, and that the Chairperson's conclusions should take into account the concerns expressed by the Brazilian delegation.
&& The Chairperson said that all positions made known by members would ne taken into account.  She said it was now up to the CTD to decide, on the basis of consensus, as to how it would proceed on this agenda item.  She requested the Secretariat  to structure the discussions held on this agenda item  through an Informal Note, in order to facilitate work on which there was  agreement.  She said the possibility of holding informal consultations prior to the 26th Session of the CTD of 7 July 1999 would be examined.
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation had no objection to the holding of informal consultations, providing these did not clash with meeting of major WTO bodies that had already been programmed.
&& The Chairperson said that the Secretariat would take this into account when scheduling meetings.
&& The representative of Sri Lanka said that the TRIPS Council had already scheduled informal consultations for the 7 July 1999 which posed problems for small delegations like hers.
&& The Chairperson said that the CTD's 26th session had been scheduled for 7 July 1999 for quite some time.  She added that at that meeting, representatives of the World Bank and the Commonwealth Secretariat would be presenting to the CTD their work on small economies, and that it would be exceedingly difficult to reschedule the 26th Session of the CTD.
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation recognised that the 26th Session of the CTD had been planned for a long time, and added that she only wished to request that were informal consultations or any other meeting to be planned, that the timing of other meetings within the WTO be taken into account.
&& The Chairperson said that the timing of other meetings would indeed be taken into account.

OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairperson confirmed that the 26th Session of the CTD was scheduled for 7 July 1999.
&& The Director of the Development Division confirmed that the special representative of the Commonwealth Secretary-General and the Special Representative of the President of the World Bank would be present at the 26th Session of the CTD to present the draft report on of the Joint Task Force on Small States.  The two special representatives intended to submit a document to the Secretariat which was to be circulated to Members.
&& The Chairperson said  the agenda for the 25th Session would include a discussion of the Secretariat document on the implementation difficulties, if any, faced by members in the implementation of provisions for special and differential treatment, including related Ministerial decisions.  A further possible item was the report by the Joint Administrative Group of the International Trade Centre at its 32nd Session.  Finally, it was expected that the CTD would achieve closure on its discussion of the CTD's contribution to the General Council regarding the work programme on Electronic Commerce.
&& The representative of Mexico said that his delegation wished to make a correction  to document WT/COMTD/M/24 of 27 April 1999.  Referring to in paragraph 114, lines 5 and 6, he said one should read "ECE", instead of "ACP".
&& The Chairperson said that she was forced to adjourn the meeting before the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division had had the chance to make his presentation on the budgetary situation.  She said that the question of technical cooperation would be  carried over to the next possible opportunity.
&& The representative of Egypt said his delegation  wished to include an agenda item for the 26th Session of the CTD regarding the participation of developing countries in international trade, in order that the CTD might accept formally the updating of the paper.
&& The Chairperson said that this request would be taken into account.  She thanked all delegations for their contributions and brought the meeting to a close.

__________


WT/COMTD/M/25 Page  PAGE 48



	WT/COMTD/M/25 	Page  PAGE 47













