WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/30
28 November 2000

(00-5122)

Committee on Trade and Development




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 22 SEPTEMBER 2000

Chairman: H.E. Mr. Ransford Smith (Jamaica)


ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA
&& The Chairman asked if there were any additions to the draft agenda contained  in airgram WTO/AIR/1364 of 4 August 2000.
&& The representative of Switzerland proposed to add to item C on Technical Cooperation an additional sub-item on how to proceed with the Evaluation report (WT/COMTD/W/72).  He recalled that many proposals had been made at the 29th Session of the CTD, and added that since the report was an interim report, his delegation wished to know how the Secretariat would proceed.
&& A representative of the Technical Cooperation Division said that the Secretariat's choice was to write a second report in 2001 which would take into account statements made by delegations.
&& The representative of Switzerland said his delegation was satisfied with the Secretariat's response, and was looking forward to the second report in 2001.  He reiterated his delegation's proposal that the Secretariat should single out specific areas of technical cooperation for more in depth analysis.
&& The Chairman proposed that under "Other Business" the CTD consider a proposal that a briefing session be held on the outcome of  an ITC Forum on National Export Strategies, held at Montreux from 27 to 29 September 2000, the theme of which "Export Development in the Digital Economy". 
&& The Chairman  proposed that the agenda be adopted as amended.  
It was so agreed.

REQUEST FOR ATTENDANCE OF AD HOC OBSERVERS
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD it had been agreed to invite the following intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These organizations were: the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO);  the Inter-Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the Organisation of African Unity (OAU);  Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the South Pacific Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU);  and the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).  The Chairman proposed that these organisations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman recalled that there were two outstanding requests for Observer Status from the League of Arab States and from OPEC, and asked if the CTD was in a position to make a decision on either of these requests.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation envisioned that they would be in position to make a decision in October, but was not, at the time of the 30th Session of the CTD, in a position to move forward on the two requests. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation hoped that the United States would be in a position to approve ad hoc Observer Status on a meeting by meeting basis at the next session of the CTD, and therefore proposed that the two organisations under consideration be added to the list of organisations invited to attend the next session of the CTD on an ad hoc meeting by meeting basis. 
&& The representative of Venezuela proposed that the OPEC be invited to attend the next meeting of the CTD on an a hoc basis.
&& The representative of the United States said that the position of her delegation was the same with respect to the request from the OPEC as in relation to the request from the League of Arab States.
&& The Chairman said that it did not appear that the CTD was in a position to decide on the two requests before the next meeting of the CTD.  In the circumstances, the Chairman suggested deferring the decision on these requests until the 31st Session of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman said that the CTD had one new request for Observer Status from the Gulf Organisation for Industrial Consulting.  A copy of the request was available in the room.
&& The representative of Bahrein, speaking also on behalf of the United Arab Emirates and Qatar, supported the granting of Observer Status to the Gulf Organisation for Industrial Consulting. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation could support ad hoc Observer Status on a meeting-by-meeting basis for the Gulf Organisation for Industrial Consulting as her delegation awaited the completion by the General Council of guidelines and procedures for the granting of Observer Status for all the committees of the WTO.  Her delegation recognised that it had been the practice of various committees to grant Observer Status on an ad hoc meeting by meeting basis.
&& The representative of Egypt said his delegation was encouraged by the response of the United States, and asked whether there was approval for the granting of ad hoc Observer Status for all three organisations (the League of Arab States, the OPEC, and the Gulf Organisation for Industrial Consulting).
&& The Chairman said that it was understanding that the United States had indicated that it would be in position to consider the request for ad hoc Observer Status for the League of Arab States and the OPEC at the 31st Session of the CTD.
&& The representative of the United States said that the Chairman's understanding was correct.
&& The representative of Egypt proposed that all three requests for Observer Status be kept together, in keeping with practice in other bodies, and considered jointly at the 31st Session of the CTD.  He said that this was regrettable since his delegation wished to support all three organisations in their requests, and he hoped that positive action could be taken in respect of all three requests at the 31st Session of the CTD.
&& The representative of the EC said that his delegation had no objection to any of the requests, but added that in view of the specialisation of Gulf Organisation for Industrial Consulting, the CTD or the General Council should take up the debate on the benefits to the WTO of the number of observers it now had.  He said that, without any offence to the Gulf Organisation for Industrial Consulting, that this organisation had a very specific task.  There could also be an organisation for agriculture  consulting and so forth, and that some stage a debate on the general criteria for Observer Status could not be avoided. 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation would not oppose the request of another Member to defer all three requests, even though it was not her delegation's wish or proposal that all three be deferred.
&& The Chairman proposed that, in light of the discussions, that a decision on all three requests be deferred to the 31st Session.
It was so agreed.

TECHNICAL COOPERATION:
&& Report by Chairman on the Days of Reflection
&& The Chairman recalled that on 18-19 July the CTD met informally to hold two "Days of Reflection" on technical cooperation.  He said his report on that meeting, prepared on his own responsibility, had already been distributed and copies were also available in the room in all three languages (see Annex).  His general impression was that the Days of Reflection had served as a useful exercise to distil ideas on the WTO's role in technical cooperation.  Among the issues on which he thought Members would want to continue to reflect were: how best to balance planning needs against urgent demands;  how to balance demands against budget and personnel constraints; what should be the substantive content of the seminars;  how best to deliver technical cooperation on the one hand, through regional or national and, on the other hand, through specialised or more general seminars;  how best to collaborate with other international and national agencies; and how the success of WTO technical cooperation function on an ongoing basis might effectively be monitored, and how ideas for improvement could be taken up.
&& The representative of Norway welcomed the Chairman's report on the "Days of Reflection", which was a useful summary of the themes raised.  Norway clearly agreed with several points in the report, such as the need for a clear strategy for technical cooperation in the WTO; the need to reduce dependence on ad hoc initiatives; and the need to address the serious underfunding of WTO technical cooperation.  His delegation reminded the CTD of Norway's strong conviction that the WTO's technical assistance activities should be made part of the regular WTO budget, while not precluding voluntary contributions.  The inclusion of the financing of these activities on the regular budget was necessary to ensure the stable and predictable funding base of the Secretariat's planning of technical assistance.  More information was needed on what was meant in concrete terms by the reference to the need to involve the private sector.  Was this a reference to possible private funding of WTO technical assistance activities, or was it a reference to the role private actors such as academia and NGOs could play in technical assistance programmes at the national level?  His delegation sounded a word of caution regarding the role of the WTO in technical cooperation.  As Norway saw it, this role was clearly linked to submitting information, building capacity, and providing training concerning the various rights and obligations that existed in the WTO Agreements.  Norway did not foresee a role for the WTO in technical assistance activities of a more general, developmental nature.  Such activities were to be left to other organisations such as the World Bank, the IMF, the UNDP, and the UNCTAD, as well as bilateral donors.  The WTO's technical cooperation activities needed to be coordinated with those of other partners, and trade-related technical assistance needed to be better integrated into general development projects and programmes.
&& The representative of Bangladesh was sorry not to have been able to attend the "Days of Reflection".  Like other LDCs, Bangladesh looked forward to more enhanced levels of technical cooperation.  His delegation generally supported what had been said by the representative of Norway, particularly the need to place the funding of WTO technical cooperation on a firm footing through the regular budget.  He said that another point of the report that had attracted his delegation's attention was the need for priority for technical assistance programmes for LDCs.  Regarding the role of the Integrated Framework (IF), he said that Bangladesh was disappointed by the fact that the IF had not performed as well as expected.  He added that the IF, hamstrung as it was, was being saddled with extra responsibilities.  It seemed to be becoming a coordination mechanism of sorts, and there was also the additional, and not fully understood, issue of integrating the IF into the PRSP process.  He felt that the IF should be left as it was conceived to be. 
&& The representative of Switzerland said the "Days of Reflection" had been quite useful, and that the Chairman's report adequately summarised the proceedings of the event.  He said that it was necessary to work out a clear strategy in the months to come, with a clear definition of objectives, and a logical sequencing of technical assistance activities.  This was, however, unlikely to solve another major problem in the delivery of technical assistance activities: as the Chairman's report pointed out, it was difficult to programme technical cooperation activities when only a minority of beneficiary countries responded to the planning questionnaires.  He said that the ad hoc nature of technical assistance delivery was not primarily a problem of the WTO Secretariat, since the Secretariat was not necessarily  in a position to reject an ad hoc request by a country official.  Therefore, Switzerland  was of the view that the CTD should give support to the Secretariat, by enabling it to take measures which would make the three-year plan a more reliable planning instrument.  He said that there were several possibilities which could be envisioned to facilitate the programming of technical assistance activities an the early announcement of technical assistance needs.  For instance, one possibility – which could be called a "soft option" – would be to name those countries which made extensive use of ad hoc requests.  Another possibility was that the CTD should take a decision that the Secretariat should only accept requests which were made in due time, that is, in the autumn of the year preceeding the delivery of the activity.  This would be a "hard option", but had the advantage of sensitising everyone to the fact that technical assistance had long-term effects, and that it needed to be carefully planned by beneficiary countries.  A third possibility, which would build-in some flexibility to deal with urgent, ad hoc, requests would be to specify that ad hoc requests were not excluded per se, but that they would be only accepted on condition that the requesting country partially participate in the financing of the activity.  Switzerland proposed that the Secretariat be mandated, as part of its current work on assessing and redefining technical assistance, to develop proposals on measures to reduce ad hoc requests, and therefore to make the three-year plan a more reliable instrument 
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was of the view that the "Days of Reflection" had been useful, and had allowed for a closer focus on technical cooperation, which had become a significant and critical issue.  Her delegation had made some suggestions during the days of reflection, and she hoped that these suggestions would be taken into account in any further work done by the Secretariat.  Her delegation had also mentioned on a number of occasions the bi-lateral assistance provided by the United States.  A compendium had been compiled of all technical assistance provided, a copy of which was to be distributed to the WTO, and the information contained therein was also accessible through the World Wide Web, at HYPERLINK "http://www.usaid.gov/"http://www.usaid.gov/.  The compendium compiled information on technical assistance provided each region and the financial resources involved.  She urged Members to consult the compendium, as this could be used to identify problems, and also possibilities for the use of technical assistance.  She said that the question had once been raised in the CTD as to why the United States did not devote the resources  it had been providing bi-laterally to fund technical assistance through the WTO.  She said that while comments made in CTD meetings on the role of the Secretariat in the delivery of technical assistance were important, bi-lateral technical assistance was a fact of life, and had been taking place prior to, and independently of, the WTO's establishment and the GATT.  She said that it was important for Members to coordinate the technical assistance they received from various sources, and that if there was a comprehensive approach to the use of technical assistance, the results would also be comprehensive.  She said that the compendium was an example of how the United States coordinated its efforts in the delivery of technical assistance, and hoped that there would be similar efforts in coordination on the beneficiary side, so that the results of technical cooperation could be better realised.  She said that the United States was to submit a contribution of SwF1 million to the Global Trust Fund, specifically for the Africa region, as a start, and that this money would cover WTO technical assistance for both least‑developed countries and other developing African countries.  The United States and the WTO Secretariat had evaluated how the funds would be utilised, and it was expected that a second contribution would be made in 2001 for other developing countries.  She said that technical assistance provided by WTO experts was effective, and that the funds required for the delivery of such assistance would be available, but the United States was concerned that, irrespective of the source of technical assistance, there be better coordination on the donor, the WTO and the beneficiary sides, in order that the results of technical assistance delivery be optimal. 
&& The Chairman thanked the United States for its contribution, and for news of the contribution to be made in 2001.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that the Chairman had compiled in a clear and factual manner the proceedings of the "Days of Reflection".  He said that the issues under discussion were complex, as evidenced by the number of points raised in the Chairman's report, which ranged from matters of budget, to matters of planning, to matters of scope and so forth.  His delegation agreed with the issues identified by the Chairman, in the introductory section of his note, as being the most urgent ones.  His delegation believed that the time had come to see how the report could be built on, given the clearer view that Members now had on the issues at stake.  He said that discussions on technical assistance were not only advancing in the CTD, but elsewhere as well.  He said that one of the tasks of the CTD would be to synthesise the common elements of the various discussions which were taking place.  For instance, the TBT Committee had discussed what approach it could take to technical assistance, and the EC had also submitted its own proposal to the Committee on Customs Valuation.  There was also an extensive discussion on the Integrated Framework, which also addressed questions such as funding, planning and scope, as well as the concept of "mainstreaming".  He said that there was also a debate in the context of APEC, as well as the initiatives taken by donors at a bilateral level.  Finally, he noted that the Director-General had sent out a questionnaire on these issues as well.  He said that discussions should reflect these various initiatives, and that conclusions should be drawn on this basis.  He said that Switzerland had made a concrete proposal regarding the planning of technical assistance activities, and that this was one way to start a concrete discussion.  Another way to start concrete discussion was to be aware of the various discussions that were on-going, notably those surrounding the Integrated Framework, which were in many ways the leading discussions on technical assistance and which covered many areas of relevance to the delivery of technical assistance in general.  He said that there had been proposals made to the effect that the principles of the Integrated Framework be extended to technical assistance in general in the WTO.  He said that a general strategy based on all these points was an important demand, though it was not clear who was in a position to write such a strategy.  His main concern was that the various approaches pursued be pulled together, so that their essence may be distilled. 
&& The representative of Colombia said the Chairman's report was useful.  In order that a more complete picture of the topics and issues for discussion that came out of the "Days of Reflection" be given, her delegation thought it important that account be taken of a specific proposal that had been made by her delegation, and endorsed by others, during the "Days of Reflection" to the effect that consideration should be given to the provision of funds to enable experts from capitals to attend meetings in Geneva in order to provide support for missions in Geneva that lacked adequate capacity.  Such actions would ensure better implementation of agreements and a better compliance with commitments.
&& The representative of Haiti recalled that his delegation had intervened on a number of the themes identified in the report.  He said he wished to emphasise three areas:  cooperation with other inter-governmental agencies; technical cooperation in favour of least-developed countries; and the question of human resource requirements and the financial implications of such requirements.  Regarding the question of cooperation with other inter-governmental agencies on matters of technical cooperation, his delegation had made concrete suggestions to the effect that Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) signed between the WTO and various other inter-governmental organisations could have concrete results for the delivery of technical cooperation activities by the WTO.  For instance, he had suggested that the conclusion of the MoU between the WTO and the UNIDO could be speeded up, so that there might be cooperation on matters related to industrial development. Referring to the ITC, and the mandate that the WTO had for close collaboration with this organisation, his delegation expressed surprise at what appeared to be, in the context of the implementation of the Integrated Framework, a reduction of the scope of cooperation with the ITC.  He said that the ITC had been responsible for the Administrative Unit of the IF, which was now being handed over the WTO.  He raised questions about this transfer of responsibilities, in view of the fact that there was already too much for the WTO to handle.  With respect to the issue of technical cooperation in favour of least-developed countries, and the Integrated Framework, he recalled that his delegation had already expressed the concern that by anchoring technical cooperation in the activities of other agencies that the Integrated Framework was losing the focus of its mission, which was to address the trade-related concerns of least-developed countries.  He said that linkages were being made between trade-related technical cooperation, and the UNDP's poverty reduction framework, and also with the World Bank's mission regarding poverty and development.  While his delegation believed that particular attention needed to be given to poverty reduction, the IF was a complementary exercise, which was intended to focus on trade-related problems, and not social problems.  If the IF was too closely attached to other poverty reduction programmes, then the IF as had been mandated by the Singapore Ministerial Conference would be diluted.  Regarding human resource and financial resource needs, he said that the quest for core budgetary funding of technical cooperation had been on-going for two years.  He said that prior to the Seattle Ministerial Conference, the proposal had been to stagger an amount of SwF10 million over a three-year period, whereas now it was proposed that the sum be provided over one year.  In relation to the latter proposal, he noted that it had also been proposed that 75 per cent of this sum be devoted funding activities, while 25 per cent be devoted to human resources.  His delegation requested clarification of what was meant by "activities".  His delegation was also of the view that each Member should contribute towards the funds.
&& The representative of the Philippines said his delegation appreciated the value of the "Days of Reflection" and the report submitted by the Chairman, insofar as it covered issues of the management of technical cooperation.  He said that the delivery of WTO technical assistance related to general development‑oriented technical assistance provided by other agencies.  He said that the value of the "Days of Reflection" would be determined by how the discussion of technical cooperation could be moved forward.  He said that in moving the process forward, it was necessary to take into account the view of donors, beneficiaries, and the Secretariat.  He said that a framework should be developed by the WTO Secretariat on how the programme of management could be worked out and consulted with the donors and beneficiaries.  He said that he was unaware of any set of guidelines on how the technical cooperation programme worked, and what were the main and subsidiary objectives;  and whether technical cooperation was accessible to all and on what criteria.  He said that following the establishment of the WTO, there was huge demand for technical cooperation which had perhaps been unanticipated.  It was on the basis of reflections that the WTO could craft certain guidelines on technical cooperation.  He said that it was recognised that WTO operated in a wider setting, and, as had been demonstrated in discussions on the Integrated Framework, there as an increasing emphasis on mainstreaming trade policies into overall development strategies, including those related to poverty reduction.  This was another paradigm which needed to be taken into account, and for which specific resources may need to be devoted.  He said that there was a specific issue concerning collaboration with NGOs and the sharing of expenses, and there had been some positive experiences from both the ITC's and the UNCTAD's  activities in this respect.  He said that it was necessary for the WTO  to consider all these issues and develop a common approach.
&& The representative of Haiti proposed that in order to develop concrete solutions to questions relating to the financing of projects under the Integrated Framework, the WTO should take up with the World Bank the idea that a quarter of resources generated by debt relief should be allocated to the funding of trade-related projects coming under the Integrated Framework.  He said that this was a concrete area where the collaboration between the WTO and the World Bank could be effective.
&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division said that, in respect of least-developed countries, a separate Secretariat Working Group had been established.  Regarding the transfer of the Integrated Framework's administrative unit from the ITC  to the WTO,  he said that this had been done to improve the administration of the IF, given that the person responsible for chairing the Inter-Agency Working Group was part of the WTO Secretariat.  He said that other questions raised by Haiti could be addressed at the meeting of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  Regarding the relationship of the private sector to the development of technical assistance, he said that the question had not arisen from the point of view of funding, but rather from the perspective that the private sector was the engine of growth.  Since this was the case, the view had been expressed that attendance by representatives of the private sector during WTO technical assistance activities would be beneficial.  There was no intention that the WTO take over the mandate of the ITC.  Regarding the need to consolidate the various ideas and proposals that had been expressed on the subject of technical assistance, the Director of the Technical Cooperation Division brought to the attention of the CTD a document that had been prepared by the Technical Cooperation Division, and circulated two days prior to the 30th Session, which was entitled "A Strategy for Technical Assistance in the WTO".  The intention was to table the document at the 31st Session of the CTD.  The document took into account all existing documents that had been prepared on technical cooperation since the establishment of the WTO, all the suggestions made at the "Days of Reflection";  the chairman's report; and the recommendations of the two task-forces on technical assistance which had been set up over the previous two years.  The document was structured into seven different sections.  He said that the document was still far from complete, but constituted a first step.  It provided in one single document coverage of many of the issues and elements raised by Members, and hopefully would assist Members in their deliberations on technical assistance.  Regarding the question of the budget for 2001, he said that there was a section on technical assistance.  There was paper which summarised a presentation given by Deputy Director‑General Mr. A. Stoler.  The text contained two tables, one outlining the fact that out of the 10 milion requested for 2001, some SwF2.5 million would relate to additional human resources, that is about 16 new positions across the whole of the WTO secretariat.  A second table depicted what would be done with the other SwF7.5 million.  The matrix was organised by subject and modes of delivery, and it covered developing countries and least-developed country members.
&& The CTD took note of all statements made. 
The Framework for Monitoring and Evaluating the WTO Technical Cooperation Activities (WT/COMTD/W/73) and Monitoring and Evaluation of the WTO's Technical Cooperation Activities – Manual for WTO'S Secretariat Staff dealing with Technical Cooperation Activities (WT/COMTD/W/74)
&& The Chairman recalled that at the its 29th Session held on 28 June the CTD began an extensive discussion on technical assistance issues, which was continued on 10 July.  However, some Members indicated that they wished to revert to the consideration of two Secretariat documents:  The Framework for Monitoring and Evaluating the WTO Technical Cooperation Activities (WT/COMTD/W/73) and Monitoring and Evaluation of the WTO's Technical Cooperation Activities – Manual for WTO's Secretariat Staff dealing with Technical Cooperation Activities (WT/COMTD/W/74).  During the previous meeting, Members had raised a number of questions on the reports, and clarifications were given by the Secretariat.  Members also made a number of suggestions for improvement in the reporting process in order to facilitate the monitoring of the WTO's technical cooperation activities.  The Chairman said that the Secretariat was going to take these comments on board
&& The representative of Norway thanked the Secretariat for the preparation of the document on a strategy for technical assistance.  His delegation was of the view that such a document would be very useful as a point of departure for the evaluation of WTO technical assistance.  His delegation were particularly interested as to how the Secretariat would spell out the niche that the WTO would occupy in the delivery of technical assistance, and how the WTO could cooperate with other agencies, without making such cooperation an added burden.  His delegation welcomed proposals by Switzerland on how to tackle ad hoc requests for technical assistance.  He said that in a number of cases, speedy action was needed on the part of beneficiary countries.  On the other hand, a situation where ad hoc processes became dominant was one to be avoided.  Specifically regarding documents WT/COMTD/W/73 and WT/COMTD/W/74, his delegation had sought expert advice.  Their experts were of the view that the Secretariat approach disclosed a highly professional approach to monitoring as well as evaluation, and that the set-up was "state of the art".  However, the experts warned against an approach in monitoring and evaluation that was too ambitious in relation to the realities at hand.  While it may be useful to draw on UNDP and OECD models, these also had dimensions that were different from those which applied to the WTO.  Norway advised the CTD to allow the Secretariat to implement its strategy progressively over a period of years.  This was a pioneering activity in uncharted territory.  Concerning monitoring and evaluation reports, his delegation noted that the Secretariat adopted a very positive attitude as they did not seek to point to errors or blame any party.  While his delegation favoured a constructive attitude, it was also of the view that the Secretariat needed to be frank in assessing experiences, for its own benefit and that of the CTD, so that the CTD could be familiarised with both successes and failures.  He said that much attention had been given to the Secretariat's role and its capacity to fill that role.  However, its success in this depended on commitments made by other parties, namely donors and recipients.  Regarding donors, his delegation had stressed the  importance of integrating technical assistance fully into the regular WTO budget.  No less important was follow-up of and feedback from recipients.  Donors needed to know how their monies had been spent, and one aspect of long-term financing was the assessment of the recipients themselves on how the assistance had functioned, and its effects.  His delegation recommended in future that the opportunity be given to recipients to express their assessment and advice.
&& The representative of the Philippines said that his delegation shared Norway's appreciation of the Secretariat's efforts in producing the draft Strategy paper.  He suggested that issues of monitoring and evaluation could be discussed later in the context of the overall strategy.  He said that the draft strategy could be placed for the consideration of beneficiaries, who would ensure that donors would be responsible enough to meet in a more effective way donor concerns regarding resource allocation.  His delegation shared the view that the delivery of technical assistance was the responsibility of donors, and beneficiaries were responsible to ensure that they benefitted from technical assistance in a useful way.
&& The representative of the United States said that the Secretariat report called for the evaluation of WTO programmes on a geographic and thematic basis which made it possible to collect lessons applicable as widely as possible to activities across more than one country.  He said that such information would be systematically disseminated to the Secretariat, beneficiary countries, and donors countries, and that therefore the United States supported the concept.  He said that his delegation was happy to note that the proposal incorporated both external and internal evaluation.  His delegation also had specific comments and questions concerning the report.  First, he noted that the evaluation questionnaires did not ask participants what their objectives were, and said that it was important to collect information on, inter alia, the objectives of participants.  He asked whether, in the process of planning the activity, there was a process for written agreement between the Secretariat and the beneficiary on the needs to which the assistance provided was designed to address, and the objectives of the assistance.  His delegation believed that such a process was vital, not only to the delivery of the assistance, but also for the evaluation of its delivery and its effectiveness.  He said that the process of reporting back to the CTD in a format that conveyed useful information was also important, and his delegation wished to hear the Secretariat's thinking in this regard.  He also asked that if the information was stored in the technical assistance data-base, whether it would be possible for the Secretariat to report back to members on a more frequent basis. 
&& The Director of the Technical Cooperation Division said that he was in full agreement with the representative of Norway that the implementation of monitoring and evaluation functions should be done on a gradual basis.  He said that, given available resources, this was the only approach could be envisioned over the coming years, adding that it was a wise approach that would allow lessons to be drawn.  Referring to the question from the Philippines, he said that the Strategy paper contained a section on evaluation and follow up.  He said that as a result of suggestions made at the 29th Session of the CTD, the questionnaires had been revised to include a section on objectives.  These revised questionnaires were to be annexed to the draft Strategy paper circulated in November.  He said that the Technical  Cooperation Division was prepared to make available on a more frequent basis information on activities undertaken, their costs and purposes.  He said that discussions were underway with the Secretariat Working Group on LDCs so that the same database could be used, and discussions were underway with the Finance and General Services Division (FGSD), so that financial figures which appeared were the official figures of the FGSD.
&& The Chairman said that the CTD would revert to the subject of technical cooperation at the 31st Session, when the draft Strategy paper will be available for discussion.  A decision to discuss further the issues arising in connection with technical cooperation, in 2001, could be taken at the discussion of the work programme for 2001 at the 31st Session of the CTD.
&& The CTD took note of the documents and of the statements made.

MARKET ACCESS FOR EXPORTS OF THE LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES – INFORMATION PROCEDURES – REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN ON CONSULTATIONS
&& The Chairman recalled that at the 29th Session of the CTD, he had  mentioned the statement by the Director-General at the 3 May General Council meeting regarding provision of information on market access for exports originating in least-developed countries, and had indicated that he wished to take up an issue of procedure. Normally, notifications and information provided on changes to GSP were sent to the CTD under the provisions of the Enabling Clause and it was assumed, therefore, that information on any actions taken by Members under their GSP schemes in favour of LDCs would also be provided in this way.  On the other hand, steps taken under the 1999 Waiver on Preferential Tariff Treatment for LDCs were to be notified to the Council on Trade in Goods.  The Chairman recalled that at the 29th Session, he had said that he would, with Members' permission, consult with the Chairman of the CTG on how to resolve this inconsistency, and then hold some informal consultations.  However, because of the summer break it has not yet been possible for the Chairman to hold these consultations with the Chairperson of the Council for Trade in Goods.  He hoped to be able to report back to  the CTD at the next session.  Advice was also to be sought from the WTO Legal Division on the matter.
&& The representative of Bangladesh brought to the attention of the CTD the fact that the European Commission had recommended to its Member states that unrestricted market access be extended to all exports of LDCs, with the exclusion of arms.  He said that the LDCs had been arguing in favour of such an initiative, and that therefore the EC's proposal was welcome.  He proposed that the CTD take note of this initiative, and that it encourage that the proposal be finalised.  He asked that the CTD call on other OECD Members, especially the United States, Canada and Japan, to take similar steps. 
The European Communities said that his delegation could make available, as an informal document, details of the initiative.  He said that the Commission had proposed that all remaining imports from LDCs which were not subject to unrestricted market access (excluding arms) be granted such access, with phase-in periods on sensitive products such as bananas, sugar and rice.  The outcome of the debate among EU member-States was awaited.  He recalled that the EC already absorbed 56 percent of LDC exports, which made it the largest importer of LDC products, and his delegation hoped that this announcement would inject more momentum to the discussion of such initiatives amongst other trading partners, and lead to improved market access conditions for LDCs. 
&& The representative of Canada informed the CTD that as of 1 September 2000, Canada had increased the number of products that could enter duty-free from LDCs.  She said Canada had eliminated duties on imports from LDCs on an additional 570 tariff lines, as a result of which LDC exporters were eligible for duty‑free treatment on 90 per cent of all tariff lines, up from 82 per cent.  She said that to further improve opportunities for LDC exporters, Canada had further liberalised the origin requirements that applied to imports from LDCs.
&& The representative of Uganda expressed the appreciation of his delegation to the EC for the proposal by the Commission on unrestricted market access for LDCs.  His delegation also welcomed the statement made by Canada.  He said he hoped these measures would facilitate diversification.  He said that a discussion of how to take advantage of such increased access opportunities through capacity-building was important.  He encouraged trading partners to continue providing increased access through preference schemes, without bringing in extraneous issues. 
&& The representative of Zambia thanked the EC and Canada for the information they had communicated, and encouraged other trading partners to take similar steps in the near future.  He recalled the Director-General's appeal to major trading partners to open their markets more fully to the exports of LDCs, and to provide more technical assistance.  He said that such measures were a top priority.  He said that in addition to tariff and non-tariff barriers, supply‑side issues should also be an element of market access discussions.  His delegation thought that an approach focused uniquely on market access without paying due attention to supply‑side constraints was incomplete, as many constraints continued to impede exports.  He said that the WTO needed to play a vital role in exploring export possibilities and opportunities for LDCs, and should encourage other relevant organisations to address their supply-side constraints.  
&& The Chairman proposed that CTD take note of information provided by the EC and Canada, urge the expeditious implementation of proposals, and encourage other major trading partners to take similar action to improve market access for LDCs.  
It was so agreed. 

ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman recalled that, following a period of uncertainty, the General Council agreed on 17 July 2000 to reinvigorate the work programme on electronic commerce on a practical basis.  This was understood to be without prejudice to any delegation's position on the status of the 1998 Declaration (WT/MIN(98)/DEC/2).  Four subsidiary bodies, including the CTD, were invited to pick up their work on e-commerce within their respective spheres of competence, identify cross-sectoral issues, and report back to the General Council at its regular meeting in December 2000.  He recalled, the work programme on e-commerce adopted in September 1998 had called on the CTD to "examine and report on the development implications of electronic commerce, taking into account the economic, financial and development needs of developing countries" (WT/L/274).  Since then a number of delegations had made submissions and comments on the issue and the Secretariat issued a "Note on the Development Dimension of E-commerce" (WT/COMTD/W/51) and also organized a seminar on electronic commerce and development.  (The report on the seminar is available in document WT/COMTD/18.)  A final report on the contribution of the CTD to the work programme was presented to the General Council in July 1999 (WT/COMTD/19).  He said that in the report of the CTD, a number of questions that might be further explored were listed.  These included, for example: What were the infrastructure and human resources developments required to address the needs of developing countries in e-commerce?  What kind of technical assistance could be provided by the WTO?  What were some of the innovative solutions and success stories in developing countries that others could learn from? What impact was e-commerce likely to have on customs revenue in developing countries?  How significant were the duties on particular products traded electronically in specific countries?
&& The Chairman drew the attention of Members to different possibilities regarding the organisation of the work of the CTD on electronic commerce for the rest of the year.  He recalled that the General Council had asked the CTD to report at the December meeting of the General Council.  At the same time, the CTD planned to have one more formal session, during which it would need to hold whatever discussions Members desired to have on the subject and finalise the report.  Given this situation, he said Members might feel it necessary to have informal consultations, in order to facilitate the finalisation of  the report presented to the General Council.  The schedule of meetings was extremely crowded for the month of October, which created logistical problems for both Members and the Secretariat.  However, he drew the attention of Members to the fact that during the Geneva Week for non-residents, a briefing session was planned on electronic commerce, for the afternoon of the 25th of October.  Speakers at this session  included WTO Secretariat staff as well as staff from the ITU, ITC, and UNCTAD.  The Chairman proposed that the CTD could make use of this opportunity and enlarge this particular session of the Geneva Week into an informal CTD consultation on electronic commerce.  This would have a number of benefits:  it would enable the CTD to have informal consultations in a context where logistical difficulties may have hampered the organisation of such consultation; the CTD could draw on the planned presence of experts from other IGOs; and the CTD would also receive the input of non-residents into a component of the CTD's work programme, which was in keeping with the desire of the Membership to increase the effective participation of all members in the work of the WTO.  The overall the goal of the informal consultations was to facilitate the finalisation of the CTD's report to the General Council.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation could support the suggestions made by the Chairman, and said that it would be very beneficial to hear from other institutions.  She said that e-commerce had become a very significant feature on the development side.  She said that with respect to the questions raised earlier on revenue, there was an unofficial Secretariat study which was undertaken in 1999 on revenue issues.  She said that the Secretariat could assist interested Members in identifying where they could locate the study.  She said that, with reference to the ITC Executive Forum, the ITC web-site for the event identified several policy‑related questions which Members were seized upon in the WTO.  She suggested that if the work programme were to proceed in accordance with the General Council decision in December, that the CTD could consider holding a symposium with the participation of developing country entrepreneurs, to update information provided in the seminar on electronic commerce of 1999 organised by the CTD.  She said that at the informal session, it would be useful to distribute information on the initiative launched at the G‑8 Okinawa Summit, which aimed at building capacity in developing countries in order to level the playing field in e-commerce.  The initiative brought together the G-8 countries in their commitment to build capacity for e-commerce in developing countries in a number of areas, including infrastructure and training.  Furthermore, private sector companies had signed on to the initiative and announced their intention to work with developing country partners.  She said that since the 1998 Declaration on E-Commerce had indicated the relevance of the impact of e-commerce on developing country financial and economic interests, and that there had been a lot done since 1998.  Her delegation hoped that once direction had been given by the General Council, Members could address some of the initiatives on capacity-building, and that the CTD could benefit from case studies and examples that have resulted from various initiatives.  She pointed to the United States initiative to connect Sub-Saharan African countries, which was a US$15 million initiative over a five-year term.  The United States also had an "Internet for Development" initiative which included pilot countries, a list  of which was increasing and which included Egypt, Uganda, Guatemala and various others.  Her delegation would expand on these initiatives in the future.  Her delegation was of the view that the G‑8 initiative went beyond what most bilateral initiatives had to offer.
&& The representative of Japan said his delegation supported the holding of further informal consultations in order to finalise the report to the General Council.  His delegation could also support the proposal in favour of holding a symposium on electronic commerce.  He said that in view of the increasing importance of electronic commerce, the development of electronic commerce presented great opportunities for all WTO Members, in particular developing countries, and all businesses, including small and medium‑size enterprises.  In this context, the examination of electronic commerce issues in the CTD should take place.  His delegation was of the view that issues related to electronic-commerce included cross-cutting issues, in particular, issues relating to financial and economic development issues;  and to technical cooperation and capacity-building issues.  His delegation was firmly in support of setting up a horizontal task force with the participation of capital-based experts, as this was the most appropriate forum for addressing cross-cutting issues.  His delegation requested that the Chairman's report should state that electronic commerce related issues should be further examined as expeditiously as possible, especially from the point of view development.  His delegation also requested that the Chairman report to the General Council state that many Members supported the establishment of a horizontal task force. 
&& The representative of Pakistan agreed that, whatever was being done as part of the reinvigoration of the work programme, was without prejudice to the status of the 1998 Declaration.  He said his delegation could go along with the basic parameters set out by the Chairman, and was willing to participate meaningfully in any work undertaken, as the outcome of work conducted in the CTD was of paramount importance in terms of the ultimate analysis of e-commerce and the work of the CTD covered areas of importance to developing countries such as technical and financial assistance and fiscal issues.  His delegation had taken note of proposals for a symposium and was of the view that February was too early for organising such an event, as it would be better to await the outcome of work conducted in the CTD and the other three subsidiary bodies.  Regarding fiscal issues, and more specifically the unofficial study undertaken by the Secretariat in 1999, his delegation was of the view that this study should be circulated to Members, perhaps in the form of a non-paper, so that it could become a basis for discussion.  Finally, his delegation requested that advance notice be given of the holding of informal discussion, and requested the Secretariat to prepare a short synoptic note on the discussion of electronic commerce held in the CTD prior to July 1999.
&& The representative of Venezuela supported the proposal to hold informal consultations on electronic commerce.  He said that this would be a good opportunity to circulate to Members the findings of an UNCTAD meeting of experts on the subject of "Electronic Commerce and Tourism", as well as information on the Okinawa initiative referred to by the United States and Japan.  He said that the interest of developing countries in the subject of electronic commerce was further made manifest by the fact that the forthcoming Heads of Government Meeting of the G-15 had as its theme Information Technology and Telecommunications, with development questions as a fundamental perspective, including those questions relating to human resources and the development of competitiveness, which were brought under the collective heading of "e-development".
&& The representative of Zambia said that he supported the proposal to have informal consultations, as well as the proposal to have a symposium on electronic commerce.  He wished to know whether it was possible to include the private sector in the consultations.
&& The representative of Canada brought the attention of the CTD to work conducted by the UNCTAD on electronic commerce and development, and specifically a publication entitled "Building Confidence: Electronic Commerce and Development".  His delegation also supported the Japanese proposal that the Chairman include in his report a statement that a number of Members supported the establishment of a horizontal task force on electronic commerce.
&& The Chairman said that there appeared to be interest in having a briefing by other organizations on e-commerce to help in the formulation of the CTD's report to the General Council.  It appeared that Members were comfortable with the idea of joining forces with the Geneva Week to hold informal consultations, with a view to finalising the report during the last meeting of the CTD in October.  He noted that there had been a number of requests for further information, and said that the Secretariat would look into this and provide information as appropriate.

FINANCE FOR DEVELOPMENT – INPUT BY THE WTO TO UNITED NATIONS HIGH-LEVEL CONSULTATION IN 2001
&& The Chairman recalled that at the 29th Session of the CTD, he had mentioned that the CTD may be required to contribute to the WTO input to the UN High Level Event on Financing for Development, to be held in 2001, but that this would depend on the outcome of the General Council to be held on 17 July.  At that meeting of the General Council, Ambassador Bryn, the Chairman, recalled that on 19 May 2000, an informal meeting with Members of the UN Preparatory Committee for the High-Level Event on Financing for Development, Heads of Delegations of WTO Members and Senior Officials of the WTO Secretariat, had been held in order to hear from the Bureau of the UN Preparatory Committee proposals for a closer dialogue and cooperation with the WTO for the preparation of the High-Level Event scheduled for May 2001.  Ambassador Bryn also mentioned that the Secretariat was already involved in two of the preparatory working groups, on trade and on systemic issues.  Given the strong wish of the Preparatory Committee of the High-Level Event to receive a political  input from the WTO membership, Ambassador Bryn proposed that the contact point for such an input be the CTD and that its Chairman be in contact with the Preparatory Committee.  This proposal was accepted by the General Council.  The Chairman recalled that it  was also agreed that issues which might be raised in the context of the preparations for the High-Level Event would be discussed in the CTD.  He recalled that a similar procedure had been followed in preparing a GATT contribution to the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro.  That contribution was based on an input from the Secretariat and discussions among Members in the appropriate Committee, and it was agreed that the Chairman of the General Council would inform the Co-Chairs of the UN Preparatory Committee accordingly.
&& The Chairman recalled that the UN had structured the preparatory process for the High Level Event through the establishment of six working groups:  Systemic Issues; Domestic Financial Resources; FDI and other private flows; International Financial Cooperation, ODA and Debt; and Trade.  The UN had also initiated a process of holding regional consultative meetings, the first one having been held in Jakarta in early August for the Asia-Pacific region.  The objective was that the work of the working groups was to contribute to the final declaration to be adopted in May 2001 at the High Level Event.  In the context of these preparations, the involvement of the WTO had to date followed two tracks.  First, the WTO secretariat had been invited to take part in the work of the working group on systemic issues, on FDI and other private flows, and on trade.  The working group on systemic issues had its first meeting on 25 July 2000 in Tarrytown, New York, and aimed to complete its work by November of this year.  Regarding the working group on trade issues, the WTO Secretariat had been invited to make a written input in the form of an analytical paper.   Secondly the Preparatory Committee had a strong wish that the WTO make a written input of a political nature.  As this input was to be from the WTO's Membership, it was important that the matter be taken up to establish how the CTD shall proceed.  The following possibilities suggested themselves:  (i) that the CTD await the completion of the Secretariat paper, and hold a discussion on its content.  The report would then be forwarded to the Preparatory Committee, with a covering letter in which the Chairman would summarise the views expressed by Members.  (ii) Alternatively, that the CTD ask the Secretariat to make a compilation of points made by Members in discussions on the Secretariat paper, and on the question of Financing for Development in general, and attach this compilation to the Secretariat paper, and forward these to the Preparatory Committee.
&& The representative of the European Communities said his delegation wished to have further information on discussions held in the working group on systemic issues.  He also wished to know what the time-table was for the input on trade, and when the CTD could expect a draft for discussion.  He said that it would be better to consider the draft first, and then consider what further input would be made.  Besides that, he was in agreement that the process to be followed should be that followed for the Rio Conference.
&& A representative of the Development Division said that a briefing on discussions held in the working group on systemic issues would be made given at the next meting of the CTD.  Regarding the time-table for the trade input, the aim was to circulate a draft to Members by the end of 2000, in time for discussion early in 2001.  The paper would be submitted as an input to inform the deliberations of the Members.
&& The Chairman said that he would be in touch with co-Chairmen  of the Preparatory Committee, and report back to the CTD at the 31st Session, which would give Members a clearer indication of the time–table involved. 
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman drew the attention of members to the fact that the WTO/UNCTAD International Trade Centre (ITC) was holding an Executive Forum on National Export Strategies in Montreux on 27-29 September 2000. The theme of the conference this year was Export Development in the Digital Economy. Details of the programme were included on the Executive Forum web-site  HYPERLINK "http://www.intracen.org/execforum" Http://www.intracen.org/execforum.  The Chairman  brought before Members the suggestion that it would be useful if the essence of this three-day meting could be presented here in the WTO.  He proposed that a half-day event be organised some time in November.  The event would feature presentations by participants at the Montreux conference, and would include representatives of the ITC and representatives of the private sector.  The event would focus on development issues, and would be entirely separate from the work of the CTD.
There being no further business, the Chairman adjourned the 30th Session of the CTD.
ANNEX


"DAYS OF REFLECTION ON TECHNICAL COOPERATION"

18-19 July 2000

Report by the Chairman

&& The Committee on Trade and Development held two informal days of reflection on WTO technical cooperation activities on 18 and 19 July 2000.  This report on these two days is made to the Committee under my own responsibility, for its consideration.
The programme of the two days covered the following themes: an introduction to WTO technical cooperation; objectives and purposes of technical cooperation;  programming and coordination of technical cooperation;  modes of delivery and impact of technical cooperation;  cooperation with other intergovernmental organizations;  monitoring and evaluation of technical cooperation activities;  technical cooperation for least-developed countries and the Integrated Framework;  and human and financial  resource requirements in respect of technical cooperation.  
My thanks are due to all of those who participated:  Mr Ravier and Mr Stoler, the distinguished Ambassadors and representatives of Members and Observers, and representatives of other organizations.  Thanks also to the members of the Development and Technical Cooperation Divisions who provided the back-up for the days of reflection.
Introduction to WTO technical cooperation
&& Mr. Ravier, in his introduction, pointed out that,  although technical cooperation was enshrined in practically every WTO agreement, its positioning in respect to other WTO Secretariat activities was not always perfectly clear.  There was a debate on whether or not technical cooperation must be considered as a core activity  - in line with activities such as implementation, dispute settlement and negotiations - and on what was the responsibility of other international organizations on trade‑related matters.
Therefore, targeting of technical cooperation was important.  Likewise, the instruments of technical cooperation needed to be targeted:  both general and specialized instruments were necessary, as well as coordination with other international organizations to avoid overlapping and to make best use of scarce resources.  In this connection, financial resources were not the only important aspect.  The availability of human resources in the WTO Secretariat was also of utmost importance.
Participants emphasised that technical assistance had to continue to be demand-driven, tailor-made and field-oriented.  Three important areas to be looked at in relation to technical assistance were:
(i)	policy environment;
(ii)	new and strengthened human resource capacity;  and
(iii)	institutional capacity building.
Objectives and purposes
&& A number of participants pointed out that, for developing countries, especially least-developed countries, the building-up of supply capacity was a key element in trade-related development. This was partly, but not wholly, the WTO's responsibility.   The WTO's competence and expertise lay in improving knowledge of multilateral rules and working procedures, assisting in the definition of approaches to negotiations, and assisting in the implementation of commitments including the effective use of the DSU.   This was particularly relevant to poorer developing countries, including LDCs.
By contrast, it was noted that the relatively more developed and integrated developing countries had somewhat different needs, including a deeper understanding of WTO rules and disciplines;  of detailed negotiating techniques in agriculture and services;  and the creation of capabilities to address problems of implementation.  They also required more experience and insight to help them defend their rights under the DSU process and in operationalizing S & D provisions of WTO Agreements.
Some speakers said that there was a wide asymmetry between the expectations of most developing countries and the existing framework of WTO's technical cooperation, based on the existing aim "to assist in the full integration of beneficiaries into the multilateral trading system and contribute to the expansion of their trade".  No mention was made of investment and of the needs of developing countries in both supply and demand sides of the equation.  There was a need to reformulate the Guidelines to include "expanding investment opportunities".
Others noted that the objectives of WTO technical assistance were to promote the understanding of WTO rules and to enhance the capacity of beneficiaries to adopt or adapt national laws in order to participate more fully in the multilateral trading system.
It was pointed out that trade policy, trade-related technical assistance, and capacity building needs should be articulated in a broad developmental context.  It was noted that the agreement on the Integrated Framework recently forged in New York recognized that these aspects of policy could not be addressed in isolation.
Programming and coordination
It was observed that the organization and implementation of WTO technical cooperation activities did not currently take place in a fully integrated manner.  While Members' immediate needs in fulfilling obligations and taking advantage of trading opportunities could be a starting-point, a multi-year programme based on a logical sequencing of activities should be the main focus for the construction of a clear strategy.  Follow‑up action and assessment criteria should also be identified at the programming stage.  Identification of priorities should be seen as a key component of programming and planning, but flexibility should be built in to deal with urgent, ad-hoc requests.
The implementation of technical cooperation activities should continue to be mainly demand-driven.  Needs assessments should thus be the starting point of the programming and planning of technical cooperation activities.  These assessments should be carried out in a systematic manner, but they should not be too rigid nor too time-consuming to prepare by countries.  
Three levels of coordination of technical cooperation activities were identified:  within the Secretariat, at the national level, and with other international and regional organizations.  In this connection, the view was expressed that WTO technical cooperation should be limited to what the organization can do best. It was observed by the Secretariat that programming of technical cooperation activities was extremely difficult when only 40 per cent of developing countries responded to the WTO questionnaire on their needs for technical assistance for the forthcoming year and when 90 percent of activities were financed through voluntary contributions.
With regard to technical cooperation in general, five "disconnects" were identified: ownership (with different ministries in Members being responsible for finance, trade and development);  transparency of dissemination of information at the national level;  information sharing on training taking place in different ministries of countries;  information on what other international organizations do at regional and other levels;  and the need for adequately trained human resources to undertake negotiations.  The need was also expressed to have the specific provisions on technical assistance in various Agreements (SPS, TBT, TRIPS, etc…) fully operationalized.
Modes of delivery and impact of technical cooperation
It was suggested that the modes of delivery of technical cooperation should be analysed more closely, particularly with regard to developing and strengthening domestic administrations both in understanding and implementing the WTO Agreements and in improving their negotiating techniques.
In developing the WTO's strategy for technical cooperation delivery, consideration should be given to ways in which information could be more effectively disseminated.  Innovative techniques that might be used could include more effective use of established reference centres; distance learning;  technical assistance linked to trade policy reviews;  training of trainers; and outsourcing to regional institutions.   However, some developing Members noted that they lacked technical capacity for distance learning  and that there was no substitute for direct contact with expertise from the WTO. 
Monitoring and evaluation
It was emphasised that the purpose of monitoring and evaluation was to assess and improve performance, not to criticize.  Monitoring and evaluation should be an integral part of each technical cooperation programme.  Monitoring and evaluation aimed to know whether the programme was on track and how to improve its delivery and impact.
Members recognized that an approach to, and instruments for, monitoring and evaluation had been proposed in documents WT/COMTD/W/73 and WT/COMTD/W/74; now they needed to be implemented.  This would mean ensuring that:
-	monitoring by WTO staff was continuous. WTO staff should be clear from the outset what needs were to be addressed in a technical cooperation programme, what were the objectives of the programme, and which indicators were best suited to judge the results of the programme.
-	evaluation at the project or programme level was built in from the outset and was part of the programme outline (criteria, deadline, internal or external evaluation);
-	an internal assessment was done for each technical assistance project (independently from a more specific CTD‑evaluation mandate);
-	the main elements of evaluations were collected in a computerized database;
-	follow-up was automatically envisaged when planning and executing technical cooperation activities;
-	lessons learned were fed back into the planning and programming of technical assistance programmes; and that
-	experiences drawn from monitoring and evaluation at the project‑level by WTO staff were reflected adequately in the annual reports to the CTD on technical cooperation.
Cooperation with other inter-governmental organizations
Members emphasised that coordination among institutions must be at all levels, from policy formulation to implementation.  In this regard, an adequate and continuous flow of information had to be encouraged among intergovernmental agencies involved in trade-related technical assistance.  A clear and coherent policy on division of labour among agencies would reduce uncertainty as to the role of the WTO in technical assistance.  However, some Members felt that greater coherence was impeded by the different decision-making processes of the various agencies.
It was noted that regional institutions had a wealth of accumulated expertise and information upon which WTO could draw to obtain a regional perspective on issues.
Just as developing countries had been encouraged to establish national steering committees so that all issues are part of the overall planning and policy formulation, members felt that there was also need for coordination among different ministries/agencies within the donor countries.
It was felt that the questionnaire recently sent to Members and other international organizations by the Secretariat was a good starting-point to assess what is available in terms of support from the countries and from international and regional agencies.
Technical Cooperation for Least Developed Countries and the Integrated Framework (IF)
Members stated that the principle of "mainstreaming" and of anchoring technical assistance to LDCs as part of an overall development strategy was a good concept,  but recognized that practical difficulties existed with regard to its coordination and coherence.  The interplay between the LDCs, donors and agencies in the formulation of projects and the delivery of assistance was also mentioned.  In this regard, the potential rôle of the IF as a mechanism for coordination was stressed;  some supported the need to set up a Trust Fund to support its operation.  Improved coordination of technical assistance within the WTO Secretariat would also ensure efficient and speedy delivery of technical assistance to LDCs.
Participants stressed that the definition of strategic concerns and coordination of assistance had to be totally owned by the country in question;  that the IF needed to be integrated into overall development policy within the LDC, and into investment and policy discussions within the World Bank Consultative Groups or UNDP Round Tables;  that technical cooperation under the IF required anchoring in national development strategies through the Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSP);  that cooperation and coordination were crucial at all levels, and resources should be devoted to keep overlapping actions among institutions at a minimal level;  and that the objectives of the IF would need to be clearly set and based on what could realistically be accomplished.
Human and financial resource requirements in respect of technical cooperation;  budgetary questions;  costs and benefits of outsourcing
&& Mr. Stoler, introducing the topic, emphasised the serious human and financial resource constraints faced by the Secretariat in the area of technical cooperation, as well as the need to bring the financing of technical cooperation on budget.  This would bring greater predictability and consistency to the WTO technical cooperation programme, and enable it to respond positively to requests for assistance.  Furthermore, it would have the effect of spreading the financial burden in a more equitable manner and providing adequate resources both for training and for technical cooperation. It was recalled that for the WTO 2001 budget exercise, the proposal had been made to increase the technical cooperation budget to 10 million Swiss Francs, of which about 75 per cent was activity-related and 25 per cent human resource-related (new staff posts).  On training, a separate proposal intended to double the capacity of the Secretariat to provide Trade Policy Courses had been drafted.
&& Mr. Stoler observed that although technical cooperation was a demand-driven activity, a certain distillation of requests received from developing countries for the year 2000 needed to be carried out to determine what could reasonably be expected in the light of resource constraints.  For this purpose, a number of criteria and priorities needed to be established; (i) activities which were similar, both by country and by issue, to what had already been done in 1999 should be eliminated where possible;  ii) requests for which there was little or no further information should be discounted;  iii) requests which were duplicative, or that could be folded into other activities, should be combined;  iv) if national priorities could be addressed in the framework of regional activities, this should be done; v) requests where host governments could probably provide the financing or at least cost-sharing should be identified;  and vi) where the number of WTO officials engaged in an activity could be reduced, this should be done.  Priority should be given to activities with LDCs; activities to assist most recent Members and countries and territories in the process of accession;  and issues related to immediate implementation and current negotiations in agriculture and services.  
Many participants supported Mr Stoler's proposals.  It was emphasised that clear planning, prioritisation and vision were necessary for the effective allocation of resources.  The Secretariat should not act simply on the basis of demands but should filter demands through prioritisation, planning and full consultation with Members concerning the mix of activities and budgetary constraints.  It was stated that even if technical cooperation activities were funded on-budget, there would still be a balance to be found between budgetary and extra-budgetary funds.
It was also emphasised that fuller information and greater transparency – including through use of an on-line bulletin board and Reference Centres – would assist Members in knowing what resources was available and how they were being spent.  Better coordination within the Secretariat in regard to both funding and conduct of technical cooperation activities, and a clear definition of the place of training in these activities, was also desirable.
Conclusion
&& As Chairman, I have deduced from the discussion during the two Days of Reflection a clear recognition of the link between trade-related technical assistance, trade and development, and of technical assistance as a core function of the WTO.  The discussions have also led me to reflect on whether WTO technical assistance should not perhaps logically have two foci:  a narrower focus on providing information on and promoting implementation of the WTO Agreements, and a related role in support of broader trade and development strategy,  in which WTO's technical cooperation should, as appropriate, be coordinated with and reinforce development assistance provided by other organizations and institutions within their areas of competence, as well as in some cases by bilateral donors.  These two elements seem to me to pervade the discussion of objectives, ways and means, and disposal and use of resources for technical cooperation and, it seems to me, should be a basis for the discussion of strategy and modalities for the WTO's technical cooperation in the future.
The future strategy for technical cooperation will be discussed in future meetings of this Committee.  It seems to me that it would be useful, in the spirit of consistent monitoring and evaluation, to repeat this reflection exercise periodically, perhaps every three years or so, to ensure that the strategy remains on track and is adapted to changing needs.
__________
 See Annex, pp.16-20.

WT/COMTD/M/30 Page  PAGE 18



	WT/COMTD/M/30 	Page  PAGE 19













