 
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 5 APRIL 2019
Chairman: H.E. Mr. Diego Aulestia (Ecuador) up to item K,
and H.E. Mr. Chad Blackman (Barbados) for items L and M 

A.	adoption of the agenda	2
B.	observers	3
(I)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	3
(II)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	3
C.	BRIEFING BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES ON THE WORK OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE	3
D.	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)	5
(I)	 Committee on Trade and Development Mandate: Focal Point for Consideration and Coordination of Work on Development in the WTO – Proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)	5
(II)	Operationalization of the CTD's Mandate: a Proposal to Deliver Outcomes based on the MC8 Mandate – Proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group  (WT/COMTD/W/192)  	5
E.	SPECIAL AND DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT PROVISIONS IN WTO AGREEMENTS AND DECISIONS – NOTE BY THE SECRETARIAT (WT/COMTD/W/239)	7
F.	notifications under the enabling clause	11
(I)	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements – Status Report on the Committee's Work	11
(a) 	Notifications received pursuant to Enabling Clause (Paragraph 4(a))	11
(b) 	New symbols for notifications and subsequent documentation relating to regional trade agreements	12
(c)	Status of the preparation of factual presentations - Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/243)	14
(II)	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – Communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	14
(III)	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)	15
G.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	15
(I)	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements – Status Report on the Committee's Work	15
(a) Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/244)	15
H.	REVIEW of STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	16
I.	WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE	17
J.	other business	17
K.	ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE sub-COMMITTEE ON least developed countries	19
L.	ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT	19
M.	date of the next meeting	19

&& The Chairman said that, before turning to the adoption of the agenda for the 108th Regular Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD), he wished to say a few brief words about the Monitoring Mechanism (MM) on Special and Differential Treatment (S&D). He noted that the MM met in Dedicated Sessions of the CTD, and was not an issue on the agenda for the Regular Session. However, since this was his last meeting as CTD Chair, he wished to take the opportunity to inform Members that, in the context of the MM, he had recently been approached by the delegations of Norway and Hong Kong, China, with a request to facilitate informal discussions in small-group settings. The purpose was to allow these two delegations to share some of their ideas with other Members on ways to trigger the operationalization of the MM. At their request, he had facilitated a number of small-group meetings on this subject earlier in the year. He said that he was sharing this information for purposes of transparency, so that all Members were informed.
	•	
	•	adoption of the agenda

&& The Chairman said that he wished to note for the record that the 108th Regular Session of the CTD had originally been scheduled to be held on 27 March 2019. This was the date he had announced at the last meeting. However, for various reasons, it was not possible to hold the meeting on 27 March. In a communication dated 12 February 2019, he had informed Members of the change in the date of the 108th Regular Session to 5 April 2019. He went on to say that the draft agenda for the 108th Regular Session was contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/16/Rev.1, circulated on 26 March 2019. 
&& The representative of Cambodia indicated that his delegation wished to raise a matter under "Other Business" concerning the imposition by the European Union of an import duty on Indica rice from Cambodia. 



&& The Chairman said that he wished to make a brief intervention under "Other Business" concerning a regular update prepared for the CTD by the Secretariat on the participation of developing economies in the global trading system. The next update was due for later in 2019. As had been done in the past in the CTD, he wished to suggest that the agenda item relating to "Other Business" be considered before the agenda items relating to the elections of the Chairpersons of the Sub-Committee on LDCs and of the CTD. After the elections of the Chairpersons, the Committee would turn to the last item on the agenda, which concerned the date of the next meeting. This date would be announced by the newly elected Chair of the CTD. With regard to the new Chair, he said that Ambassador Chad Blackman of Barbados would be elected Chairman of the CTD at the present meeting – in line with what had been announced at the General Council meeting of 28 February 2019. Ambassador Blackman, who was not in Geneva and was therefore unable to attend the present meeting, had prepared a pre-recorded video intervention for the Committee, which would be shown after the formal election. In the intervention, Ambassador Blackman would also announce the date of the next meeting of the Committee.  
The agenda was adopted as amended.

	•	observers 
(I)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter-Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.



(II)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations had been previously expressed. He indicated that, if there were no changes in positions on the requests for observer status, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting.
It was so agreed.



	•	BRIEFING BY THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES ON THE WORK OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the 107th Session held on 21 November 2018, the Committee had agreed with his proposal to invite the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on LDCs to the present meeting. As he had explained at the November meeting, he believed that the CTD would benefit from a briefing from the Sub-Committee Chair, as it would add value to what was found in the section on the Sub-Committee's work contained in the CTD's annual report to the General Council. It was also in line with the Decision taken by the CTD on 5 July 1995 for the establishment of the Sub-Committee – as contained in document WT/COMTD/2 – and in particular the stipulation that the Sub-Committee was to report to the CTD for consideration and appropriate action. He was pleased that the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee, Ambassador Monique Van Daalen of the Netherlands, had accepted his invitation. 
 The Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on LDCs said that three meetings of the Sub Committee were held in 2018. A summary of the work undertaken could be found in the CTD's 2018 annual report to the General Council, contained in document WT/COMTD/97. Furthermore, the Sub-Committee had held its first meeting of 2019 on 25 March. She indicated that, in her briefing, she would add to the information contained in the CTD's annual report by providing a non-exhaustive overview of issues being discussed in the Sub-Committee, as well as an outlook on future discussions. She reminded Members that the Sub-Committee undertook its work based on the Work Programme for the LDCs, which was initially adopted in 2002 and subsequently revised in 2013. This Work Programme – contained in document WT/COMTD/LDC/11/Rev.1 – mandated the SubCommittee to focus on systemic issues of interest to LDCs, such as market access, trade-related technical assistance and capacity-building initiatives, accession of LDCs to the WTO, and the traderelated elements of the Istanbul Programme of Action (IPOA) for the LDCs. 



She went on to say that market access remained a core issue of discussion in the SubCommittee. Based on annual Secretariat notes on LDC market access and regular updates on trends in LDC trade, the Sub-Committee discussed the factors that shaped LDCs' trade and market access. She noted that a positive trend in LDCs' exports had been seen over the past two years, but further efforts were needed to strengthen productive capacity and export diversification in the LDCs. The Sub-Committee also considered yearly reports by the Secretariat on the outcomes of the annual review on developments in preferential rules of origin for LDCs in the Committee on Rules of Origin. Furthermore, in recent meetings, the delegation of the European Union had been active in keeping Members informed on the implementation of the Registered Exporter (REX) System of origin for the certification of goods, and engaging them in the review of its preference schemes. In terms of monitoring trade-related technical assistance and capacity building initiatives, the Sub-Committee considered yearly reports by the WTO Secretariat and the Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF). In 2018, the Sub-Committee had also received briefings by the Standards and Trade Development Facility (STDF), and the Advisory Centre for WTO Law. Another systemic issue considered on an annual basis in the Sub-Committee was the accession of LDCs. It was in the Sub-Committee that Members had produced a set of guidelines to facilitate LDC accessions. The LDCs also used the SubCommittee to keep Members informed of their activities and priorities at the WTO. For example, in 2018, the LDC Group had briefed Members on the priority issues contained in the LDC Ministerial Declaration adopted at the Eleventh WTO Ministerial Conference (MC11). Furthermore, at the last meeting of the Sub-Committee, the Coordinator of the LDC Group had provided Members with reports on the South-South Dialogue and the LDC Retreat. 



Going forward, the Sub-Committee would continue to consider the systemic issues mandated by the Work Programme. She indicated that she wished to point to a few specific elements in this regard. Discussions on market access would firstly give further attention to the utilization of trade preferences. She explained that, at the last Sub-Committee meeting, the LDCs had expressed interest in a further investigation of the reasons why certain preferences were not fully utilized. Increased attention might also be given to the issue of making trade more inclusive, in particular with respect to the participation of women in trade. Women's economic empowerment was a priority in the activities of the EIF and the STDF, and an increasing number of discussions on these issues were taking place at the WTO following the Buenos Aires Declaration on Women and Trade. A third issue related to LDC graduation. In October 2018, the Secretariat of the Committee on Development Policy of the United Nations (UN) had informed the Sub-Committee that 12 LDCs were expected to graduate from the LDC category in the near future. In response to a request made by the LDC Group in the Sub-Committee, the WTO Secretariat was collaborating with the EIF on a project to help graduating LDCs improve their understanding of the trade-related implications of graduation. A fourth issue related to the ending of the IPOA for the LDCs in 2020. She noted, in this regard, that preparations had started for the Fifth UN Conference on LDCs, which was scheduled to be held in 2021, and which would chart the way forward. She concluded by thanking all Members, and especially LDCs, for their constructive engagement in the Sub-Committee.
&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, welcomed the briefing by the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee. He said that the last meeting of the Sub-Committee, held on 25 March 2019, had been productive and informative with respect to the state of play of LDCs' participation in international trade, including the shortcomings to address better integration. He thanked the Secretariat for the comprehensive information provided in this regard, and also thanked the EIF for the update on initiatives to strengthen LDCs' export capacity. Appreciation was additionally expressed to the European Union for its presentation on the Everything but Arms (EBA) initiative. He added that the LDC Group wished to deepen its economic relations with its various trading partners and to fully benefit from the preferences granted. Much work remained to be done to ensure a better integration of LDCs into world trade. The LDC Group continued to advocate for a more inclusive, fair and equitable multilateral trading system. Behind the achievement of these goals was the need for true political will. The LDC Group was counting on Members' support in WTO rulemaking as well as in terms of technical assistance, for the implementation of provisions in favour of LDCs, and to foster better integration into world trade.  
&& The representative of Vanuatu thanked the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee for her briefing, as well as for her efforts to ensure that LDC issues and needs were addressed at the WTO. He supported the statement by Chad and extended his delegation's appreciation for the support provided by the WTO Secretariat and the EIF for the study on the trade-related implications of  graduation from LDC status. His delegation looked forward to collaborating in the implementation of the project. 



&& The representative of the European Union welcomed the briefing by the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee, in particular for the emphasis placed on the specific challenges and concerns of LDCs. 



&& The Chairman noted the relevance of issues surrounding the utilization of trade preferences by LDCs. He believed that this deserved further investigation in order to understand why these preferences were not fully utilized.



The Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on LDCs thanked the delegations of Chad, Vanuatu and the European Union for their remarks. With regard to preference utilization, she said that the matter was discussed at almost all meetings of the Sub-Committee. She also indicated that further work was required in order to ensure that the preferences were fully utilized. 



&& The Chairman expressed appreciation for the comprehensive briefing provided by the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee. He noted that it was up to Members to decide if they would invite the Chairperson of the Sub Committee next year to make an oral presentation. In his view, such a briefing by the Sub-Committee Chairperson should take place next year as well.              



&& The Committee took note of the briefing by the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on LDCs, and of all interventions.
	•	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)



(I)		Committee on Trade and Development Mandate: Focal Point for Consideration and Coordination of Work on Development in the WTO – Proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208) 



(II)	Operationalization of the CTD's Mandate: a Proposal to Deliver Outcomes based on the MC8 Mandate – Proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)



&& The Chairman said that, at the Eighth WTO Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. Two submissions containing proposals for work under the MC8 mandate were included on the agenda of the present meeting. The first submission – by Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group and contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 – was for the CTD to report on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies. The second submission – by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group – was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. This submission contained three proposals. In the order they were presented in the document, the first proposal was for the Secretariat to continue to update its report on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. The second proposal was for the CTD to report on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies, while the third proposal was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. He noted that the two submissions had remained on the CTD's agenda for several years, and at the last meeting, a number of the proponents had requested that the submissions appear on the agenda for the present meeting as well. Also, at the last meeting, he had encouraged further engagement among Members in order to try and make progress on the outstanding proposals, and he had additionally noted that it was up to the proponents to present their case, as progress could only be achieved with the active engagement of the proponents. He said that, in recent meetings, Members had made interventions regarding both submissions together, and he therefore invited the Committee to once again take the two sub-items together.



&& The representative of India said that the two submissions, when taken together, contained three proposals. The first proposal, which was for the Secretariat to continue to update its report on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, was discussed and agreed to at the 87th Session. Accordingly, the Secretariat had prepared an update in June 2013, and subsequent updates were prepared in 2016 and 2018. India expected that the Secretariat would continue to prepare and circulate these reports. Turning to the second proposal, which was for the CTD to report on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies, he said that this proposal was in line with the terms of reference (TORs) of the CTD, as well as with the MC8 mandate. Referring to the CTD's annual report to the General Council for 1996, as contained in document WT/COMTD/9, he noted that the CTD had agreed that year to review the implementation of provisions in favour of developing countries on the basis of contributions from Members and from the WTO bodies responsible for monitoring the implementation of the Uruguay Round commitments. To assist in this exercise, the Chairman had invited the Chairpersons of other WTO bodies to submit information on how provisions in favour of developing countries had been dealt with in their respective Committees. On the basis of these responses, the Secretariat had prepared background documentation presenting the replies received in an analytical format. He went on to say that the proponents urged the Committee to restart that practice, and ensure that the CTD acted as a focal point for development work. As for the third proposal – which was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly – he said that this would help ensure a timely consideration of RTAs, and the full realization of the responsibilities assigned to the CTD. In closing, he requested that the items concerning the two submissions be maintained on the CTD's agenda.



&& The representative of China expressed support for the statement by India, and indicated that his intervention related to both documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192. He stressed the usefulness of the Secretariat report on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, and requested that the report continue to be updated in the future. He also noted that the CTD, by its name, should be expected to serve as a focal point for development work in the WTO. Furthermore, as mentioned by India, the Committee had performed this role in the past, which was also in alignment with the CTD's TORs and the MC8 mandate. Finally, he said that there was a systemic and specific need to discuss the proposal for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements. He requested that the items concerning the two submissions be maintained on the agenda for the next meeting, and expressed the openness of his delegation to participate in any possible consultations with other Members. 



&& The representative of South Africa said that documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/208 contained proposals to operationalize the CTD's mandate. According to its TORs, the CTD served as a focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO. In addition, the Committee was to review periodically, in consultation as appropriate with the relevant bodies of the WTO, the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and LDC Members, and to report to the General Council for appropriate action. The proposal that was contained in both submissions under consideration was for the General Council to amend document WT/L/105 – on the procedures for an annual overview of WTO activities and for reporting under the WTO – in order to specify that the CTD was instructed to report, within its mandate, on development-related activities and development issues raised in other WTO bodies and provide the necessary recommendations to the General Council on achieving better coordination within the WTO on development issues. This would operationalize the CTD's mandate as the focal point for development work in the WTO. As per the proposal, the CTD needed to agree to send a recommendation to the General Council to amend document WT/L/105. In closing, she indicated that it was important for the two submissions under consideration to remain on the CTD's agenda until Members were able to fully operationalize the mandate.



&& The representative of Ecuador supported the statements by India, China and South Africa. She said that the proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/208 aimed to ensure that the CTD fulfilled its TORs, as contained in document WT/L/46. She also indicated her delegation's openness to participate in informal consultations with other Members on the proposals.



&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation for the Chairman's efforts to find a path forward on these proposals. However, seven years were sufficient time for the proposals to have been appearing on the agenda. Members would not reach consensus on them, and the proponents themselves had failed to take any initiative to advance their ideas. If the proponents wished to make changes to their proposals to address the concerns raised by Members, they would need to revise their proposals and add them to the agenda of a future meeting. While the proponents were free to do so, the United States did not agree to these as standing items. His delegation saw no basis from the CTD's rules of procedure that would justify these items remaining on the agenda, without required action by the proponents. With respect specifically to the proposal for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly, the United States had repeatedly stated that the proposal suggested a diminishing of Members' substantive rights and obligations under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), and the Enabling Clause. His delegation saw no prospect for consensus in either the CTD or the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA). The only outcome from the proposal would be to provide one Member with the right to prevent others from complying with their notification obligations, which would be prejudicial in the face of any dispute settlement proceedings regarding a particular RTA. The proponents had failed to make their case. He emphasized the need to find ways to make WTO Committees work better for the Membership, and the CTD was perhaps the most obvious example of a Committee that needed to push past old proposals and discussions, and move towards a more useful debate.

&& The representative of the European Union indicated that, for the benefit of those who were attending the CTD for the first time, she wished to explain why her delegation believed that the proposals being discussed had reached the end of the road some time ago. She said that her delegation's understanding of the MC8 mandate was that the CTD should further explore the positive link between trade and development. This needed to be based on constructive exchanges on clearly identified topics, in line with the instruction from MC8 to carry out focused work. The European Union had engaged constructively on the proposals submitted in the context of the MC8 mandate that had previously been agreed to by the Committee. However, the remaining proposals did not respond to the requirement to carry out focused work. Furthermore, her delegation was not aware of any efforts in the last few years by the proponents to take into consideration comments from other Members, neither in bilateral discussions nor in the form of revised proposals. Regarding the proposal for the CTD to report on the development work of other WTO bodies, her delegation was of the view that this would give the CTD an oversight function for all aspects of the WTO's work. It went against the mandate to act as a focal point on development issues and carry out focused work. Members needed to discuss what this focused work should be, and not re-open the CTD's mandate. Turning to the proposal for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly, she said that her delegation was open to having constructive discussions with a view to clarifying issues relating to notifications. While she concurred with the view shared by the United States on the proposal, she said that this did not mean that a solution could not be found to the issues. However, discussions on the matter needed to take place in the context of paragraph 28 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration, and it therefore seemed fruitless to continue discussions on this particular proposal.

&& The Chairman encouraged further engagement among Members in order to try and make progress on these proposals. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
	•	SPECIAL AND DIFFERENTIAL TREATMENT PROVISIONS IN WTO AGREEMENTS AND DECISIONS – NOTE BY THE SECRETARIAT (WT/COMTD/W/239)
&& The Chairman recalled that he had brought to Members' attention at the last meeting that the Secretariat had updated its paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. The updated paper, circulated on 12 October 2018 in document WT/COMTD/W/239, was prepared on the basis of the proposal from Ecuador contained in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1. This proposal was agreed to by the Committee at its 97th Session in November 2015. The updated Secretariat paper appeared on the agenda of the present meeting at the request of Ecuador. He invited the Secretariat to present the paper.
A representative of the Development Division said that he wished to provide a broad overview of the Secretariat paper. He noted that it was the latest update in a line of Secretariat papers. While each updated version was a separate document in its own right, the underlying theme was familiar to Members. The current updated report, like previous ones, was prepared on the basis of Secretariat-wide inputs. In particular, Secretariat staff working in the various areas covered in the document had been requested to provide the necessary updates. In addition, the updated report followed the same basic structure as recent previous versions of the document. With regard to the information contained in the report, he said that the report firstly provided a listing of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements. By undertaking such an exercise, it was possible to count the number of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements. The paper also provided a typology of the S&D provisions contained in the WTO Agreements, which had been introduced by the Secretariat several years ago. Furthermore, the report provided information on the implementation of the S&D provisions contained in the WTO Agreements, when such information was available. The sources used for this purpose were numerous, and he pointed to the wide range of document references in the paper. He also noted that a separate section reflected S&D provisions and references in Ministerial, General Council and other relevant Decisions, with information or comments on implementation where available. Turning to the typology of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements that was used by the Secretariat, he said that there were six categories of provisions. The first category concerned provisions aimed at increasing the trade opportunities of developing country Members, while the second concerned provisions under which WTO Members should safeguard the interests of developing country Members. A third category referred to flexibility of commitments, of action, and use of policy instruments. The other categories concerned transitional time‑periods, technical assistance, and provisions relating to LDC Members. 
He went on to say that, for the first time, a section on the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) had been included in the Secretariat report. The inclusion of the TFA had contributed to an increase in the number of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements. In particular, the updated Secretariat paper counted 155 S&D provisions across the WTO Agreements. He proceeded to present a number of charts which had been prepared on the basis of the information contained in the report. A first chart, which provided a breakdown of the 155 S&D provisions by Agreement, showed that the largest number of S&D provisions – a total of 25 – were found in the GATT 1994 and in the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade. This was followed by the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, with 16 S&D provisions. The Agreement on Agriculture, and the GATS, each contained 13 S&D provisions. A second chart provided a breakdown of the 155 S&D provisions by category. According to this breakdown, the highest number of S&D provisions – a total of 47 – were found in the category concerned with safeguarding the interests of developing country Members, while 44 S&D provisions were found in the category concerning flexibility of commitments. Finally, he presented a chart which compared the number of Ministerial, General Council and other Decisions reflected in the updated Secretariat report relative to the number reflected in the 2016 and 2013 versions of the report. He noted that the number of such Decisions reflected in the report had progressively increased – from 16 in the 2013 version, up to 32 in the latest update.  
&& The representative of Ecuador commended the Secretariat for the updated report and for the presentation made. Her delegation was of the view that the information contained in the report was valuable for Members. She called on the Committee to agree to update the paper every two years, as proposed in document WT/COMTD/W/204/Rev.1.

&& The representative of the European Union welcomed the updated report and noted with appreciation the inclusion of a section on the TFA. She suggested that additional information on the actual use of S&D provisions could be added in the respective tables under the "Comment" column, in particular with regard to which Members had used individual provisions and when. Such information, which could cover the past five years, would greatly enhance transparency.

&& The representative of Australia thanked the Secretariat for the updated report. He believed that the report was useful for discussions on S&D generally, and should also serve as an important reference to Members as they proceeded to design appropriate and targeted S&D in current and future negotiations. He went on to say that he wished to make a few observations on the content of the report. He said that the document set out the different types of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements, including in terms of flexibility of commitments, transitional time periods, and technical assistance. The document also illustrated that S&D provisions could seek to fulfil different, and sometimes multiple, objectives. In some instances, they could seek to increase trade opportunities for developing countries, and preferential market access was one such example. In other instances, they could seek to safeguard a particular interest of countries, for example, by ensuring that development considerations were taken into account in the implementation of commitments. Furthermore, the report provided a useful picture of Members' varying interactions with S&D provisions. Many of these provisions had resulted in significant technical assistance and capacity-building activities. Some provisions had been invoked to a great extent by Members responding to their particular needs, while others had not been invoked or relied upon at all. In his delegation's view, these observations would be useful to bear in mind as Members sought to design appropriate and targeted S&D provisions in current and future negotiations. Members should continue to consider how S&D encouraged the implementation of commitments commensurate with Members' individual capacities, and more generally assist all Members to integrate fully into the WTO. 

&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, thanked the Secretariat for the updated report. He noted the usefulness of the document, in particular as it provided a complete picture of the S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. He also emphasized the LDC Group's commitment to paragraph 44 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, and to the effectiveness of S&D provisions. The LDC Group sought, among other things, the full operationalization of the Ministerial Decisions on duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs, on the waiver for services and service suppliers from LDCs, and on preferential rules of origin in favour of LDCs. The operationalization of other S&D provisions was also important. He said that all the S&D provisions aimed to foster the integration of LDCs into world trade, through the promotion of LDCs' exports, and their structural transformation and economic diversification. In closing, he repeated the LDC Group's call for an effective implementation of S&D provisions.
&& The representative of Norway welcomed the updated report, which he believed was an important document, and also thanked the Secretariat for the presentation. He said that discussions on S&D were often general, and to some extent abstract, and this could lead to misunderstandings. In this regard, the updated report was a tool that could help Members be more precise, thereby preparing the ground for more constructive discussions. He also believed that the document could provide Members with inspiration to put forward submissions to the MM. This was without prejudice to their right to put forward proposals in any negotiations. He observed that the MM had not been utilized yet, although there was a clear mandate from a Decision taken at the Ninth WTO Ministerial Conference (MC9). He indicated that this could be a lost opportunity for Members. On the basis of the Secretariat report, he encouraged Members to reflect on whether they had input in any format which could be useful for discussion in, and recommendations from, the MM. 



&& The representative of Mexico welcomed the updated Secretariat report. He believed that the report was useful in understanding the existing S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, as it listed the various provisions, and provided information on the manner in which the provisions had been applied in practice. He also noted the usefulness of classifying the S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements into six categories. He went on to say that the fact that the S&D provisions had not been utilized in the same manner by developing Members suggested that all developing countries did not have the same problems and needs. He gave the example of the variety in the use of Category B and Category C provisions in the TFA, while noting that the utilization of S&D in the other WTO Agreements also differed depending on the issues faced by each developing country. His delegation hoped that the document would be useful for Members in negotiations and other work relating to S&D.



&& The representative of China thanked the Secretariat for the updated report and for the presentation. He stressed the usefulness of the report, as it allowed Members to review clearly and comprehensively all S&D provisions in a single document. He believed that it could also be useful to add content on the implementation or utilization of S&D provisions, and perhaps make an analysis of why most of the provisions were not easy to use. This would allow Members to avoid a repetition of such a situation in the future, which he believed should be a common expectation for all Members in order to have practical and effective S&D provisions in any future negotiations.


&& The representative of India congratulated the Secretariat for the updated report. The document, which provided a comprehensive compilation of all S&D provisions, was a useful reference for Members. His delegation believed that the document needed to be updated at least once every two years, so as to incorporate developments and decisions taken. After the circulation of each updated report, a related item could be included on the CTD's agenda for discussion and further exchanges of views.   


&& The representative of Japan expressed appreciation to the Secretariat for the updated report and for the presentation. The report could be a good basis for more specific discussions on S&D provisions, and in this light she indicated that her delegation would study it carefully. In addition, her delegation was interested in the actual use of S&D provisions, and accordingly supported the suggestion that this be elaborated on in future updates. As such a work might be burdensome for the Secretariat, she suggested that the Secretariat could start with one or two Agreements. She also expressed her interest in the ideas outlined by Norway regarding the MM.


&& The representative of Hong Kong, China commended the Secretariat for its work over the years in preparing the report on the implementation of S&D provisions. The report was a useful tool, and was pertinent to the review of S&D provisions, as mandated by Ministers at the Doha Ministerial Conference. She also noted that paragraph 1.6 of the updated report mentioned the MM. In this regard, she said that the MM, which was established by Ministers in 2013, was meant to play a crucial role in reviewing S&D provisions. However, more than five years after its establishment, the MM had not been put into operation, due to the absence of a written submission. The fact that an important Ministerial Decision had not been implemented was undermining the credibility of the WTO. Her delegation had systemic concerns on this matter, and therefore encouraged Members to put forward a written submission as soon as possible. For this purpose, she believed that good use could be made of the updated Secretariat report. While the Bali Ministerial Decision which established the MM did not prescribe a format or the content for written input, the simplest way forward could be to identify one S&D provision and provide a brief explanation on national experiences as to how the provision was, or was not, working. With the help of the updated report, the Secretariat could add factual details relating to the utilization of the provision, or the discussions at relevant Committees, so as to facilitate discussions at the CTD's Dedicated Session on the MM. She added that the updated Secretariat report was not only a good basis for work in the MM, but could also be useful in other areas of work in the WTO. Finally, she noted that Norway and Hong Kong, China had prepared an example to illustrate how a written submission could possibly be made and discussed in the CTD's Dedicated Session on the MM. She expressed her willingness to share this example with interested Members.


&& The representative of Switzerland thanked the Secretariat for preparing the updated report, which he believed was a useful basis for upcoming discussions on S&D. He hoped that it would lead to constructive discussions. He also indicated that his delegation wished to echo the comments by the European Union and Norway, and additionally wished to recall the Bali Ministerial Decision which established the MM. He said that Members could benefit in this setting from an examination of concrete problems associated with existing WTO Agreements. This would provide an instructive starting point to elaborate specific needs-based answers, with the aim of enhancing and promoting the integration of developing countries and LDCs into international trade. 


&& The representative of South Africa expressed appreciation to the Secretariat for the updated paper and for the presentation. Her delegation supported the proposal that the Secretariat continue to update the report every two years. The document served as a good reference point for S&D at the WTO. She also indicated that her delegation agreed that the reasons for the non-utilization of S&D provisions could be stated. This could help discussions in the Special Session of the CTD, which could take up the issues and respond to the mandate in paragraph 44 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration to make S&D provisions more precise, effective and operational. For her delegation, it was important that discussions in the MM be kept separate from this work. 
&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation welcomed the updated Secretariat report at a time where a frank and open discussion was needed on trade and development. The report was a helpful tool for discussions in the CTD, and in the WTO more generally. She encouraged Members to reflect further, based on the document, on whether they would have input to provide in any format, so as to ensure that discussions remained constructive and useful, and helped to fulfill the purpose of available tools such as the MM. Canada continued to encourage Members to make written submissions to the MM, so that it could be fully operationalized.


&& The representative of New Zealand thanked the Secretariat for its efforts in updating the document. His delegation welcomed the specific and concrete information the report provided on S&D. He also thanked Norway for drawing attention to the MM, and for the efforts to promote its use. New Zealand was supportive of the use of the MM, and was interested in seeing how the proposal was received by other Members. 
&& The representative of Colombia thanked the Secretariat for the report, which her delegation found very detailed and comprehensive. The report provided not only a compilation of S&D provisions contained in various WTO Agreements and Decisions, but also an analysis of the application of these different provisions. This was a useful tool that could be used as a reference for work in other parts of the WTO as well. It was a cross-cutting document which covered S&D provisions relating to goods, services and intellectual property. She noted in particular the importance her delegation attached to the provisions related to increasing the trade opportunities of developing countries, and those related to technical assistance. Her delegation believed that the information contained in the report provided a sound basis for discussions in the CTD, as well as in the MM. In this regard, she believed that it would be useful to set up a Working Group to focus on the operation of the MM, and which could conduct discussions along the lines suggested by Norway and Hong Kong, China. Finally, she expressed support for a periodic review of the Secretariat report in the future. 


&& The representative of the United States thanked the Secretariat for the updated document, and noted that a factual and straightforward report on S&D provisions was helpful. Given that the report in its current form was factual in scope, he indicated that his delegation would need to reflect further on the suggestions made at the present meeting, including those regarding utilization. In the context of the MM, he observed that the report could help provide guidance on problems that Members brought forward in the implementation of any specific S&D provisions.  


&& The representative of Guatemala welcomed the updated report, which she believed was a useful tool for discussions in the CTD, and could also serve as a basis for work in the MM. She expressed her delegation's willingness to collaborate with other Members in this regard. She also noted that the Secretariat report  included what information was available on the implementation of S&D provisions, and inquired whether there was any intention to try to obtain additional information, for example by sending out questionnaires. 
&& The representative of the Development Division thanked delegations for their interventions, and noted that the document appeared to be well appreciated by Members. In response to the question from Guatemala, he indicated that the document already contained a substantial amount of document references and information. The Secretariat was in Members' hands regarding any further work that could be done to obtain additional information. Guidance was required from the Committee in that regard.


&& The Chairman welcomed the discussion that had taken place on the Secretariat report. He noted that the delegations that had spoken had recognized the value of the document, and that it contained important information. He also observed that some Members had indicated that they were still reviewing the document, while other delegations that had not intervened might wish to have a further look – or a new look – at the document. He therefore believed that there was still some discussion that was required. He also noted that the Committee needed to consider at a future meeting, hopefully at the next meeting, whether it was worthwhile for the Secretariat to continue updating and preparing the report.  
&& The Committee took note of the Secretariat report, and of all interventions.                                                      

	•	notifications under the enabling clause
(I)	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements – Status Report on the Committee's Work
(a) 	Notifications received pursuant to Enabling Clause (Paragraph 4(a))  
&& The Chairman said that there were no new notifications of RTAs to consider at the present meeting. However, under the present sub-item, he wished to take the opportunity to update the Committee on the matter of the notifications submitted in November 2018 by Uruguay, on behalf of the members of the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA). He recalled that he had informed the Committee at the last meeting that several notifications – a total of 223 – had been submitted by Uruguay to the Secretariat on 1 November 2018, and a further 35 notifications had been submitted on 20 November 2018. All the notifications had been submitted as modifications to the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo (TM80). The first batch of notifications concerned agreements concluded under the TM80 over the period 1980 to 2016, while the second concerned the instruments concluded under the TM80 in 2017. He had indicated that he would be looking over these notifications with the Secretariat, and would be in touch with the notifying Members for any clarification that was required. Since the last meeting, he and the Secretariat had indeed been in touch with the LAIA members, and the Secretariat had sought clarification on a number of points relating to the notifications submitted. He understood that these points were currently being considered by the LAIA members, and discussions had been held with the Secretariat on possible ways to circulate the notifications. In light of the present situation, the LAIA members had requested that the circulation of the notifications be suspended until further notice. This was therefore an ongoing process. While the intention had been for the notifications to be on the agenda for the present meeting, more time and work would be required until they could be circulated and considered by Members. The Committee would be kept updated on this matter as necessary. 
&& The representative of Uruguay indicated that his delegation was working with the LAIA members, and with the Secretariat, in order to circulate the documents.


&& The Committee took note of the interventions.      


(b) 	New symbols for notifications and subsequent documentation relating to regional trade agreements
&& The Chairman said that, at the last meeting, he had recalled elements of an intervention that his predecessor in the Chair had made on this matter at the 105th Session in April 2018. In particular, his predecessor had addressed a number of concerns that had been raised at an earlier meeting – the 104th Session in November 2017 – regarding the implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs (RTA TM) in the CTD. On the issue of notification symbols, his predecessor had correctly observed that, while CRTA document symbols allowed a tracking of all subsequent documentation relating to an RTA from the time of notification, this was not the case in the CTD. In fact, RTA notifications in the CTD were circulated according to the document series which had been applied since 1995. A unique number was assigned for subsequent documentation relating to a notified RTA – for example, a factual presentation, or a questions and replies document – and there was therefore no linkage between an RTA notification symbol, and the symbol for any subsequent documentation relating to that RTA. Given that this had been raised as a concern, his predecessor had looked into the matter, and after discussions with the Secretariat, had informed the Committee that it would be possible for a unique number to be henceforth reflected on the notification document itself. This would allow the CTD to have a document structure for RTAs very similar to the CRTA document structure. Since that time, no objections had been raised by any Member regarding the implementation of a document structure in the CTD similar to the CRTA document structure. Nevertheless, at the last meeting, a request was made for further information on this new document structure in the CTD. He had therefore suggested that the Secretariat could provide information on the new document structure at the present meeting. Accordingly, he invited a representative of the Secretariat to present the new document structure. 


 A representative of the Development Division said that the purpose of the new document structure was to assign a unique number to an RTA that was notified to the CTD, and to place that number not only on the notification of the RTA, but also on all subsequent documents relating to the RTA. At the present time, this type of structure did not exist in the CTD. He indicated that he would first explain the current structure of document symbols in the CTD, and then move on to explain the proposed new structure. In terms of the current structure, he said that notifications to the CTD were circulated in the document series WT/COMTD/N/a, where "a" represented a number assigned to each notification circulated. This series – which had been used since 1995 – applied to RTAs, as well as to other notifications to the CTD. After the establishment of the RTA TM, a new document series had been created for documents required in the implementation of the RTA TM in the CTD – including the factual presentations of notified RTAs, as well as the questions and replies documents. The factual presentations were circulated as WT/COMTD/RTA/b/1 – where "b" was a number assigned to each RTA in the series. The questions and replies document were circulated in the same series, as document WT/COMTD/RTA/b/2. If there was an additional document for questions and replies, it was assigned the symbol WT/COMTD/RTA/b/3. As for the minutes of the Dedicated Session of the CTD that was held to consider a notified RTA, they were circulated with the symbol WT/COMTD/RTA/M/c, where "c" was a number identifying each Dedicated Session. He indicated that there was no link or relationship between the numbers "a", "b" and "c". To illustrate this, he gave an example from the CTD's 9th Dedicated Session on RTAs, which was held on 21 November 2018. One of the RTAs considered at that meeting was notified using the symbol WT/COMTD/N/49. The factual presentation and the questions and replies document relating to that RTA were circulated as documents WT/COMTD/RTA/10/1 and WT/COMTD/RTA/10/2 respectively. The minutes of that meeting, including with regard to the consideration of the RTA in question, were circulated in document WT/COMTD/RTA/M/9. 
Turning to the new document structure, he indicated that he would illustrate the new structure for the documents used up to the present in the CTD, for an RTA assigned the number "x". In the new structure, the notification of this RTA would be circulated according to the series starting with WT/COMTD/RTAx/N/1. The factual presentation would be circulated as document WT/COMTD/RTAx/1, while the questions and replies document would be issued as document WT/COMTD/RTAx/2. If there was a need for an additional document containing questions and replies, it would be circulated as document WT/COMTD/RTAx/3. The minutes relating to the consideration of RTA number "x" would be circulated as document WT/COMTD/RTAx/M/1. With regard to the new document structure he had presented, he noted that "RTAx" appeared on the notification, the factual presentation, the questions and replies documents, and the minutes relating to the consideration of RTA number "x". The appearance of the same number on all documents concerning a particular RTA would facilitate the tracking of information relating to that RTA from the time of notification. He also noted that, by taking away the "COMTD" part from the symbols he had just outlined, and replacing "RTA" with "REG", one would obtain the CRTA structure of document symbols. The proposed new structure of symbols for documentation in the CTD was therefore essentially the same as the structure for CRTA documents. He indicated that the new structure might be better understood by inserting an actual number in place of the "x", and proceeded to provide an illustration. Finally, he said that he wished to touch upon another type of notification received in the CTD, which concerned preferential trade arrangements (PTAs). The issue of document structure was also relevant here. He explained in this regard that, when the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs (PTA TM) was established a few years after the RTA TM, a document structure similar to the one that already existed for RTAs had been put in place in the CTD for PTAs. This was because many of the documents required in the implementation of the PTA TM – the factual presentations, the questions and replies documents, and the minutes of the meetings of Dedicated Sessions of the CTD – were similar to those used in the implementation of the RTA TM. Therefore, if the Committee were to agree to implement the new structure of document symbols for RTAs, it seemed logical to also implement the same structure for PTAs. This would entail replacing "RTA" with "PTA" in the new structure of document symbols that he had outlined in his presentation.


&& The representative of Costa Rica noted the usefulness of the new structure of document symbols and asked whether this new structure would have implications for users' electronic subscriptions to WTO documents.
&& The representative of Mexico expressed support for the proposed new document structure, which she believed was useful, and would facilitate delegations' efforts in searching for documents. 


&& The representative of Colombia believed that the new document structure would contribute to a better organization of work in the CTD. She asked whether the new structure would apply only to future documentation, or whether the intention was also to apply it to documentation that had previously been considered in the CTD. 


&& The representative of Peru said that the new structure of document symbols would be useful for the Committee's work. He indicated that his delegation had a similar question to that raised by Colombia, and wondered in particular whether it would be better to limit the new structure to future notifications.  


&& The representative of the United States indicated that his delegation supported implementing the same document structure for RTAs as in the CRTA, and also had no objection to applying a similar structure for PTAs as well.  


&& The representative of the Development Division said that his presentation related to symbols for notifications and subsequent documentation, and not to the templates used for making notifications. These templates had already been agreed to by the Committee, and their content would not be affected when implementing the new document structure. With regard to whether the new symbols would apply to notifications previously circulated in the CTD, he indicated that the present intention was not to re-issue all previous notifications and subsequent documentation with the new symbols. However, consideration would be given on a case-by-case basis to re-issuing certain documents, when it was deemed useful to do so in order to implement the new document structure. He illustrated this by giving the example of several RTAs that had been notified under the Enabling Clause, but for which the factual presentations had not yet been prepared. Consideration would be given to re-issuing the notifications in question with a new symbol, and with an appropriate reference to the original notification. The factual presentations could then also be circulated according to the new structure. 
&& The Chairman noted that the present sub-item concerned new symbols for notifications and subsequent documentation relating to RTAs. Although the discussion had also extended to PTAs, he suggested that the Committee address RTAs and PTAs separately when considering the issue of the new document structure. He firstly invited the Committee to agree to implement the new symbols for notifications and subsequent documentation relating to RTAs. 


&& The Committee agreed to implement the new symbols for notifications and subsequent documentation relating to RTAs.
&& The Chairman invited the Committee to agree to implement the new symbols for notifications and subsequent documentation relating to PTAs.


&& The Committee agreed to implement the new symbols for notifications and subsequent documentation relating to PTAs.
(c)	Status of the preparation of factual presentations - Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/243)  


&& The Chairman said that his report on the status of the preparation of factual presentations was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/243. It contained 16 separate entries relating to the status of preparation of factual presentations. In some cases, the Secretariat was still awaiting the submission of the full set of data, while in other cases, all comments on the draft factual presentations had not been received. As in the past, he urged all the parties to these agreements to provide the data and information as soon as possible. He added that some progress had been made with regard to some factual presentations. Concerning the ASEAN-Korea agreement, he informed Members that, after his report had been finalized, feedback on the draft factual presentation had been received from Indonesia, Korea and Myanmar. These were in addition to the comments received from Thailand which were mentioned in his report. Comments were still awaited from other parties to the agreement. As for the agreement between Ecuador and El Salvador, he noted that the draft factual presentation had been sent to the parties on 29 March 2019, after his report was circulated. Comments on this agreement had been requested by 25 April 2019. Finally, he said that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following CRTA procedures, a factual presentation on PICTA would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. He urged the parties to PICTA to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications had been completed.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's report. 


(II)	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – Communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that this sub-item concerned the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union notification. The subitem also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India, which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175. The sub-item was requested by China at the last meeting. 
&& The representative of India said that his intervention related to both the present sub-item, as well as to the next sub-item. He said that document WT/COMTD/W/175 raised systemic concerns relating to the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. These concerns also applied to some other RTAs. In this context, some Members had expressed the view that the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 were outside the scope of the CTD and needed to be discussed in the Negotiating Group on Rules. In India's view, the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider issues arising from RTAs with a dual notification. In doing so, the CTD could consult with other WTO bodies, as per paragraph 3 of its TORs. The non-resolution of the matters raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 was the main reason why the consideration of RTAs with a dual notification were pending for such a long time in both the CTD and the CRTA. His delegation requested that both the present sub-item and the next sub-item be maintained on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of China indicated that he wished the present sub-item to remain on the agenda for the next meeting. 
&& The representative of the United States noted that this sub-item had long ago fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made, and needed to therefore be removed from the agenda. 


&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
(III)	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)
&& The Chairman said that this sub-item concerned the notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea. He noted that the intervention by India under the previous sub-item also related to the present sub-item.
&& The representative of the United States noted that India had requested that the present subitem be reflected on the agenda. He expressed disappointment that India was not prepared to substantively engage on this issue in the CTD. He urged India to submit its data, after nearly a decade, so that the Committee could move on with the matter. 


&& The representative of the European Union said that it was important to clarify the legal and procedural questions arising from an RTA being notified by each party under different legal provisions. With respect specifically to the India-Korea agreement, she regretted that no progress had been made. The parties were invited to make additional efforts to find a solution.  


&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
	•	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements
(I)	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements – Status Report on the Committee's Work
(a) Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/244)  
&& The Chairman said that his report on the status of the preparation of factual presentations was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/244. In summarizing the information contained in the report, he informed the Committee that there were currently five PTAs that had been notified since the establishment of the PTA TM for which the Secretariat had still not received the full set of data or information required for the preparation of the factual presentations. These were the PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation, Chinese Taipei and Thailand. He also indicated that he wished to take the opportunity to remind Members implementing PTAs of their notification obligations with respect to changes in the implementation of the PTA. In particular, such changes – including any legal changes – needed to be notified to the CTD.
&& The representative of the European Union welcomed the Chairman's report, which she said provided transparency on the state of play in the preparation of the factual presentations. She wished to hear from the Members that had not yet submitted the required data and information to the Secretariat as to why there was a delay. She stressed the importance of transparency in the context of PTAs.
&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation for the Chairman's report. As in previous meetings, his delegation once again encouraged the concerned Members to provide the full set of data and information that would allow the Secretariat to complete the drafting of the outstanding factual presentations. He also expressed appreciation to the Chairman for his efforts to address the issue. He reiterated his delegation's concern that, for some PTAs, the Secretariat had been waiting for more than seven years for the information and data. He urged Members to participate in the exercise, and said that the glaring lack of transparency contributed to the perception of a decreasing relevance of the WTO to some stakeholders. 
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's report, and of the interventions.
	•	REVIEW of STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES


&& The Chairman said that an item concerning DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered. Since this was his last meeting as CTD Chair, he said that he wished to take the opportunity to touch on the issue of the Secretariat report concerning Members’ DFQF market access for LDCs, which was mandated by the Bali DFQF Decision to be prepared for the CTD’s annual DFQF review. As he had explained at the last meeting, divergent views existed among some Members on the scope and coverage of this report. For the past two years, it had not been possible for the Secretariat to circulate the report for the CTD’s annual DFQF review. He said that he was mentioning this matter in order to inform the Committee that, since the last meeting, he had reached out once again to some of the Members concerned with this debate – and had held some additional informal consultations in a bilateral setting – with the purpose of exploring what possibilities might exist to unblock the situation with regard to the Secretariat report. However, it appeared that for the time being, positions remained unchanged. He indicated that he wished to encourage Members – and in particular the Members involved – to engage constructively on this matter, and to work with the new CTD Chair. He hoped that a Secretariat report could be prepared for the CTD’s next annual DFQF review, which would take place at the last CTD meeting of the year.


&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that market access remained fundamental for LDCs. It was the necessary path for LDCs' integration into international trade, as well as for their economic development and the improvement of their social conditions. He thanked the developed and developing Members that provided LDCs with DFQF market access, and called on other Members to provide such market access in order to promote the integration of LDCs. He also noted that, as part of the implementation of the DFQF Decisions, technical assistance was needed to improve the utilization rate of the preferences granted. Furthermore, in order to ensure real efficiency in implementation, it was necessary to know about the obstacles which prevented a full use of the preferences. The LDC Group wished for a detailed analysis to be undertaken in this regard, which would contribute to better remove these obstacles, and to the integration of LDCs.


&& The representative of Cambodia expressed appreciation for the efforts made by Members to provide DFQF market access to LDCs, including to his country. Cambodia attached great importance to this tangible form of trade preference, which helped in boosting economic growth, integrating into the multilateral trading system (MTS), and overcoming poverty reduction. It was also a fundamental element in building trade capacity, and the economy as a whole. He expressed support for the statement by Chad and thanked Members – both developed and developing – for their efforts to assist LDCs to fully benefit from DFQF market access. His delegation would continue to work with the LDC Group and other Members in order to gain the maximum benefit from this trade preference. He called on Members to continue to support LDCs, and to work constructively towards the full implementation of the DFQF Decisions.


&& The representative of Norway said that some improvements and expansions had been made by Norway to its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme from 2019 onwards. The details would be provided to the Committee once the notification was finalized.


&& The representative of the European Union said that she wished to express her delegation's strong attachment to the Hong Kong commitments. She said that the European Union had been a pioneer in providing DFQF market access to LDCs. European Union imports from LDCs had increased by 10.4% from 2017 to 2018. In addition, while the LDCs' share in global trade represented less than 1%, their share in the European Union's imports amounted to 2.1%. She encouraged other Members, including developing countries, to make efforts to provide preferential market access to LDC exports.


&& The representative of Sri Lanka indicated that she wished to raise a concern regarding the rules of origin in the European Union's GSP scheme, in particular in the context of bilateral cumulation and the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union. She said that her delegation had already discussed the matter with the United Kingdom, and had been advised to also discuss it with the European Commission. As part of her explanation, she outlined how materials from a member State of the European Union, which were processed in a GSP beneficiary country and then exported back to a European Union member State, could be considered as originating in the beneficiary country. The concern related to whether such bilateral cumulation would continue to apply in the future for GSP beneficiary countries in their trade with the United Kingdom and the European Union member States. She gave the particular example of fabric from the United Kingdom, which was further processed in Sri Lanka and then exported to France. She said that she wished to flag this as a systemic issue, which would have farreaching implications for many developing countries that were beneficiaries of the European Union's GSP scheme, including the GSP-plus sub-scheme and the EBA initiative. 


&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation for the efforts by the Chairman and his predecessor to try to finalize the Secretariat report and find a solution that was acceptable to all Members. He said that his delegation could continue to accept the compromise that it had previously accepted.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
	•	WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman said that, in previous meetings, Members' attention had been drawn to the Decision taken at MC11 concerning the WTO's Work Programme on E-Commerce, which called for a continuation of the work under the Work Programme. He recalled that the CTD was one of the subsidiary bodies of the General Council mandated to undertake work under the Work Programme. Although there were no specific proposals from Members to consider in the CTD, a number of delegations had indicated their interest in this area at the last meeting. It had been agreed that the item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.
&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, emphasized the need to pursue discussions under the Work Programme on E-Commerce – taking into account the economic, financial, and development needs of developing countries – and to report on progress in this regard, including any recommendations for action. He noted that it was fundamental and pertinent to reinvigorate the Work Programme in order to take into account the concrete challenges that LDCs faced in benefitting economically from e-commerce. The LDC Group remained open and flexible to pursue work on this matter.   
&& The Chairman proposed that the agenda item concerning the Work Programme on ECommerce be maintained on the agenda for the next meeting.
It was so agreed. 
	•	other business
&& The representative of Cambodia appreciated the opportunity to express the views of her delegation regarding the European Union's imposition of an import duty on Indica rice originating in Cambodia. This imposition followed a determination in a domestic proceeding in the European Union to withdraw tariff preferences for these products under the European Union’s GSP programme. Previously, imports of Indica rice from Cambodia benefited from duty-free access to the European Union market under the GSP programme. However, on 16 January 2019, the European Union adopted Regulation 2019/67, through which it withdrew duty-free treatment for Indica rice and imposed a duty of €175 per tonne, which was a high duty of applied and bound rates of the European Union. She expressed her delegation's disappointment with the European Union's decision to adopt this measure. This was a situation of the highest concern to Cambodia, given the importance of the rice industry in the development of Cambodia’s economy. Her delegation understood that the reason for the imposition of the measure was the ostensible surge of imports of Indica rice from Cambodia in the European Union market. In her delegation's view, this measure was not a safeguard measure within the meaning of the WTO Safeguards Agreement. In addition, the measure appeared to be inconsistent with the most-favoured-nation (MFN) obligation under the GATT 1994.
She went to say that the European Union's decision seemed to be at odds with the overall objective of its GSP programme and of the Enabling Clause, which was to promote the economic development of developing countries, in particular LDCs, and to facilitate their integration into international trade. In her delegation's view, the European Union’s withdrawal of duty-free access to Indica rice from Cambodia was based on the need to protect the European Union's domestic industry, and undermined the general requirement of the Enabling Clause that tariff preferences in favour of developing countries should not be granted in a discriminatory manner. Moreover, the measure seemed contrary to the European Union's policies of encouraging LDCs to graduate early and to reach the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals. By imposing an import duty of €175 per tonne on Indica rice from Cambodia, but not on the same product from other similarly-situated developing countries, the European Union was effectively placing Cambodia’s rice exports at a competitive disadvantage compared to rice exports that would enjoy duty-free access under the European Union's GSP scheme. This adversely affected the competitiveness of Cambodia’s Indica rice in the European Union market. In light of the serious difficulties caused to its rice exports to the European Union by the measure, and in accordance with paragraph 4(b) of the Enabling Clause, Cambodia hereby requested the CTD to hold consultations with the European Union, Cambodia, and any other Member concerned by this matter, with a view to reaching a satisfactory solution to this situation. Her delegation looked forward to hearing suggestions from the CTD Chair on the manner in which these consultations between the CTD, Cambodia, the European Union, and other concerned Members would take place.
&& The representative of the European Union noted that it was not appropriate to have a substantive discussion under "Other Business", and in this light requested the indulgence of the Chairman to make a few remarks. She thanked Cambodia for the intervention made, which she hoped would also be conveyed in writing to her delegation. She said that this was a bilateral issue, and was very much part of the European Union's GSP regulation 978/2012, which had been appropriately notified to the CTD. The GSP rules on safeguard investigations provided for ample and adequate room for dialogue with the countries concerned by the investigation – in this case, Cambodia and Myanmar. In accordance with the GSP rules, the issue had been subject to numerous bilateral exchanges – before, during and after the investigation. She indicated that she would not go into any further details at this point, but could do so if the issue were to be raised as an agenda item.    
&& The Chairman said that, according to the rules of procedure, it was not possible to engage in substantive debate or adopt any decisions under "Other Business". He requested delegations to keep this in mind, and acknowledged the request by the European Union for indulgence in this regard.
&& The representative of China requested the floor and started to deliver a statement to express support for Cambodia on the matter it had raised. However, the Chairman intervened and indicated that Members could not engage in substantive debate or come to any conclusions under "Other Business". The agenda item was mainly for informational purposes. He requested Members to take this into account.
&& The Chairman noted that a representative of the UN Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), which had observer status in the CTD, was requesting the floor. He assumed that this was for informational purposes.    
&& The representative of the UNECE said that he wished to inform the Committee, on behalf of the joint UN Regional Commission's approach to trade facilitation, that the Third Global Survey on Digital and Sustainable Trade Facilitation had been launched. In previous years, the initiative was known as the Global Survey on Trade Facilitation and Paperless Trade Implementation. The results of the new survey would be presented at the Aid for Trade Global Review, which would be held from 3 to 5 July 2019 at the WTO. 
&& The Chairman said that he wished to make a brief intervention concerning a regular update to a statistical paper prepared for the CTD by the Secretariat on the participation of developing economies in the global trading system. This paper had been prepared over the years in the context of the CTD’s mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the MTS. It had been the CTD's practice to hold a discussion on this subject every two years or so, at which time the paper was updated to assist Members in their discussion. The previous discussion by the CTD on this subject had taken place in November 2017, and another update to the Secretariat paper contained in document WT/COMTD/W/230 was due. He had accordingly instructed the Secretariat to proceed with the preparation of an update for a discussion at the last meeting of 2019. He also invited Members that had any additional suggestions for the updated document to contact the Chairman or the Secretariat by the end of May 2019. After this time, the Secretariat would begin work on the update.       
	•	ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE sub-COMMITTEE ON least developed countries
&& The Chairman said that, on the basis of consultations, he wished to put forward the name of Ambassador Monique Van Daalen of the Netherlands to serve for another year as the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on LDCs. 
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Van Daalen as the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on LDCs for 2019.
	•	ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
&& The Committee was informed that, at the General Council meeting of 28 February 2019, the names of the WTO Chairpersons for 2019 had been announced, including that of Ambassador Chad Blackman of Barbados as Chairman of the CTD for 2019. The Committee was invited to formally elect Ambassador Blackman.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Blackman as the Chairman of the CTD for 2019.
&& The Chairman thanked Members for the confidence they had placed in him by electing him Chairman of the CTD, and also thanked the outgoing Chairman for steering the Committee over the past year. He said that, as the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO, the CTD played an important role. He assured Members of his intention to work closely with them on the various areas of the CTD's work. 
Several delegations took the floor to welcome the election of the new Chairman, and to express appreciation for the work of the outgoing Chairman. Interventions in this regard were made by the representatives of Chad on behalf of the LDC Group, Cameroon, China, the European Union, Mexico, Norway, the Russian Federation, South Africa and the United States.
	•	date of the next meeting
&& The Chairman said that the next meeting of the CTD Regular Session was tentatively scheduled to be held on Wednesday, 19 June 2019. An initial agenda would be circulated four weeks before the meeting, on 22 May 2019, as per the CTD's rules of procedure. After the circulation of this initial meeting notice, Members would still have the opportunity to request items on the agenda for the meeting. The agenda would close on 6 June 2019, and would be circulated on 7 June 2019. 
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
