WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/38
10 July 2002

(02-3842)

Committee on Trade and Development
Thirty-eighth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 14 FEBRUARY 2002

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Nathan Irumba (Uganda)

Subjects discussed:

 TOC \O "1-8" A.	ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA	 PAGEREF _TOC13976828 \H 2
B.	OBSERVERS	 PAGEREF _TOC13976829 \H 2
(i)	Request For Attendance For Ad Hoc Observers	 PAGEREF _Toc13976830 \h 2
(ii)	Further Consideration of request for observer status by League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organisation for Industrial Consulting, the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities	 PAGEREF _Toc13976831 \h 3
C.	COORDINATED WTO SECRETARIAT ANNUAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PLAN 2002 (WT/COMTD/W/95/REV.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC13976832 \H 3
D.	ELECTRONIC COMMERCE	 PAGEREF _TOC13976833 \H 19
(i)	Presentation of a Country Experience (Costa Rica)	 PAGEREF _Toc13976834 \h 19
(ii)	Preparation for a seminar	 PAGEREF _Toc13976835 \h 21
E.	INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT	 PAGEREF _TOC13976836 \H 22
F.	ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE FOR THE LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	 PAGEREF _TOC13976837 \H 23
G.	OTHER BUSINESS	 PAGEREF _TOC13976838 \H 24

ANNEX I  - Costa Rica's Experience in Electronic Commerce	25




ADOPTION OF THE DRAFT AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda of the meeting was contained in airgram WT/AIR/1702/Rev.1 of 7 February 2002.  He outlined the changes made in the revision of the airgram.  The Trade Negotiating Committee had agreed, on 1 February 2002, that the work on special and differential treatment stemming from the Doha Ministerial Meeting should be carried out in Special Sessions of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD).  The issue of special and differential treatment had therefore been taken off the agenda of the regular session of the CTD.  An invitation to a Special Session following the Regular Session of the Committee had been sent out after that decision on the assumption that a Chairman for the Special Session would have been selected in the General Council.  In the absence of a General Council decision on chairs the Chairman had consulted informally.  The Special Session would therefore be postponed until a chairperson had been elected.  An invitation to a Special Session of the CTD would be issued as soon as practicable.
He went on to say that after the meeting of the CTD on 22 January 2002 which had been entirely devoted to Technical Cooperation and Training, the WTO Secretariat had prepared a revision of the Technical Cooperation Plan and an Agenda item on Technical Cooperation had therefore been included on the Agenda.  The CTD would have normally elected its chairperson at the end of the first meeting of the year.  However, the Chairman of the General Council was still in the process of holding consultations on the slate of officers for the different WTO bodies.  As the CTD Chair could not be decided independently of the overall election of officers, the CTD would have to elect its chairperson for 2002 at its next regular session, scheduled for 23 April 2002 as the first substantial item on the agenda of that Meeting.  He further suggested that the election of chairperson for the Sub-Committee on Least Developed Counties also be deferred to the following Meeting.  He therefore proposed that Agenda Item C on the Election of Chairperson of the Committee on Trade and Development and Agenda Item E on the Election of Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on Least Developed Countries be postponed and put on the agenda of the next regular session.
The agenda was adopted with those changes.
OBSERVERS
Request For Attendance For Ad Hoc Observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of CTD it had been agreed to invite the following inter-governmental organizations on an ad hoc meeting by meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Corporation Organization (ECO), the Inter-Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference, (OIC) the South Centre, the South Pacific Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He proposed that those Organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of CTD and that, in view of the forthcoming special sessions of the Committee on special and differential treatment, those Organizations be invited to any formal session held before the next regular session.
It was so agreed.

Further Consideration of request for observer status by League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organisation for Industrial Consulting, the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman stated that at previous Sessions there had been a number of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organization International de la Francophonie and from the Common Fund for Commodities.  He recalled that such observer status would be on an ad hoc basis. the positions of Members were well known and on the record he proposed that the Committee revert to those requests at the next formal meeting.
&& The representative of the European Commission said that his delegation had been consistent in being flexible on the issue of observership.  His delegation deplored that the Organization International de la Francophonie could not take part in the meetings, given that organization's clear focus on trade-related technical assistance and the programmes which it implemented.
&& The representative of Guinea agreed with the statement made by the representative of the EC and hoped that Members would adopt a more flexible attitude in that regard in future. 
The Committee decided to revert to the outstanding requests for observership at its next meeting and took note of the statements made.  

COORDINATED WTO SECRETARIAT ANNUAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE PLAN 2002 (WT/COMTD/W/95/REV.1)
&& The Chairman stated that the Annual Technical Assistance Plan discussed at the meeting of 22 January 2002 had received many comments from delegations.  The Secretariat had revised the Plan accordingly.  That  revision was contained in document WT/COMT/W/95/Rev.1, dated 6 February 2002. 
&& Deputy Director-General Mr. Paul-Henri Ravier welcomed the continued dialogue that the Secretariat had had with Members and said that his remarks built on the report by the Director‑General to the General Council on 13 February 2002 under the item "Other business".
He continued by saying that there were two broad questions to address.  First, the question of the implementation of the Plan, and second, the question of how much it would cost.  In response to the first question he had seven specific remarks:
The implementation of the Secretariat-wide Plan for 2002 had began on 1 January 2002.  The CTD had taken note of the Technical Assistance Plan (document WT/COMTD/W/95) at its last meeting on 22 January 2002.  The operational activities were being implemented on the basis of the New Strategy which had been welcomed and endorsed by Ministers in paragraph 38 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  Implementation of the Plan had been preceded by exhaustive, bilateral and plurilateral consultations between the Secretariat and the Members, and the Secretariat remained in continuous dialogue with Members and welcomed the advice it was receiving 
Second, and linked to implementation was the fact that over the past six weeks more than 30 activities had been executed.  It was to be noted, that planned activities in several cases had to be postponed, some at the request of the beneficiary country concerned and others, in order to be able to respond to emergency ad hoc missions related to notifications to be executed within a mandatory time-frame.  Officials in the Technical Cooperation Division were in contact with delegations in the regions of their responsibility in order to identify definite dates and venues for execution of the planned activities.  The rate of implementation was and equally dependent on the beneficiary countries as the Secretariat and providers of assistance.
Third, the Revision of the Plan contained in document WT/COMTD/W/95/Rev.1. had been issued to respond to Members' comments and observations during the last meeting.  The Secretariat would issue revisions to the Plan when even necessary.  These were transitional years for WTO Technical Cooperation and the Secretariat continued to explore optimal strategies for how to best respond to the new and unprecedented development agenda established at Doha Ministerial Conference.  The Secretariat's approach was stated in paragraph 2 of the Plan and the Secretariat would continue to be guided by superior advice, which commanded consensus.
Fourth, Members would certainly agree with the dynamic and evolving nature of the Plan.  He insisted that both the Plan and its implementation were work in progress.  That would ensure that it met the needs of both providers of resources and of beneficiaries.  Since the last meeting, the Secretariat had consulted with several regional and subregional groupings, such as CARICOM in order to fine tune and focus the Plan more precisely around the needs of the beneficiaries.  The Secretariat expressed its appreciation to the CARICOM Group for their positive and constructive suggestions on the fine tuning of the Plan to better respond to the needs of the Latin American and Caribbean region.
Fifth, consultations had been held or were in progress with multilateral agencies to identify the complementary contributions that they could make.  On 25 January 2002 the Secretariat had held interagency consultations with the World Bank, OECD and UNCTAD.  The purpose of those had been to develop enhanced interagency co‑operation on technical cooperation and capacity-building in the field of competition policy, to explain the Doha mandate to other agencies in that regard, and to seek their support and cooperation in its fulfilment.  The Secretariat had exchanged experiences on the best way of meeting the needs of developing countries.  Discussions on each organization's specific technical cooperation plans had led to the identification of specific opportunities for cooperation and coordination among the organizations.  The inter-agency meeting was considered successful by the participating agencies.  The invited agencies had underlined their support for enhanced cooperation to meet the requirements of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  The Secretariat had been able to identify complementarities between the types of technical assistance provided by the different organizations, and advantage would be taken of that complementarity.  A significant number of specific possibilities for cooperation in the form of joint activities, mutual support for each others activities, and coordinated activities had been identified, especially with UNCTAD.  It had also been agreed that interagency cooperation had to be viewed as an ongoing process and that representatives of the various organizations would remain in contact with each other on a regular basis to exchange information on coming events.  The Secretariat was in the process of following-up with each of the organizations to work out the practical details.  Further information on capacity-building for trade and competition policy in accordance with the objectives set out in Annex 1 of the Plan would be provided at the informal meeting of the Working Group on the Interaction Between Trade and Competition Policy on 26 February 2002.  The second example was of the Working Group on Trade and Investment which had already held an informal meeting to examine the issue of technical assistance and capacity-building in its specific area with the substantive participation of the UNCTAD Secretariat.  More information would be provided as soon as possible on consultations with UNCTAD in that regard.  The third example was that the Secretariat had convened a meeting with several agencies and the key providers of technical assistance on 19 February 2002 to define the structure, parameters and categories for the WTO Technical Assistance Database that would be used to provide information to Members on trade-related technical assistance activities by beneficiary countries and by donor countries in accordance with the Doha Ministerial mandate.  More information would be provided by the Secretariat at a subsequent meeting of the CTD.  Finally, the Director-General had convened a meeting of Integrated Framework Heads of Agencies in Washington on 26 February 2002, which would be hosted by Mr. Wolfensohn, the President of the World Bank.  The WTO Director-General would host a joint meeting of the WTO African Group and the Least-Developed Countries Consultative Group on 19 February 2002 to seek their advice in advance of the IF heads of Agencies meeting.  The Heads of Agency meeting would focus inter alia on the implementation of the IF pilot scheme and its extension to other countries.  A report would be made to the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries after that meeting.
The Pledging Conference for the Doha Developmental Agenda Trust Fund had been scheduled for 11 March 2002.  He hoped to have Ministerial participation at that event and mentioned that invitations had been circulated to all Members.  He said that the Secretariat appealed to donors and invited agencies to ensure that the Pledging Conference would be a success.  Success would maintain the post-Doha momentum on the central issue of Technical Cooperation and Capacity-Building.
He emphasized that the Annual Plan could not respond to all the needs of the beneficiary countries.  The Plan was only one out of five basic elements in the overall architecture for responding to the Doha Mandate on Technical Cooperation and Capacity-Building. 
He recalled that those were the interagency strategic partnerships on which he had reported before.  Strategic partnerships with the bilateral donors, strategic partnerships with regional banks, regional institutions and commissions, the integrated framework for responding to the specific needs and priorities of the LDCs, the WTO trade-related technical assistance database which he mentioned, and the Secretariat Annual Plan for responding to the short-term needs focused inter alia on WTO Agreements, building knowledge on the Agreements, explaining obligations, identifying the rights and enhancing trade negotiations and policy capacity.  In light of the remarks and what was foreseen as rapid developments in the implementation of WTO technical assistance the Secretariat would inform Members periodically about developments of the Plan.
&& Deputy Director-General Mr. Andrew Stoler addressed the second of the questions, informing Members of developments related to the costing of the Plan, notably in light of the Pledging Conference.  He hoped that the figures, taken together with the details provided to delegations in documents related to the Coordinated Annual Plan and its Annex 1, would provide Members with basic information that they needed to prepare their authorities' positions in advance of the Pledging Conference for the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund.  He began with the costing of the activities that were covered by the 2002 Plan.  Nearly all of the activities were known to the Secretariat when they prepared the estimates that were used to arrive at the CHF 15 million figure which had subsequently been agreed by Members as the target for the 2002 Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund.  The costing that had been arrived at for those activities in 2002 based on the 456 activities in the Plan and came to approximately CHF 14.9 million.  The costing was arrived at by taking the following elements into account.  First the estimated costs of the activities themselves was about CHF 16.1 million.  That amount had then been reduced on account of cost sharing arrangements with other intergovernmental organizations that the WTO Secretariat anticipated arriving at, in particular, with respect to the regional activities.  The reduction in the cost because of this to the WTO came to about CHF 2.9 million.  In addition, the programme support fund cost of CHF 1.7 million had to be added.  The consolidated total cost then came to CHF 14,886,376.  In arriving at those figures the Secretariat had applied standard costing methodologies assigning different standard costs for a one day of activity for one person, depending upon whether the activity was classed as a regional activity, a national activity or a miscellaneous activity taking place in Geneva with the last one actually being the most expensive because it usually implied bringing in speakers and participants from outside of Geneva.
He went on to say that the figures were consistent with the earlier estimate of the need for approximately CHF 15 million in contributions for use in 2002.  However, since the General Council had agreed on the CHF 15 million level for the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund, a number of additional activities had been identified and costed.  Most of those activities were described in Annex 1 to WT/COMTD/W/95/Rev.1.  The additional activities and their estimated costs were the following.  First, there were future activities of the WTO Training Institute which had not been covered by the regular budget in 2002 and those activities would require around CHF 300,000.  Secondly, there was technical assistance relating to trade and investment where there was an additional amount contributed to the project of CHF 1.8 million expected from UNCTAD.  The share due to the WTO was based on what was in Annex 1 and was about 2 million Swiss francs in 2002.  The third category of additional expenses related to technical assistance with regard to trade and competition policy and amounted to CHF 250,000 for the year 2002.  Finally there were CHF 331,500 of programme support funds associated with that extra Annex 1 activity so that the consolidated total that would be reached with the Annex 1 activities would be an additional CHF 2,881,5000.  It was estimated that all the projects taken together would involve a cost to the WTO, over and above the regular budget available for technical cooperation, of about CHF 16.3 million.  About 19 per cent of that amount would be devoted to national activities, about 76 per cent to regional activities and the remainder to expenses on the tools which were identified in Section 6 of WT/COMTD/W/95/Rev.1.  The Secretariat wished to see pledges to the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund in 2002 for about CHF 16.3 million and reminded delegations that the Secretariat would be covering a considerable amount of WTO staff technical‑assistance related travel through CHF 1.5 million provided for the regular budget for that purpose.
&& The Chairman said that by its very nature a "Plan" was a plan and its realization was determined by the resources available for its implementation.
&& The representative of Venezuela said that the document corresponded to the variety of topics for negotiation mentioned in the Doha Ministerial Declaration for negotiations and future work.  However, it concentrated more on traditional items of the commercial agenda and relatively few activities were devoted to the Singapore issues.  The document enumerated many organizations that were going to cooperate in the activities, some of which were subregional.  She said that complementarity with UNCTAD had not been mentioned in any of the activities being planned for Latin America.  It was her understanding that the Technical Assistance Plan presented by UNCTAD’s Secretary-General, Mr. Ricupero, referred to cooperation with other bodies, in particular with the WTO.  Delegations wished to see more cooperation between agencies and it would therefore have been timely if the WTO assistance plan had foreseen joint activities with UNCTAD.  Her delegation was convinced that the two institutions' somewhat different mandates would not give rise to duplication of efforts and would benefit Members.  On several occasions the WTO technical assistance activities in the Andean countries and in Venezuela had been prepared jointly with UNCTAD and had given rise to excellent results.  It was important that that positive experience of cooperation, which her delegation understood to be also true for Africa, be repeated in the Latin American region.  There should be more cooperation between UNCTAD and the WTO in the activities foreseen at the regional level in the areas of services, agriculture, environment and the new issues. She sought clarification on the implications of paragraph 2.2 of the document which refered to the efficient coordination of technical assistance with multilateral agencies and the consequences of the word synergy in that context.  She asked whether the technical assistance resources being earmarked for joint activities with UNCTAD could be requested by individual delegations also.  With regard the list of activities she said that it was necessary to consult with the Members before defining the programmes and the topics, as stated in paragraph 3(iii) of the Secretariat’s document.  It was also important that countries participated in the organization of the activities so as to better reflect the interests and the needs of each country. 
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation wished to continue to consult with the Secretariat in order to make the Plan a better one.  It was good that the Secretariat had already entered into consultation with other agencies in order to coordinate the efforts and share costs.  His Government was studying ways to contribute to the Global Trust Fund, which he felt should also cover the technical assistance and capacity building activities on the so-called Singapore issues, especially on trade and investment.  He believed that the document had been improved.  It clearly showed a linkage between technical assistance activities and the Doha Development Agenda.  However, there was room for the further improvement.
&& The representative of Cuba said that she was fully aware of the importance that Ministers at the Doha Ministerial Conference had attributed to technical assistance and capacity-building.  It was referred to in over ten paragraphs in the Ministerial Declaration and it emphasised that technical assistance and capacity-building should be guaranteed and predictable.  Her delegation urged the donors to make the necessary contributions so that a comprehensive plan could be carried out that satisfied the needs of all Members.  Her delegation was satisfied with the coordination between the WTO and other specialized agencies, in particular with UNCTAD.  That would avoid duplication of efforts and would be able to better tap available resources in other organizations.  She approved of coordinated activities, particularly in dealing with the Singapore topics, as well as regarding the database.  The database was of fundamental importance for developing countries so that they could better understand and hence be able to participate more fully in negotiations on market access.  There was a need for greater coordination of efforts with UNCTAD with a view to derive more benefits from the resources available in that organization.  Although technical assistance was not the solution to the problems which developing countries faced, it would clearly assist them in providing a better understanding of the different topics, many of which were relatively new.
&& The representative of Zambia said that the Plan was well structured and the activities clear and interesting.  His delegation believed that in order for technical assistance and capacity-building to effectively support developing countries' participation in the negotiations it had to meet specific criteria.  It should be designed in accordance with developing country needs and agendas.  The Zanzibar Declaration provided clear guidelines in that regard.  Secondly, his delegation believed that it had to encompass different topics on the trade agenda in a comprehensive manner.  The key was that it be linked to Members developmental goals.  Thirdly, it should recognize the need for identifying and pursuing common interests in negotiations, particularly through support to the regional and subregional integration agreements, and in particular to LDCs.  He went on to say that he was aware that the WTO could deliver just one type of technical assistance, one which was focused on trade rules and the implementation of trade agreements.  He believed such technical assistance to be in accordance with the WTO's mandate.  At the same time, in light of WTO's limited mandate his delegation could not expect any technical assistance activities to be able to help his Government identity its interests in the negotiations.  That was something that had been acknowledged even by the Secretariat itself.  Other agencies had to be actively involved in providing different perspectives and options so that delegations' positions could be based on an understanding of the various possibilities.  One size fits all assistance and standardized products would have limited impact.  That was why an intense cooperation with other agencies had to be included in the formulation of any WTO assistance programme.  He noted the section devoted to the Integrated Framework and the reference made on page 4 to "mainstreaming" and asked for clarification on the practical implications of channelling assistance on trade negotiations through the IF and the precise meaning of the terms "Mainstreaming" and "synergies"'.   Those questions related to the role of the IF in trade negotiations.  His delegation looked forward to receiving clear indications from the WTO Secretariat on the substantive content of the list of seminars and missions indicated in the Plan. They had to be explained in terms of objectives and modalities.  He hoped that in the future, more attention would be paid to a balanced distribution of programmes.
&& The representative of India mentioned that capacity-building extended to beyond holding of seminars and would require a long-term commitment.  Capacity among developing countries was not equal.  Many developing countries would have to start from zero.  The pace of expansion of WTO activities should take the capacity of developing countries into account.  In the delivery of technical assistance the Secretariat should explore the possibilities of making use of other institutions, particularly those which specialized in international trade and economic relations.  Certain institutions had a good understanding of the situation in developing countries and would be able to better design specific codes for developing countries.  In that respect the training of trainers in developing countries was important as such training would have a multiplier effect.  He recalled the 16 January 2002 meeting of CTD, where his delegation had made some comments.  He felt that those observations had not been taken on board in the revised document prepared by the Secretariat.  His delegation had pointed out that in some instances when the Doha Ministerial Declaration had been recalled, phrases had been added by the Secretariat which gave a wrong impression and had the effect of changing the balance in the Ministerial Declaration.  His delegation suggested that where specific paragraphs of the Doha Ministerial Declaration had been referred to, the exact language of the paragraph should be used without any revision.  He drew attention to paragraphs 4 and 5 of the Document as well as Annex 1, in which it had been suggested that the Singapore issues had a certain hierarchy.  His delegation did not see any specific hierarchy mentioned in the Doha Ministerial Declaration which gave either the Singapore issues or environment, a higher priority.  Market access issues were equally important, if not more important.  Paragraph 11 mentioned that the principle rationale of merging the WTO Development and Economic Research divisions was to adjust the Secretariat to address the development and technical cooperation and capacity-building mandates through research activities to provide factual and analytical information.  His delegation found no mention of such studies in the Plan which only focused on national seminars, regional seminars and workshops and training courses.  Analytical studies would assist developing countries in better understanding the various aspects involved in the post-Doha negotiations phase.  Paragraph 1 of Annex 1 of the raised Plan mentioned that  the Secretariat's Annual Plan for technical assistance contained activities focusing in particular on Singapore issues, so as to better prepare Members for negotiations.  Technical assistance and capacity-building was intended to create awareness among the developing countries and LDCs about the implications of a multilateral framework of rules in any area and to enable them to take a decision at the Fifth Ministerial Conference when the issues relating to the start of negotiations and modalities would come up for a decision.  That was clearly noted in paragraph 21 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration and any technical assistance should clearly state that the objective was to enable developing countries and LDCs to better evaluate the implication of closer multilateral cooperation for their developmental policies and objectives and human and institution development rather than what had been mentioned in the document provided by the Secretariat.  He requested that his delegations concerns which had also been mentioned in the previous meeting be taken into account in order for his delegation to agree to the document.  The first paragraph of Annex 2 mentioned that in paragraph 31 to 33 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, Members had agreed to negotiations, even though this reference existed only in paragraph 31.  He requested the Secretariat to revise the document accordingly.
Referring back to Annex 1 in the trade and investment part he went on to say that the Secretariat and Deputy Director-General Ravier had mentioned that this was work in progress which would be further elaborated and developed in consultation with other international agencies like UNCTAD.  Analytical studies which would help developing countries understand various aspects of trade and investment could be included in that section.  An analytical study of trade and investment would assist developing countries to participate effectively in regional seminars and national workshops that related to the topic.  He referred to footnote 2 of the table in Annex 5 which showed the number of planned activities by region.  His delegation felt that an activity could then be categorised under" LDC activities" even if only one LDC was participating.  That footnote should then read "Activities held in one LDC or, in the case of regional activities, those activities to which at least 50 per cent of the participants were LDCs'.  It was consequently necessary to recalculate the figures in the column on the extreme right of the table.  In conclusion he referred to paragraph 5, subparagraph 6, which related to technical assistance for non-residents.  It was essential that non-Geneva based Missions were kept abreast of the negotiations.  Minutes of formal and informal meetings in the negotiating phase should therefore be sent to the non-resident Missions.  It would also assist Geneva-based delegations that were not able to participate in particular meetings.  Those concerns had to be taken on board in order for his delegation to agree to the document. 
&& The representative of the European Commission said that through the Plan was a good basis for future work, it still needed some more improvement.  He pointed out that the Plan was important as it was the reflection of what the WTO would need to do in response to the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  In addition, the Plan was an operational document for the expenditure to be incurred under the Doha Trust Fund.  His delegation therefore attached importance for the Plan to be approved at the earliest so that it could be used as a basis for the Pledging Conference on 11 March 2002.  He said he believed that more should be done to clearly address the Doha commitments.  He would appreciate if the activities which responded to the individual paragraphs of the Declaration were made more apparent.  The column which had been added to the Annex which pointed to the relevant paragraph was a good start but did not allow delegations to understand what was being done in the different specific areas.  For instance, he suggested that what was being done on implementation should be clearly defined.  Paragraph 14 of the Implementation Decision adopted at the Doha Ministerial Conference made implementation a priority of WTO's work on technical assistance and capacity-building.  He said that his delegation agreed that the WTO should cooperate closely with other international agencies and noted the work was under way in this regard.  The WTO should also cooperate with bilateral donors, with training institutes and other activists in the field.  That could be worked out in greater detail.  The Plan still gave the impression that almost everything was being done by the WTO itself, which he felt was not the intention at the outset.  His delegation attached importance to effective coordination between the WTO, other agencies in Geneva and across the Atlantic, and with the main donors.  He said he thought that the WTO could build on the experience which the ITC had in sectors such as SPS and TBT.  He asked if the Secretariat had given more thought as to what could be done on-line rather than sending officials abroad.  He pointed out that in training institutes in Europe, in management institutions and in universities, a lot of training was done on-line and that was experiences the WTO could build on.  He went on to say that it was his delegation's understanding that many of the short missions and the participation of WTO officials in meetings should not have been listed one by one.  That inflated the number of activities.  The 450 or so activities listed would appear to be exaggerated if every single mission of a WTO official was regarded as a capacity-building or technical assistance activity.  The Plan had to give full attention to the Singapore issues.  Annex 1 of the document was superficial and did not, for example, reflect recent cooperation between UNCTAD and WTO on investment.  The Singapore issues was an area where negotiating capacity for developing countries was crucial and he hoped that this could be reflected in the document.   With respect to the costing he noted that the Plan as such did not provide any figures.  He was therefore grateful for DDG Stoler's input.  However, Members had to get an idea of the total figures distributed among the different activities.  The Plan itself should have given a clearer idea of the cost of different activities.  That should include a better idea of the importance attached to the Singapore issues as well as a clearer view of WTO participation in activities which were jointly carried out with other international organizations.  Finally he said he agreed with Deputy Director-General Ravier that the Plan had to be dynamic and that it had to evolve with the experience which was being gained.  His delegation would favour a clear arrangement which would allow the Secretariat and the Members to keep track of how the plan was being implemented.  His delegation was ready to assist the Secretariat in every way and was confident that in doing so the Plan could be endorsed in the future.
&& The representative of the United States said that she appreciated the effort the Secretariat had made in further revising the Annual Plan and appreciated that Deputy Director-General Ravier had clarified the understanding that the Secretariat was still not looking for an approval of the document.  Her delegation looked forward to participating in the discussions with the Budget Committee, and appreciate Deputy Director-General Stoler's information on costings.  Her delegation's understanding was that the Plan reflected Members' requests for assistance which had resulted in the compilation of activities that the Secretariat was planning.  The Plan did not provide a qualitative basis on which to measure the effectiveness of the activities undertaken, nor to understand precisely what kind of assistance was being provided and the link to particular objectives, whether based on commitments taken at the Doha Ministerial Conference, or objectives based on already existing commitments.  One of the points that had been made by the recipients in other meetings was that general seminars might not be the most appropriate way to in deliver technical assistance.  She recognized that what might work in one country or region might not work in others.  Delegations had also mentioned that their different levels of development in different fields meant that the assistance provided might have to vary from issue to issue and agreement to agreement.  She was anxious to hear further from others about how the assistance worked on the ground.  She suggested that, to further enhance the objectives in the document, the CTD should authorise its Chairperson to consult with chairpersons of other WTO bodies, committees and negotiating groups with a technical assistance element to find out if those various bodies would put technical assistance and capacity building as a regular item on their agendas in order for delegations to be regularly updated and for linkages to be made as the activities proceeded rather than having an end of the year rush to pull together what existed, what was happening and what might need to be done.  Her delegation had already found that in the past years various WTO bodies dealt with technical assistance.  That would become even more diverse with the  new negotiating structures.  Other WTO bodies had been carrying out hands on technical assistance and had been working well with other organizations, standards organizations, and customs organizations and had provided effective technical assistance.  The preparation that had been done in the SPS area was a good example.  It would be critical that the CTD maintained a link with the other bodies to make it easier for Members to evaluate the technical assistance activities during the ongoing year and the coming ones.
She went on to say that the revised Plan contained improvements, such as the chart linking some of the activities to paragraphs of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  Trade facilitation was mentioned only a few times in the various listings even though.  Her delegation knew from bilateral discussions that a number of governments had requested assistance in the area of trade facilitation.  However, she recognized that the listings only represented requests which had been made.  Nevertheless notwithstanding what Members had in the Doha Ministerial Declaration, assistance in the area of trade facilitation was something that the WTO should coordinate with other agencies.  She agreed with the Ambassador of Zambia on the importance of coordination with other multilateral agencies.  More thought should be put into what other organizations could contribute to in joint efforts.  She emphasized that a certain amount of bilateral technical assistance was always available globally and appreciated the setting up of a database that would make it easy for beneficiaries to know exactly what was being provided bilaterally.  A lot of the bilateral assistance was directly trade-related.  However, her delegation had sometimes found that representatives of different beneficiaries might not always be aware of the assistance provided on the ground.  There was a need for more coordination on the ground to recognize the linkages.  More could be done on-line and that this might be useful for providing some training on-line, a tool she said should be explored.  On the issue of the Pledging Conference, her delegation sought clarification on whether Ministers were expected to attend.  She also asked for updated information regarding who was invited.  In other meetings, delegations had indicated they wished to contribute in kind.  All contributions were equally important and it should be ensured that the Pledging Conference was inclusive in this respect.  The focus of the Conference was on the Global Trust Fund and her Government was ready to make its contribution of US$1 million and was in the process of discussing with the Secretariat the transfer of other funds into that pool.
&& The representative of Norway said that her country would be interested in continuing discussions on how the Plan evolved. Her delegation sought a coordinated approach to technical assistance and wished to avoid overlap, duplication and any differences between international organizations and other bodies, about which agency was most competent in the different areas.  It had to be ensured that everything was covered and that there was no lacunae.  It was important that the Plan and the proposed activities were clear, as should be their connection to the commitments made at the Doha Ministerial Conference.  She said that many delegations had stressed the importance of coordination with other multilateral institutions, but it was important that Members knew which those organizations were.  The database would be important in that context as it would provide information  about who was doing what.  It was not only UNCTAD which carried out activities of interest.  Members should give thought to the suggestion made to have technical assistance dealt with on the agendas of the different bodies as they had a more hands on approach to the questions concerned.  It was important that the programme be followed up and that it be made as concrete as possible.  She said that her delegation had asked itself what the WTO’s role would be in the IF process and what the follow-up should be.  She felt that there seemed to be an imbalance in the distribution of activities in the Plan.  She noted what the delegation of India had said on Annex 5, and agreed that issue should be looked into.  She continued by saying that when it came to identifying the activities that addressed the different commitments in Doha Ministerial Declaration, it was important that there was more focus on the Singapore issues, than the Plan currently seemed to have.  It was also important because the Plan was a living document and as delegations went into negotiations and analysis of the different issues there would be more demands from delegations for assistance in those areas.
&& The representative of Tunisia said his delegation welcomed the new changes introduced in the Plan in light of the observations made by delegations in the last meeting of the CTD, in particular regarding the link between the Plan and the Doha Ministerial Declaration. His delegation supported what had been said by the delegations from Venezuela, Cuba and the Ambassador of Zambia for more cooperation with international organizations, in particular with UNCTAD since that organization had a long experience in the field of trade.  He was concerned as his Government's requests had not being taken fully into consideration, since the activity planned to take place in Tunisia in the previous plan, had apparently been removed in the revised version.  He requested the Secretariat to provide an explanation, preferably in written form.
&& The representative of Belize said he thought it was critical to ensure that what was delivered corresponded to the needs of the Members.  However, Members had an important role to play in that regard.  The technical assistance to be provided over the next two to three years seemed to involve a range of interconnected activities of both donors and partners.  That raised the question of how the divergent expectations could be assessed and how those divergences would be addressed.  That was critical in ensuring the success of the WTO’s Technical Assistance Plan.  It was important to consider what would happen in the period subsequent to the capacity-building phase.  He was concerned that a number of Members who were eager to integrate their respective trade strategies into the multilateral trading system in a fashion that would allow them to realize their respective development objectives, would be faced with various constraints.  Members expressing a will to integrate should be provided with opportunities and support to do so.  He suggested an analysis of the constraints of trade, in particular of how it related to the developmental needs and interests of the countries that would benefit from technical assistance and capacity-building.  He said that he had only raised this issue as a way of identifying means of identifying how those countries could be facilitated in further integrating into the multinational trading system.  He supported the suggestion made by the representative of the United States of having the Chairman coordinate with the Chairmen of other bodies to ensure that there was homogeneity with regards to the delivery of technical assistance.
&& The representative of Malaysia said that the language in Annex 1 of the Plan gave the impression that Members had already agreed that negotiations would take place on the Singapore issues.  He said that that was a decision for the Members to take.  The matter should not be prejudged by the Secretariat because, according to the Doha Ministerial Declaration, it was clear that Members were to decide on how and what they would do with the Singapore issues at the Fifth Ministerial Conference.   Delegations could not, at this point in time, accept that it be stated that the technical assistance provided should be geared towards negotiations in those issues.  He agreed with the proposal that there should be coordination between the Committee and the other bodies in the WTO so that Members knew what each body was doing, in order to avoid duplication of technical assistance.  He asked whether there was a deadline for agreeing to a final document in view of the imminent holding of the Pledging Conference.  The Plan should be finalized as soon as possible and scheduled activities should not be put on hold.  He add that these activities could be implemented even though the document had not been approved.  He further asked that if a final CTD document was approved by the General Council, did it mean that no further requests could be made for technical assistance, or if, since it was a living document, changes, amendments and additions could still be made as Governments needs changed.  He stressed that the possibility to change the Plan through the course of the year should exist.  In addition he sought clarification as  to whether, when further changes were made, the costing would be adjusted accordingly and how a possible shortfall in available resources would be dealt with.  In connection to what had been said concerning the role of other international organizations he believed that information on the work being undertaken by other international organizations would be helpful.  As most technical assistance to his Government was channelled through the WTO, information on other agencies in Malaysia which may have requested technical assistance directly from other international organizations, would be useful.  The WTO’s role would therefore be a clearing-house of some kind.  He asked if the activities of other international organizations were to be included in the document, would it be for information only, or if the WTO would have an overseeing role so that Members would have to go through the WTO to request assistance from other international organizations.
&& The representative of China noted the remarks made by Mr. Ravier with respect to cooperation between the WTO and other international organizations, including the relevant UN bodies, in delivering technical cooperation to developing country Members.  Such cooperation and partnerships were important as the organizations carried out complementary activities.  Members should  make full use of the comparative advantages of all international organizations.   He referred to the tables in the Plan and sought clarification regarding the content of the fourth column entitled "Cooperation with".  He said that, for example, on page 31 projects for Cambodia had been listed, while in the fourth column it was mentioned that this would be in cooperation with UNCTAD.  He was unsure whether that activity was sponsored by the WTO with the cooperation of the UNCTAD Secretariat or whether it was sponsored by UNCTAD with the cooperation of the WTO Secretariat.  That had to be made clear, otherwise it would create a precedent as to which other activities might be included in the tables.  He concluded by saying that there could be amendments to the Plan later and that there could always be room for improvement during its implementation.  There was therefore no need to continue to work on revisions as it would be too time-consuming.  A Plan was a Plan and there was no such thing as a perfect Plan.  The Secretariat had to be given a certain amount of flexibility in its implementation of the Plan.  
&& The representative of Ghana sought clarification on Section 3 entitled "African Countries and JITAP".  He pointed out that only eight African countries were beneficiaries of the JITAP and the JITAP had its own activities.  The programme would in principle end in June 2002, although it might be extended.  He asked if the title implied that the activities in the technical assistance Plan for countries which were beneficiaries of JITAP would be carried out within the framework of the JITAP.  If that was the case, the Missions should have been alerted to tell their Governments to adjust the activities of the JITAP in cooperation with the executing agencies of which WTO was a prominent one.  
&& The representative of Switzerland said he had five brief points.  Firstly, he said that his delegation was satisfied with the share of technical activities directed to the LDCs, which represented 50 per cent of the total.  However, he supported the suggestion made by the representative of India that the figure might be deceiving.  He asked the Secretariat to assure that the share of 50 per cent in favour of LDCs was established.  Secondly, his delegation supported the view expressed that all areas identified in the Doha Ministerial Declaration for technical assistance should be supported equally from the Global Trust Fund, including the Singapore issues.  Thirdly, his delegation was concerned about how the Members could provide support to the Secretariat in its endeavours.  He explicitly called for the ad hoc requests to be limited to the barest minimum.  Fourthly, he asked whether the large number of activities planned could really be carried out with the in-house staff available.  It was still an open question to Members as how the priorities should be established if it became clear that all the activities could not be carried out with the human resources at the disposal in the Secretariat.  Lastly, he said his delegation hoped to receive information on the work and methodology of the newly created unit of the Technical Cooperation Audit.
&& The representative of Canada said her delegation recognized that further work was required and supported the proposal for linkages with other WTO bodies by having them put technical assistance and capacity-building on their agenda.  She welcomed the first efforts to deliver on the Plan and cooperate with other organizations.  There were many appropriate and important organizations that should be mentioned in the Plan such as  UNCTAD, UNEP, FAO, WIPO, UNIDO, APEC, IDB, the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank.  The Heads of Agency meeting of the Integrated Framework was a good idea in that respect.  However, she recalled that the IF was a tripartite relationship between the agencies, the donors and the LDCs and said that it might be appropriate to invite at least the Chair of the IF Steering Committee, and/or the two donor and two LDC representatives to attend that meeting as the perspectives of all should be heard.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that technical cooperation and capacity-building were core activities of the WTO as confirmed by the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  The negotiations agreed at the Doha Ministerial Conference and the recommendation of continuing the work programme on the Singapore issues and other subjects made it crucial that an effective technical assistance and capacity-building strategy be put in place.  The Coordinated WTO Secretariat Annual Technical Assistance Plan for 2002 was a testimony of the fact that the Secretariat attached importance to technical assistance and capacity-building.  The Revised Plan appeared to be a good basis.  However, even if technical assistance and capacity-building were important, they were only one side of the development dimension of the multilateral trading system.  More important was the need to inject a development dimension into the rules and disciplines, both in the existing ones and in those which Members would agree on in the future.  There should be no presumption of any negotiations on issues on which there was no Ministerial mandate.  He therefore supported the views expressed by the representative of India.  Suggestions made by the representative of the United States regarding on-line training were good and merited consideration.  He said he was surprised that other WTO bodies had not been consulted in the preparation of the Plan.  There was a need for maintaining greater  coordination with other WTO bodies in order for Members to get effective assistance from the Plan.  He went on to say that one-day seminars might not be the best way to achieve the desired goal.  In that regard, the importance of objective and analytic research studies and hands-on training could not be over-emphasized.  He looked forward to a final document which would take into account the concerns expressed by the various delegations.   He concluded by saying that all Members were allocating resources, both human and financial, for the implementation of the activities, and he hoped that the Secretariat would put in place some sort of auditing or monitoring system which would ensure the effectiveness of the Plan and enable periodic evaluations of its effectiveness.
&& The representative of Egypt asked for clarification with respect to the three other levels of technical cooperation.  The response to his question might respond to some of the concerns raised by others with respect to the cooperation with UNCTAD.  The second level of cooperation was referred to in the second indent of paragraph 2 on page 3 of the revised Plan.  He asked whether a document would be published by the WTO regarding that level of cooperation as well as regarding the cooperation with the OECD mentioned in subparagraph 4 of paragraph 2.  He said that he was aware that UNCTAD had already drafted a document regarding technical cooperation with respect to the Doha Ministerial Declaration and he believed that that document had been drafted in close cooperation with the WTO Secretariat.  If he had understood the Plan, it referred exclusively to activities to be delivered by the WTO Secretariat, and as was stated in the document "to an extent in coordination with multilateral agencies with related competence".  If everything was taken together delegations would get a complete view of all ongoing activities and the degree of coordination and cooperation that had been established among agencies.
&& The representative of Indonesia	said that his delegation shared the concern expressed by the delegations of India and Malaysia with regard to the wording in paragraph 1 of Annex 1 of the Plan.  He sought clarification on Annex 5 of the Plan which showed the number of planned activities per region.  The figures in one column gave the percentage of region over subtotal.  The percentage for the Asian/Pacific region was 20 per cent whereas the number of countries and the share of the world population located in the Asian/Pacific region was much larger.  He therefore asked what the rational for the 20 per cent figure was.
The Ambassador of Paraguay said that, even though the statements had been substantive, his delegation still felt that if the Committee continued to review the Coordinated WTO Technical Assistance Plan, they would reach the end of the year without developing countries having received the technical cooperation they needed in order to be able to participate in the work programme arising out of the Fourth Ministerial Conference.   His delegation wished to see the Plan enforced and believed that necessary adjustments could be introduced as its implementation progressed.  He quoted the Spanish saying  “perfection is the enemy of the good” as he believed that the Plan was already good.  A number of activities had been scheduled for February 2002, including one in Paraguay.  It was important to commence the activities already scheduled in the Plan and not to wait until the Plan was perfect.  It was better to enforce the Plan as it was and to introduce the adjustments as the need arose.
&& The representative of Bolivia said that he agreed with many of the comments made regarding improvements and felt that these could be introduced as the Plan was implemented.  If Members considered the ambitious objectives set out in the Doha Ministerial Declaration and felt that the assistance provided in the Plan would not meet their requirements, they could say so.  However, his delegation recognized that what was in the Plan was as much as could be reasonably expected from the WTO Secretariat.  The Plan did have a strong capacity strengthening and training component.  He agreed with other delegations about the need to start implementing the Plan at the earliest.  During the implementation of the seminars and courses in the Plan, it might be useful for developing countries if the WTO Secretariat could coordinate with other specialized agencies that had particular knowledge in the given areas.  It would be also important to ensure a multiplying effect in the beneficiary countries, by working in cooperation with local institutes that dealt with trade matters and with local training institutes.  That would not involve changing the guidelines of the Plan.  A multiplying effect could be achieved by finding different local entities that might be able to disseminate the information the WTO was providing.  If the Member concerned agreed, other methods such as the internet and other means to reach a broader public could be used.
&& Deputy Director General, Mr Andrew Stoler said that a question had been posed regarding whether it would be possible to fully cover some of the Singapore issues such as trade and investment in the global financial envelope.  He responded that this may be possible provided it was possible to marginally increase the CHF 15 million associated with the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund.  There might actually not even be a need for CHF 16.3 to achieve all activities as the Secretariat had been conservative in the estimates of what the cost-sharing arrangements would contribute. He said that delegations would recall that, at the end of 2001 the Secretariat had asked donors who had contributed money into the existing trust funds whether they would agree to roll over that money into the DDAGTF for 2002.  A number of them had agreed to do that.  Others had raised some queries.  However, it meant the fund was not starting from zero in terms of the amount that was needed at the Pledging Conference.  On the issue of having a more detailed ventilation of the figures given on a global basis, he said that the copies of his remarks which had been distributed referred to the standard used costing that the Secretariat had used in arriving at the estimates of costs of the individual activities.  It would show what the relative costs of the individual activities in the document were.  However, delegations would not be able to see what exactly the cost-sharing would be with some of the agencies with which there was a cooperative effort.  On the point raised about whether the figures could go up or not, his answer was clearly yes.  He said that the Secretariat saw the CHF 15 million or even the CHF 16.3 million as a conservative estimate of what would be the absolute minimum to accomplish the planned activities.  The numbers represented the minimum funding required for the existing set of planned activities.  If delegations were willing to contribute more to the Trust Fund through the pledging exercise, new activities could be identified, provided that the Secretariat had the capacity to deliver in terms of its own resources or outsourced resources.  Lastly, in response to what would happen in the event of a shortfall, he reminded delegations that it was in order to deal with exactly such a possibility that a buffer account of CHF 1 million had been provided for in the Global Trust Fund as agreed to in 2001 by the General Council.  That buffer account was intended to deal with a situation in which there was a temporary shortfall in contributions received from delegations.
&& Deputy Director-General, Mr Paul-Henri Ravier said that the status of the document was a procedural problem which needed clarification.  The  aim was not to spend the entire year to perfect the 2002 Plan but to implement it.  About 13 per cent of the working year had already elapsed and only 11 per cent of the activities had been carried out.  However, it was understandable since implementation was always slower early in any year.  Nevertheless, it was not desirable to delay implementation of the Plan any further.  He insisted that it was the Member's Plan, not the Secretariat’s.  Revision 1 of the Plan was actually the sixth or eighth version as the Plan had been developed through consultations between the Secretariat and the Members. Such consultations had been held since the end of November 2001.  Though the Plan could be improved on the basis of the remarks made by delegations, perfection may not be that easily achievable.  The aim should be to have a working document of the Committee.  He did not think that the objective should be to adopt the document formally on a consensus basis as that would delay its implementation.  It was true that the CTD had other commitments and there were other essential issues to be debated in the CTD.  It was not in the interest of the membership at large that the CTD became the management committee for technical assistance although that had not been the situation in the past.  No matter how important technical assistance had become as a result of the Doha Ministerial Conference, he did not believe that it was the mission of the CTD to be exclusively occupied with technical assistance.  Members should ideally take note of all the comments which had been made and for the Secretariat to remain open to further comments and remarks from the membership.  He agreed with the notion that a plan is a plan and by its very definition must be amenable to changes.  He said 10 to 15 per cent of the activities contained in the Plan would be cancelled in the course of the year for one reason or another and would be replaced by an equivalent number or a higher number of activities which were not yet planned.  If Members were locked into a Plan adopted by consensus, every time an activity was cancelled or added Members would have to meet in order to adjust the Plan.  He did not think that this was what anybody wished to see happen.
He went on to comment on the limitations and constraints in the Plan and its implementation.  The limitations belonged to three or four broad categories: the number of activities, the cost of the activities and the human resources that could be devoted to the activities.  The greater the number of activities the greater the cost and the greater the time devoted and therefore human resources required.  The basic features of the Plan was that the number of regional activities was much higher than in the past.  That had two direct consequences.  From a financial point of view, it costed more per activity though less in terms of human resources.  A regional activity was quite costly, even though a larger number of countries could be covered.  That was one of the characteristics of the Plan and that was one of the ways in which the Secretariat was able to address these limitations.  He took note of the suggestion that had been made regarding the implementation of on-line activities and said that the Secretariat would explore and take advantage of every possibility to use effective technological means in order to save time and money.  However, it was entirely dependent on technology in that respect which for instance meant that on-line would depend on the weakest element of the chain, which in many countries was often telecommunications capacity.  
Technical assistance had not begun on 1 January 2002;  it was really a continuous effort.  Therefore, neither in terms of activities nor in terms of coordination with other international agencies or with bilateral donors, had the Secretariat considered that it was starting from scratch.  It was because technical assistance was part of a continuum that the Secretariat had not indicated which activities responded to each individual article of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.   Members had also defined a number of needs prior to the Doha Ministerial Conference and there had to be continuity with respect to those activities.  However, the Secretariat had taken note of the fact that Members wished the Secretariat to link the activities to the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  He then went on to talk about coordination, indicating that there were different ways of pursuing coordination.  He however emphasized that from the very beginning, two-thirds of the WTO’s technical assistance activities had been carried out in co-operation with a number of organizations, one of which was UNCTAD, which he believed after regional development banks was the WTO's main partner.
&& Mr. Cheidu Osakwe, Director, Technical Cooperation Division said that it was possible to put the comments made into three categories:  first, any consensus that was apparent in the remarks made  by Members;  secondly, the dilemmas and irreconcilable positions;  and finally, the specific questions asked, including the request for clarifications.  He began by saying there was obviously no consensus on the Plan as yet;  if there had been it would have shown that the Plan was perfect.  The possibility of a perfect plan simply did not exist.  First there were the Singapore issues versus the traditional issues.  Several Members had said that there should be more emphasis on the Singapore issues, and that the Plan be tuned to the negotiating agenda, others had said that this should not be done.  Secondly, some members had asked the Secretariat to engage in a programme approach while others had asked for the activities to be more project-oriented.  Thirdly, many of the providers had encouraged the consumers of technical assistance to identify their priorities and to list their needs.  Yet, on the other hand many of the same members had said to the Secretariat that they did not want to see a list.  The final dilemma was that between the strategies that Members wished to see anew and the strategy that Members had adopted in paragraph 38 of the Ministerial Declaration.  He said the Secretariat welcomed discussions and would attempt to make the adjustments required by Members.  However, Members had to recognize that there were divergences which the Secretariat could not bridge.  It was up to the Members to bridge some of these dilemmas themselves.
He continued to say that coordination had a cost and required enhanced capacities.  The Secretariat would attempt to coordinate its activities and it was doing so within the IF.  && Deputy Director-General Ravier had given examples of the coordination exercises that the Secretariat had undertaken since the last meeting. The first was the 25 January trade and competition policy course;  the second was a week thereafter on trade and investment.  DDG Ravier had also referred to the coordination meeting on 19 February with regard to the technical assistance database.  The Secretariat would continue such efforts.  However, coordination was always not that simple and it was not coordination that limited the operational activities.  For instance, in delivering a technical cooperation activity it was possible to find two different organizations taking different positions on subsidies, one encouraging subsidies and the other organization discouraging it.  It therefore had to be recognized that there was a limit to the coordination including in the context of the limitation of mandates, capacity and resources of different organizations.  Moreover, coordination was not limited to inter-agency coordination.  There should be coordination amongst donors, coordination amongst agencies and coordination amongst beneficiary countries.  He went on to the issue of UNCTAD and said that the WTO Secretariat was not in a position to address the question of the role of UNCTAD.  However, he could confirm that the WTO and UNCTAD Secretariats were working together in a constructive, positive and practical manner and wished to continue to do so.  With regard to regional institutions he referred to the statement by the Director-General in the General Council on 13 February 2002.  Connections had been established and were being established with the many regional agencies and commissions.  There would be a meeting of the Inter-American Development Bank and the WTO on 27  February 2002.  They would be working together and other agencies had been invited, as well as some of the coordinators of informal groups within the WTO.  Together they would see how they could make best use of the best practices of each.  On the issue of the strategy, he said the Secretariat has proceeded on the basis of the strategy endorsed in paragraph 38.  On the point made with regard to presumption of negotiations in certain areas, he clarified that no such presumptions had been made.  The Plan for technical assistance activities was not a negotiating document.  Essentially, what it contained was references to the Strategy for WTO technical cooperation and a listing of operational activities.  The Plan was based on Members' demands.  He said the Secretariat had a compilation of the requests from Members for activities, both written and requests made by telephone.  The Secretariat was prepared to making them available to any delegation who wished to see the requests.  
He went on to say that on the issue of seminars he had not fully understood the problem with the use of this tool for technical assistance.  For example there could be a request for WTO resource persons to show members how to schedule commitments for specific commitments on trade in services.  Seminars spanned the gamut of such activities.  They could be of a general nature or they could be of a technical nature.  However, he knew the issue was tied to the LDCs' position that the Secretariat should deal with supply-side matters based on the Ministerial Declaration.  The LDCs argued that they could make that case because there was a mandate in paragraph 42 and 43 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  Secondly, some work had been undertaken within the IF which involved complementary work by other agencies, as there were issues that the WTO could not undertake on its own. On the question on the follow-up to the IF pilot scheme, which was currently under way in three countries he said that it  would be extended to approximately five more LDCs and that an issue that still remained was the follow-up to some of the priority technical assistance recommendations arising from that.  His final point was on the question of whether the Doha Development Agenda also covered the Singapore issues.  He said it did, as it would cover all the issues and mandates that were listed in the table on page 6 of the Plan.  There were several other limited questions, that he would take up with individual delegations such as the question by the representative of Ghana on the applicability of technical assistance activities for African countries with the JITAP and the clarification sought by the representative of China.  The implementation of the Plan would continue as soon as consensus was reached on areas of improvement.
&& The representative of the United States said that as the WTO also had an e-commerce agenda which cross-cutted into various different bodies it was important that wherever there was the opportunity to use on-line resources, the WTO should be prepared to do so.  She mentioned the fact that the agenda included a presentation by a developing country to explain its experience on the use of electronic commerce.  The ITC had been extremely proactive in taking advantage of on-line tools to be able to train and to show developing countries how to use the on-line process to access markets.  She hoped that on-line aspects would not become such a weak link that her delegation had to question the initiatives.  Her delegation appreciated the element contained in the Plan related to video-conferencing but noticed that there was a conditionality attached to video-conferencing as the WTO Secretariat had to use video-conferencing even for its internal work in coordinating with other agencies interested in trade.  The Secretariat could not necessarily meet the demand even if it wanted to.  Weak links existed in all missions and at all kinds of places, even in developed countries.  However, it was important to move along this line with the technology available and with the recognition that it would be possible to further progress as the technology became more widespread and available.  On the Singapore issues she agreed with the Secretariat and said that it was important to recognize the sensitivities.   There should be language that covered both views of the issue since this was an area seriously negotiated at the Doha Ministerial Conference.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation disagreed fundamentally with the Secretariat as it still could not fully see how the change of priorities which should have come about from the Doha Ministerial Declaration and the Decisions was reflected in the Plan.  A Plan  should be the Members’ Plan. He had consulted with the Secretariat and had made numerous comments on how the Plan should be structured.  He had no disagreement with any other Member on the content of the Plan, but he did tell that it was time that the Members were a bit more proactive and got another chance to comment on the document.  His delegation did not want to micro-manage anything or stop the Secretariat from implementing the activities which were on call.  However, he wished to see a Plan that was politically useable and which fully reflected what had been agreed to at the Doha Ministerial Conference.  The Plan, as it was presented, did not represent the sort of response which his delegation was looking for.  The dilemma, for example, on the Singapore issues was a simple question of presentation.  There was no disagreement that there would be several activities linked to the issues in paragraph 23 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.  The only question was what to do with paragraph 21 and the illusion given that a decision had already been taken to negotiate these issues.  That was also a question of presentation.  There was no fundamental disagreement that something had to be done on the Singapore issues.  He did not accept the argument that there was a dilemma which made the Plan impossible to change or presented with more information on cooperation with other international organizations.  He asked why there could not be a section on industrial tariffs which some delegations had asked for, as there was one on investment.  Members were clear on the sort of action which they wished to see.  However, that did not mean that everything had to be done from scratch.  It was important to make the Plan a tool which allowed Members to track various themes throughout the year.  His delegation could agree to take note of the Plan.  However, there had to be a change of focus in the WTO.  That was why he had said that the Plan should be endorsed, not just be taken note of.  As the Pledging Conference was to take place in three weeks time, his delegation could not endorse the Plan in its current form as the basic document for that Conference.  These issues should be resolved quickly in an informal process to arrive at a Plan which corresponded to the political imperatives which Members  were working under, after the Doha Ministerial Conference.  
&& The representative of India said it was difficult for his delegation to take note of or endorse the document before his delegation's repeatedly raised comments had been taken into consideration.
The Committee took note of the comments made and asked the Secretariat to revise the Plan accordingly.

ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
Presentation of a Country Experience (Costa Rica)
&& The Chairman said that according to paragraph 5 of the Committee’s Work Programme on Electronic Commerce delegations could be invited to share their experiences in the domain of e-commerce.  He recalled that the delegation of Panama shared its country’s experience at the 36th Session of the Committee which was held on 26 November 2001 and that the delegation of Costa Rica had then volunteered to share its experience.  He introduced Mrs Mariel Picado, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Costa Rica to the WTO to inform the CTD about how the Government of Costa Rica had approached the issue of electronic commerce.
The presentation by Mrs. Picado on the e-commerce experience of the Government of Costa Rica is attached in Annex 1.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that though he did not represent a developing country, the systematic approach which the Government of Costa Rica had adopted was probably of interest to all Members.  It was clear that the telecommunications infrastructure in Costa Rica was already good, an important element in implementing any programme of e-commerce.  He asked how that had been achieved and what sort of problems the Government of Costa Rica had encountered and in which way it had gone about ensuring such a high coverage of access and such a good infrastructure.  
&& The representative of Morocco asked how the Government of Costa Rica used e-commerce in the promotion of tourism, an area he thought was vital to Costa Rica.
Mrs. Mariel Picado referred to the question regarding the system of telecommunications and said that the coverage was high and that there was a Costa Rican electricity company which was responsible for the service.  It had been in operation for many years in Costa Rica and its 95 per cent coverage had made it possible to reach areas located far from any centres; including distant rural areas which otherwise would not have had access.  The Costa Rican Electricity Institute was the one responsible for telecommunications and electricity.  The internet infrastructure had been made available to the majority of the population and she underlined the fact that one of the important questions being studied at the present time in Costa Rica was the quest of an advanced internet network.  As indicated in her presentation, they would probably use optic fibre rings across the board in the country, thus taking advantage of the copper-based network which would make it possible to integrate the transmission of voice and images at high speed and thus reduce the costs of the connections and ensure access because of the wider band width.  On the question of tourism she said that tourism was important to Costa Rica's economy.  Different websites were being developed in order to promote Costa Rica as a tourist centre and to indicate the various services available in the different areas and sites of the country.  She said the Government had created  one main entry point to Costa Rica on the Internet.
&& The representative of Rwanda said that it appeared that the example of Costa Rica was a demonstration of a new era of development, similar to the industrial revolution which had its roots in England and then had gone to the West and then into Japan and other eastern countries.  There was already a gap between the West and the rest of the World and it seemed that if a country did not take advantage of the new electronic means, another cleavage would be created.  Since his delegation was interested in the use of those new electronic means he asked what percentage of the investment was by the State and what percentage was private investment, in the extension and expansion of the electronics market.  It seemed that it was a nationwide programme.  He went on to ask what the likelihood was of success in a developing country where the degree of illiteracy was high and where the telecommunications services were underdeveloped.  He also asked what advice she could give to the Governments of such countries.  
&& The representative of Senegal asked if in Costa Rica there was an electronic customs clearance in operation and if that was the case, what the repercussions of it had been on the speed of customs procedures and on the costs of customs clearance.  He said that at a time when greater facility in exchange was being discussed, it was good that some countries did use electronic means in the customs sphere.  It would be useful if delegations could get more information and some figures on the impact of the use of electronic means on customs clearance procedures. 
&& Mrs Mariel Picado of Costa Rica said that with regard to the proportion of the investment which came from the public and the private sectors in the expansion of e-commerce she wished to give a few examples.  She mentioned the work being done by a Foundation which was developing a number of initiatives in order to make fuller use of electronic technology such as the use of computers.  That Foundation had tried to generalize and develop a culture of informatics and improve knowledge of informatics through a number of initiatives, such as education.  Another important project was "Communications without Borders" which was one of the most important projects in which they were involved.  It was an area in which there was a possibility of integrating the private and public sectors in order to widen the use of electronic technologies.  It was in that connection her Government was developing telecentres which were equipped in order to ensure that there was widespread access to computers and internet.  Agreements were being entered into between the communal and municipal associations which were providing the funding and societies which were responsible for the training.  There were training centres for instructors which ensured specialized training in the field of electronics.  That was something which would back up the national industry.  It was a question of giving more training to the already existing skilled personnel in order to help them to produce more and better software.  Lack of adequate infrastructure was an obstacle to the development of e-commerce.  She said the Government of Costa Rica had taken various initiatives to improve the infrastructure and to enhance the broadband capacity necessary for on-line transactions.  There were also a number of other initiatives under way.  Another way of improving infrastructure would be to seek alliances with other sectors in society such as the academia and the private sector.  It was important that there be a response at the legislative level as well so that the necessary reforms could be made in infrastructure area.  Her Government was making an effort to improve connections throughout the country.  It had ensured that the cable services expanded the possibility for connections.  That process had gone in parallel with the so-called informatics culture.  Even if the infrastructure was in place, appropriate use had to be made of it.   There was for example a free countrywide e-mail service and there had been a broad campaign to make people aware of the existence of it.  The aim was to familiarize the population with the use of electronic information technology so that they would learn how to use those services.  The Government had thought that the best way of doing so was through an information campaign through which for example people would learn about the various possibilities in order to make them interested and for them to start using the service.  On the customs question, she said that the Government of Costa Rica was making efforts to improve the situation with the help of new information technologies.  There was an internet page which made it possible to consult decrees, administrative materials and circulars, as well as all issues and information necessary for customs procedures.  There was also the possibility of consulting jurisprudence and there was information on tariff classifications, restrictions, prohibitions as well as information regarding imports and exports.  With respect to customs clearance, she said that the Government had a single digital window for exports, though it did not as yet have a single window for imports.  However, the Government was looking for systems which would make it possible to speed up custom processes and customs clearance.
&& The Chairman said that it was clear that the Government of Costa Rica had a ensured a high level infrastructure to an extent all delegations could learn from.  He invited other delegations with experience in the area to make presentations on an ad hoc basis.  
Preparation for a seminar
&& The Chairman said that the Committee’s work programme on electronic commerce contained in document WT/COMTD/35 requested the Secretariat to organize a seminar on revenue implications.  The seminar was scheduled for 22 April 2002.  At the 36th Session of the Committee, Members had asked the Secretariat to keep the Committee informed about the preparations for that seminar.
&& Mr. Patrick Low, Director, Development and Economic Research Division said that the Secretariat had drawn up a preliminary programme and was in the process of looking for speakers.  The draft programme was made available to Members and was divided into four sessions, three shorter ones in the morning and a longer one in the afternoon.  The first session in the morning would consider recent data trends in e-commerce, particularly at international exchange through electronic means.  The second session would focus on revenue implications and the effects of e-commerce on prospects of governments of collecting revenue, different revenue sources, focusing particularly on the development aspects of the issues and would also touch on the question of what was available in terms of information technology to assist in the collection of revenue and identification of liability.  The third session in the morning would address some of those issues from a WTO perspective.  The Trade in Services Division would make a presentation as it was that area in which e-commerce had been most discussed in the WTO context.  In the afternoon session two or three governments would present their experiences of e-commerce in relation to the revenue issue and how they saw the difficulties and challenges.  Some private sector entities would also be invited to speak on the subject.  He said he hoped that the programme would provide a clear idea of the issues connected to the revenue implications of e-commerce and the challenges for revenue collection.  The Secretariat would ensure that there was time for discussion and questions and answers.  He invited any delegation who felt that it had an experience to share with respect to revenue implications of e-commerce to let the Secretariat know so that it could be included in the programme.  He also said that the Secretariat would welcome any suggestions and guidance from delegations as to who they  might approach in a private sector.
&& The representative of Canada said that the idea of the seminar was a good one.  She suggested that the distinction be made between e-deliverables and goods only ordered on-line in the revenue perspective.  That was to say that goods only ordered on-line were delivered at the borders whereas the others were not.
&& The representative of the European Commission said he was made aware that especially on direct taxes a lot of work had been done elsewhere, including in the OECD and he invited the Secretariat to draw on their expertise if it had not already done so.  Duplication of efforts could be avoided if the Secretariat looked closely at what had already been done.  Where government revenue was mentioned, he preferred the discussions to be more comprehensive and include the additional revenues which would accrue from using all the benefits and possible gains from electronic commerce, including for example how the development of e-commerce would affect government revenue.  It should include possible growth and possible additional services being rendered possible in a country which used electronic commerce.
&& Mr. Patrick Low, Director, Development and Economic Research Division said that the distinction between what could actually be delivered over the Internet and what could not was fundamental and would certainly be part of the discussion.  The Secretariat was in touch with the OECD who had carried out a lot of work on all aspects of taxes on the internet and hoped to get someone from the OECD to participate in the seminar.  On the question of the interaction between e-business and governments the seminar would take the broader approach.
The Committee took note of the presentations and the comments made.  

INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT
&& The Chairman said that the International Conference on Finance and Development would take place on 18‑22 March 2002 in Mexico.  At the informal meeting held on 11 December 2001 it had been agreed that the WTO Director-General would be invited to send the package of decisions agreed to at Doha Ministerial Conferernce to the Secretary-General of the United Nations for the information of the Preparatory Committee.  In preparation for the Conference, the Preparatory Committee for the Conference had been held from 14-25 January 2002 in New York and the WTO Secretariat, as one of the major institutional stakeholders of the process, had been represented.
&& Deputy Director-General, Mr. Ablassé Ouedraogo said that the WTO, as one of the "major institutional stakeholders" of the process, had been represented at the final Preparatory Committee held on 14-25 January 2002 in New York City.  He had had the honour to make a statement at the opening of the Preparatory Committee.  A copy of the speech was available on the WTO Web-site.  This meeting had been chaired by Mr. Kofi Annan.  Ministers dealing with development and other institutions such as the World Bank and the IMF had also been present.  The Preparatory Meeting had been able to agree on the draft text for the consideration of the Head of States and Government which covered eight areas:
Confronting challenges of financing for development the global response
Mobilizing the west financial resources.  
Mobilizing international resources, foreign direct investment and all the private flows.  
International trade as an engine for development. 
Increasing international and financial and technical cooperation.
External debt.  
Systemic issues
Staying engaged.
He added that in the chapter on trade, the draft text of the Monterrey Consensus had proposed a summit welcoming the implementation of the WTO decisions which had placed the needs and interests of developing countries at the centre of a WTO work programme and outlined the issues of concern to developing countries.  Among other things he said that the draft text of the Monterrey Consensus had also recognized the importance of enhanced and predictable access for the exports of developing countries to all markets; called on developed countries that had not already done so, to work towards the objective of duty-free and quota-free access for all LDCs exports; called for additional bilateral and multilateral support and cooperation in areas of trade-related training, capacity-building, institution building, trade supporting services;  and to  commit Members to enhance the role of regional and subregional agreements and free-trade areas in consistency with the multilateral trading system.  The other two sections of the Monterrey Consensus with particular relevance to the WTO were those that dealt with systemic issues and "staying engaged".  In the section that dealt with systemic issues the text proposed that policy and programme coordination of international institutions and coherence at the national and international levels should be encouraged to meet the development goals of the Millennium Declaration.  He said that the Secretariat felt that the mandate should be representative of the full membership and should be based on clear, simple and objective criteria so as to ensure the effectiveness of a global economic system which supported development.  It should also identify areas where relationship between the UN and the WTO could be improved and where capacity to provide technical assistance could be strengthened.  He went on to say that in the 'staying engaged' section, the text proposed that for the purposes of follow-up and coordination, the UN General Assembly and Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) as well as intergovernmental and governing bodies of other institutional stakeholders would engage in preliminary consultations on  the issues and address the issue of coherence, coordination and cooperation as a follow-up to the Conference at the spring meetings. It was proposed that the current high-level dialogue on strengthening international cooperation for development which was held every two years in General Assembly, would be reconstituted to include a policy dialogue with participation of 11 stakeholders under implementation of the results of the Conference.  He said that copies of the final version of the agreed draft text of the Monterrey Consensus with UN document symbol A/AC.257/L.13 was available in all three working languages for the information of delegations.  Additional information on the conference and preparations for it could be found on their website at www.un.org/esa/ffd.
He went on to outline the Secretariat’s plans for participation at the International Conference on Financing for Development.  He said that it would be divided into three segments.  The first was the high-level official segment which was scheduled to be held during the morning of 18 March 2002, the second segment was the Ministerial segment which would take place from the afternoon of 18 March to 20 March 2002 and the third segment would be the summit component which was scheduled to be held from 21 to 22 March. As a stakeholder, the WTO involvement in the Conference would be at two levels, that of the membership and that of the Secretariat.  He said that the Director-General had accepted the invitation to the Conference and would be making an introductory statement at the plenary session at the summit component of the Conference.  The DG would also be co-sharing one of the summit level round tables on the theme "Financing for Development:  Looking Ahead". The heads of the institutional stakeholders namely the IMF (Mr Köhler), the World Bank (Mr Wolfensohn), and the WTO (Mr Moore) along with the Secretary-General of the United Nations (Mr Kofi Annan) had also been invited to participate in the Press Conference sometime during the summit segment of the Conference.  In conclusion, he drew attention to the link between the Doha Ministerial Conference and the Conference on Financing For Development and the Summit on Sustainable Development to be held in Johannesburg in the end of August 2002. 
&& The representative of UNIDO brought to the attention of the Committee, in connection with the Conference on Financing for Development, a side-event on trade facilitation and capacity-building which would be co-chaired by the European Commission and UNIDO.
The Committee took note of the statements made.

ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE FOR THE LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said the election of the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries  would take place at the next session.  

OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under other business.

ANNEX 1  

Presentation by Costa Rica

Costa Rica's Experience in Electronic Commerce

I.	INTRODUCTION

The impetus given to information and communication technologies (ICTs) obviously involves a whole series of benefits for development.  Trade, and in particular electronic commerce, is one of the areas in which these new communication tools have the most significant impact.  The value of electronic commerce is unquestionably undergoing exponential growth – the estimate being that it will reach some US$2.5 trillion in 2004.  Electronic commerce makes it possible to overcome the comparative disadvantages created by distance and geographical obstacles,  inter alia by giving access to international markets at substantially lower costs.
In the virtual market, developing countries can compete on an equal footing with the developed countries and enterprises are able to gain competitive advantages that would not otherwise be open to them in the physical world, one of the prime benefits being the reduction in costs.  More and more firms are thus entering the virtual market and using the Internet to communicate with the outside world.  Small- and medium-sized enterprises are among the main beneficiaries and view the Internet as a means of accessing information and world markets at much lower expense.
This new environment presents both challenges and opportunities, and all countries – especially the developing nations – need to step up their efforts and prepare themselves to rise to these challenges and to make the most effective use of opportunities offered by electronic commerce.
This document sets forth some of the most salient features of Costa Rica's experience in matters relating to electronic commerce and details the country's preparations in terms of infrastructure, government policies, universalization and legislation, with a view to contributing to the work being done in the World Trade Organization in the follow-up to the Geneva Ministerial Conference.
II.	A FEW RELEVANT INDICATORS OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRONIC COMMERCE

Costa Rica has been implementing a development policy designed to provide a little over four million people with the benefits of information technology.  The aim is to guarantee generalized access to the Internet and thus enable the majority of the population to enjoy the advantages offered by such technology and those deriving from related activities such as electronic commerce.  The following are a few relevant indicators of the country's development of this important tool.
Access to and use of the Internet
Internet services in Costa Rica have expanded considerably, even though efforts are still needed to extend their coverage.  Every day, new people are becoming aware of the advantages that these services can provide.  Enterprises and institutions have also been developing numerous sites of national interest that are prompting more people to join the network.  According to a national opinion survey conducted in late 2000, about 20 per cent of Costa Ricans – i.e. some 800,000 people – have used the Internet at least once.  The survey also indicates that around 21 per cent of Costa Rican households own a computer, and that home use of the Internet has undergone a significant increase.  Close to 32 per cent of Costa Rican families have access to the Internet at home or at work, in research centres, in Internet cafés or a combination of facilities.  This shows that an average of 300,000 households are aware of, and use, the Internet.
There are different types of Internet access (switched, dedicated, cable modem, DSL, satellite, etc.) in Costa Rica.  Telephony is one of the most frequent applications, and although the country does not have an open telecommunications market, it has one of the highest indices of national telephone coverage in Latin America.  About 95 per cent of the population have access to the telephone.  Such dense coverage makes it easier to implement policies aimed at providing generalized access to the Internet for the majority of Costa Ricans.
Almost all Costa Rican homes (96 per cent) have electricity, and the possibility of using electrical lines as a means of access to the Internet is currently being studied.  Electricity might prove a meaningful source for increasing Internet connectivity in the country.
Level of education
Education promotes and facilitates the use of ICTs and therefore has an impact on the development of electronic commerce.  Education has always been considered important in Costa Rican society, as evidenced by the fact that elementary education has been free and compulsory throughout the country for more than a hundred years.
Costa Rica has a literacy rate of 95.5 per cent.  The level of education is high, with an 80 per cent rate of basic education and a 75.3 per cent rate of diversified education, including special programmes with extensive coverage of computing subjects.
It should also be emphasized that 50 per cent of students study English as a second language.  Costa Rica has 46 private and four State universities, and provides a high level of technical education.
Importance of the technology sector
Technology is a very important sector of the Costa Rican economy.  While in 1995 exports of high-technology products accounted for no more than 1.2 per cent of all goods exported from the country, the relative share of the sector had risen to almost 30 per cent by the year 2000.  From 1998 on, the arrival in Costa Rica of major foreign-owned firms led to an exponential increase in foreign sales in branches with a strong technological component.  From 1995 to 2001, exports in the technology sector grew by an average of around 130 per cent per year.  Costa Rica is, moreover, a participant in the WTO Agreement on Information Technology Products (ITA), which completely eliminates customs duties on a series of IT products and items needed for their production.
The software sector has gained considerable economic significance, especially as a result of its high growth rate in recent years as a high value-added local industry.  The number of software production firms has increased from a mere 5 or 10 to more than 137 in the past 20 years.  Most of them export about one quarter of their total software sales.  More than 25 per cent of these companies have increased their exports by over 50 per cent – a figure which is expected to exceed 100 per cent in the coming years. 
Foreign direct investment has accounted for approximately 5 per cent of Gross Domestic Product in recent years, and the prime beneficiary has been the technology sector.  This phenomenon has had a major impact on the Costa Rican economy, with high technology as the main export sector ahead of the tourism and textiles and clothing industries, which respectively rank second and third.
Costa Rica's economic development strategy is geared towards the production of technology- and knowledge-intensive goods and services, which in turn vastly increases the use of ICTs.  In this respect, the UNDP's Human Development Report 2000, devoted to technological development for human development, placed Costa Rica in the category of "potential leaders", which comes second in the four categories in the UNDP technology achievement index ("leaders", "potential leaders", "dynamic adopters", and "marginalized").
III.	POLICIES AIMED AT PROMOTING THE INTERNET AND ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
Under the information technology development policy it has been implementing over the past ten years, the Costa Rican Government has adopted a series of measures geared towards promoting universal access to the Internet and at developing a digital culture among the different segments of the population.  The aim is also to enable the State to function more efficiently through use of the Internet, and the State serves as a model user of ICTs.  This will increase both supply and demand in the use of electronic media and will lead to a more favourable environment for the development of electronic commerce.
This policy is conducted under what is now known as the "Digital Agenda", which pursues five courses of action:  (a) improving the necessary infrastructure;  (b) working towards universal access to the Internet;  (c) promoting the new economy;  (d) giving impetus to digital government;  and (e) modifying the legal framework.
Infrastructure
It is common knowledge that despite the considerable potential for developing electronic commerce, some countries still face a number of challenges that stand in the way of its rapid expansion, such as inadequate infrastructure, low technological penetration, lack of bandwidth, and low purchasing power of the population.
Costa Rica is making every effort to upgrade its telecommunications infrastructure, so as to connect and link a wide range of users inside the country and with the rest of the world, and to broaden access to the Internet.  Practical steps are being taken in the technological and legislative fields in order to modernize the sector.
One of the main thrusts is to increase Internet service capacity (bandwidth) and to reduce costs, while seeking to provide a first-class infrastructure to the different users.  To achieve this objective, the authorities have been working on a project called "Establecimiento de la Red de Internet Avanzada" (Establishment of an Advanced Internet), which will be described further on.
Enhancing the country's connectivity is another crucial goal.  The Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad (Costa Rica Electricity Institute – ICE), is the State agency that provides and develops public telecommunications services.  As mentioned above, 95 per cent of the country is equipped with telephone facilities.  Working jointly with one of its companies, the  Radiográfica Costarricense S.A. (RACSA), the ICE provides connectivity and Internet services for a whole range of applications, through its telephone and fibre-optic infrastructure.  As a result, cable television companies are now also offering Internet commercial services through their coaxial and fibre-optic cable infrastructure, under joint agreements with the RACSA.
Fibre-optic rings are, moreover, being connected throughout the territory, and in 2001 global connection was achieved through the MAYA-1 submarine fibre-optic cable system and the ARCOS-1 cable system (both laid on the floor of the Caribbean Sea).  Connection to these undersea cable systems has given Costa Rica access to the international telecommunications networks, thus providing higher quality, at a lower cost, and more bandwidth for communications than the State satellite-based system provider.
The Advanced Internet and other networks such as CRNet and GOBNet (connection to the Legislative Assembly, the Casa Presidencial or Presidential Office, and the Ministries), EDUNET (connection to technical colleges, para-university colleges, universities, and so forth) and Internet 2 (linking universities with the country's research centres) have also been integrated.
(a)	Advanced Internet

The Advanced Internet is a project to establish an advanced network based on Internet protocols (IP), which aims to upgrade the national telecommunications system and integrate all voice, data and image services.  The key objective is not only to increase high-bandwidth coverage in Costa Rica, but also to reduce the cost of Internet access for businesses, households and academic institutions.  The project seeks to guarantee generalized access to the main communication networks and the exchange of data in order to help people in their daily lives – especially in rural areas – and drive the new economy forward.
The project is using the fibre-optic rings laid in the country, the SDH (Synchronous Data Hierarchical) circuits and the existing copper network to create a high-capacity system based on IP for high-speed voice, image and data transmission, offering dedicated broadband connections, low connection costs, security, reliability, and flexibility.  It provides 24-hour broadband digital access at a cost 20 times lower than the current system.  This was achieved thanks to the global access afforded by the recently developed submarine cable systems.
This technological development represents a qualitative and quantitative leap and will lead to significant reductions in Internet service charges and a vast increase in the number of broadband users in the country, placing Costa Rica in third position (2.75 per cent) worldwide after South Korea (9.2 per cent) and Canada (4.5 per cent) in terms of broadband coverage.
(b)	Internet 2

The national advanced research network, known as Internet 2, was launched in Costa Rica in April 2001 as a complementary network for advanced scientific applications.  It is designed to link the country's higher education and research institutes and offers a leading-edge instrument for conducting research in all realms of knowledge and developing new technologies.
(c)	EDUNET

EDUNET is a broadband network for elementary and secondary schools, set up to promote digital literacy and use of the Internet as working tools in the educational environment and to enhance the quality of education through access to new content and information technology.  EDUNET is currently being used by teachers and students in various parts of the country, and the short-term objective is to connect at least 50 per cent of schools and 100 per cent of secondary schools in Costa Rica.  The national education system is greatly benefiting from the direct connection for schools provided by the Advanced Internet project.
Universalizing access to the Internet
One of the overriding objectives of the Digital Agenda is to give all Costa Ricans generalized access to the new technologies, by eliminating the obstacles that prevent them from enjoying the advantages they offer and by bridging the digital divide.  Electronic mail and the Internet are due to become the main channels of communication inside the country and with the rest of the world – and hence tools for trade, education and cultural exchange.
A series of steps are being taken in pursuit of this target, such as installing computers connected to the Internet in various public-access State facilities.  Major efforts are also being made in the spheres of education and human resources.
(a)	Comunicación Sin Fronteras

Comunicación Sin Fronteras (Communication Without Borders) is a national programme to foster widespread use of e-mail and the Internet as a means of expanding communication and handling social issues.  It promotes access to ICTs for all Costa Ricans and especially those hampered by geographical location or social status.  The www.costarricense.cr web site and telecentres are among the most important tools for achieving this goal.
Costarricense.cr

In June 2000, Costa Rica became the first country in the world to offer e-mail service free of charge to the entire population, thus affording equal access for all to the new technologies – unlike other countries where only few people enjoy such a privilege.  This was made possible thanks to Comunicación Sin Fronteras, which in January 2002 changed its domain, www.costarricense.cr.  This web site guarantees all Costa Ricans their own e-mail account practically from birth.  In order to facilitate access to the site and encourage the use of free e-mail, computers have been installed in post offices and in all the country's municipal centres.  The login and password are linked to each person's name and identity card.  The site currently numbers 150,000 users and is the third largest e-mail provider in the country.
Telecentres
The creation of telecentres, which are facilities in various parts of the country equipped to provide access to and capacity development in ICTs, are another major thrust of the programme.  These centres should serve to build human networks and help Costa Ricans in their daily tasks.  Their purpose is to facilitate the exchange of information and the use of electronic banking and to promote an Internet culture and democratization of the network, mainly through the accountability of local governments.
One of the objectives of the programme is that 20 per cent of the population should become consistent users of e-mail and the Internet by the end of the first half of this year.  The programme aims to set up 187 telecentres, which are in the process of being installed in all the country's municipal offices and public libraries and in 30 post offices;  52 centres have been set up to date, and it is expected that their installation will soon be completed.   
(b)	Reduction in Internet service charges
In order to facilitate access to the Internet, services charges are being reduced.  Thanks to the MAYA-1 cable system, household Internet cable service charges have dropped.  An initiative called Programme 900 has also been launched to enable people to connect to the Internet without having an e-mail account.  This service has been expanding by about 334 accesses a day for a total of 4,100 telephone subscriptions.  A special Internet connection rate is also being offered to private institutions or firms that provide computers giving access to free e-mail for the public and their staff.
(c)	Education and human resources
Education unquestionably promotes and facilitates the use of information technology and accounts for disparities in terms of access and use of ICT applications among the population of a given country, or between different countries or regions.
As was emphasized earlier, the literacy rate and the level of education are high in Costa Rica, and these are crucial factors in the development of ICTs.  In recent years, the Costa Rican Government and the different academic sectors have been promoting training and capacity building in information technology.  Their focus has been on the use of informatics and the Internet as working tools and as a means of enhancing the standard of education through access to new content and information technology.
It should also be pointed out that one of the major challenges currently facing Costa Rica in this sphere is not to improve the standard of education but to satisfy the high demand for specialized technicians stemming from Costa Rican and foreign information technology firms.
Omar Dengo Foundation
The Omar Dengo Foundation is a private, non-profit-making entity created in 1987 to contribute to the educational, cultural, scientific and technological development of Costa Rica.  Its objective is to democratize access to the use of technology as a tool for sustainable human development.
The Foundation's programmes have benefited approximately one million people – young people, students, teachers and communities.  Some of the most noteworthy projects are  Informática Educativa (Educational Computing), which seeks to introduce computer-aided learning by installing computer laboratories in elementary schools;  the Red de Telemática Educativa (Educational Telematics Network), aimed at improving and innovating the educational process by teaching people to use the Internet;  and Informática Para Todos (Computing for All), a programme to broaden access to informatics.
Informática Educativa was launched in 1988 as a computer-aided learning programme specifically designed for elementary schools.  Its principal objective is to help improve the quality of education and provide access to information technology for children in rural areas and marginal urban communities.  The project is jointly sponsored by the Ministry of Education and the Omar Dengo Foundation, with support from a number of institutions such as the Inter-American Development Bank.  Computer laboratories have already been installed in 434 public schools all over the country, reaching at least 50 per cent of elementary schoolchildren, and the plan is to cover another 70 schools in 2002.
CEFOF
The Centro de Formación de Formadores y de Personal Técnico para el Desarrollo Industrial (Trainers' and Technical Personnel Training Centre for Industrial Development – CEFOF) is a regional centre for productivity established in 1992 to offer prime services to the national and international industrial sectors.  Its goal is to help increase the competitiveness of production sectors by strengthening quality management, information technology, environmental management and administrative management systems and quality assurance laboratories.
CENFOTEC
As was mentioned before, the informatics sector has gained considerable economic significance in Costa Rica, especially as a result of its high growth rate in recent years as a high value-added local industry.  The number of production firms has increased from a mere 5 or 10 to more than 137 in the past 20 years.  As a result of the vast expansion of the software industry, Costa Rica is competing in the European, North American and Latin American markets.  The national industry therefore needs more specialized personnel to be able to continue responding to increasing demand in international markets.
The Centro de Formación en Tecnología de la Información (Information Technology Training Centre - CENFOTEC), a private-sector initiative, seeks to develop and disseminate knowledge and the invention of information sciences and technologies by establishing centres for training specialists.  This domestic industry support centre is the only body in the Central American Region to offer specialized training in information technologies.  CENFOTEC receives the backing of the Costa Rican software industry and came into being in answer to the need to train and update specialists in the field.
The new economy
The turn of the century has forced a series of challenges and realities stemming from globalization and technological breakthroughs upon our countries.  Fully aware of this reality, Costa Rica has been implementing a development model the aim of which, in addition to benefiting all of its citizens and being sustainable from the fiscal, social and environmental points of view, is to be deeply rooted in new information technology and the use of knowledge.  This concept has been christened the “new economy”.
In more concrete terms, this new economy aims to fuel the growth of technologically based Costa Rican companies which are integrating into the global economy with world-class levels of excellence. These include software export firms, firms which sell their goods and services using electronic commerce or which sell inputs to the high-technology multinationals operating in the country and firms in other sectors which adopt information technology in order to reduce their inventory requirements and the time needed to introduce new goods, improve supplier relations and, generally speaking, boost productivity.
Programmes such as those to improve the telecommunications infrastructure, update the legal framework and strengthen education in general are essential for enabling the new economy to become viable.  The Government has a major role to play in this context, not merely by removing the barriers facing enterprises, but also by ensuring that the measures that it takes in relation to education and infrastructure, for example, are compatible with the emergence of these new sectors.  The projects currently under way to drive the new economy forward, for example by developing and strengthening the software production sector, a mainstay of the new development economy, are in consonance with this vision.
In addition to fostering new sectors which use knowledge intensively, the way in which trade is conducted on both the home and international markets must also be tailored.  It is estimated that up to 25 per cent of all world trade will be conducted on-line by 2003.  Enterprises with no Internet access, or from countries which are not well-prepared to enter this market in terms of legislation, customs, logistics, infrastructure and cognitive capacity will therefore find themselves at an almost insuperable disadvantage. Such will be the new barriers to arise between advanced world economies and straggling local economies.   
Costa Rica has embarked upon a series of initiatives to encourage enterprises, in particular small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), to become involved in electronic commerce. Of particular note are a number of initiatives in the agricultural, industrial and export sectors which seek to assist SMEs by reducing the obstacles which hamper their integration into the digital economy and creating opportunities for both business and information exchange over the Internet.
(a)	Agricultural sector
INFOAGRO, the Costa Rican Agricultural Sector Information System ( HYPERLINK "http://www.infoagro.go.cr" www.infoagro.go.cr), has been set up for the agricultural sector and enables farmers to access information of particular importance to their work, for example on the climate, new pests and diseases and the treatment thereof and farming techniques. The system also affords them a means of marketing and selling their products and informs them of the real level of demand. 
(b)	Industrial sector 
The Costa Rican Managerial Information System (SIEC) ( HYPERLINK http://www.siec.go.cr www.siec.go.cr), sponsored by the Ministry of the Economy, was developed for the  industrial sector and is designed to furnish information on the market and public services and thereby assist enterprises with business decision-making.
(c)	Dissemination of information and creation of the web site  HYPERLINK "http://www.marketplacecostarica.com" www.marketplacecostarica.com 
With a view to providing support for SMEs in the field of electronic commerce, the Ministry of Foreign Trade (COMEX), in conjunction with the Costa Rican Foreign Trade Promotion Agency (PROCOMER), the body responsible for promoting Costa Rican exports on the international markets, has also been developing a series of initiatives. Information leaflets have thus been produced and seminars held, geared towards supporting domestic producers and motivating them to use technology as a means of promoting and increasing their export function. 
Furthermore, the web site  HYPERLINK "http://www.marketplacecostarica.com" www.marketplacecostarica.com has been created and serves to promote Costa Rica's export supply.  Structured by sector, it presents Costa Rica's main export products, together with information on registered enterprises, which enables them to establish business contacts and promote their products at minimal cost.  Visits to the site, the most frequently consulted sectors, products and enterprises and visitor profiles are analysed on a regular basis using follow-up technologies on the Internet.  Exporters are therefore given all the assistance they require to identify trade opportunities and monitor contracts. This site already features in the databases of the major Internet search engines. 
A total of 114 enterprises were registered at 31 December 2001, the foremost industries being food, craft, electronics, timber, metallurgy, plants, flowers and foliage, plastics, fresh produce, software and textiles. Of note is the fact that the number of site visits from its creation in August 2000 to December 2001 totalled 14,427, with 1,442,787 hits recorded overall.
	The digital government as a model user

What is required if a development model based on the use of information technology is to be achieved is a government which makes intensive use of information technology. The director in overall charge of promoting a paradigm shift should be the New Government which, in addition to using the resources at its disposal, should lead the endeavour by example. There are, moreover, intrinsic benefits in adopting these technologies, namely increased efficiency, cost cutting and transparency in public management which, in turn, pave the way for greater democracy, achieved by improving the work of the government and facilitating widespread access thereto for citizens.
In keeping with this vision, the aim is to develop through the Advanced Internet project a “digital government” which acts as a model user and provides citizens with on-line facilities of all kinds.  These facilities include information on State institutions, procedures and requirements as well as enquiry, transaction and payment services interrelated with all other bodies and agents. 
The digital government is therefore becoming an instrument which encompasses both the public and private sectors and civil society. In addition to streamlining procedures, guaranteeing greater transparency and cutting red tape, this will lead to the development of a computer culture, which will help to remove barriers to the use of digital media.  At the same time, this “model user” is going to engender greater confidence and security in the use of technology by citizens, thereby boosting Internet supply and demand and creating a more favourable environment for electronic commerce as a result.
The on-line government procurement system “CompraRed” ( HYPERLINK http://www.hacienda.go.cr/comprared www.hacienda.go.cr/comprared) was implemented in the country in September 2001.  This public web site was developed as a means of automating the process of publishing and disseminating the various government procurement procedures conducted by the Costa Rican State. It incorporates publication of invitations to tender, electronic creation of publications, a digital signature service, databases for suppliers and supplies and current regulations. To date, a total of 2,228 such procedures have been published on the CompraRed system.
On-line systems for tax declaration and payment ( HYPERLINK http://www.hacienda.go.cr/tributacion www.hacienda.go.cr/tributacion), payrolls ( HYPERLINK http://www.ccss.sa.cr/sicere www.ccss.sa.cr/sicere) and payment of service bills ( HYPERLINK http://www.ice.go.cr/servicios www.ice.go.cr/servicios) have also been launched.  Similarly, initiatives have been carried out in conjunction with the country's various production sectors, such as INFOAGRO ( HYPERLINK "http://www.infoagro.go.cr" www.infoagro.go.cr) and SIEC ( HYPERLINK http://www.siec.go.cr www.siec.go.cr), to provide information services on sector and market conditions.  An exporter registration system, the Single Window System for foreign trade, applications for admission to the free-trade zone regime and other procedures ( HYPERLINK http://www.procomer.com www.procomer.com) have also been implemented.  Moreover, a medicine information service has been set up whereby citizens can connect to the Ministry of Health medicine information system using the 1-800 toll-free number and obtain details of products, prices and dispensing chemists where such products are available, etc. More than 30,000 enquiries were recorded in a single year (2000-2001).
Furthermore, on 15 November 2001 the Directorate-General of Customs of the Ministry of Finance, the Costa Rican Foreign Trade Promotion Agency (PROCOMER) and the Costa Rican Chamber of Exporters (CADEXCO) launched the project known as BUDHA, the Ministry of Finance Document Search Engine, ( HYPERLINK "http://www.hacienda.go.cr/budha/" www.hacienda.go.cr/budha/).  This system affords Costa Ricans the possibility of consulting the decrees, administrative decisions and circulars issued by the Directorate-General of Customs as well as National Customs Tribunal rulings on the Internet. Current tariffs and taxes, valuation procedures, tariff classification criteria, restrictions and prohibitions to which the import and export of goods are subject, possible penalties and available resources, etc. are also available for consultation.  This system inter alia standardizes customs criteria, streamlines customs procedures and enhances system transparency.  
Legal framework
Given the global nature of on-line commercial transactions, the existence of an appropriate regulatory framework is a key requirement for promoting electronic commerce.  Consequently, the Costa Rican Government and legislature have been studying and analysing the implementation of a set of rules attuned to the new realities and meeting the demands imposed by the digital economy. The aim is to develop a legal framework which would provide the appropriate degree of security for on‑line transactions and remove obstacles restricting the free development of market forces without imposing unnecessary barriers to trade.
In 2001, several draft laws designed to promote electronic commerce and universal and secure Internet access were presented to the Legislative Assembly.  A series of regulations relating to intellectual property were also approved, thereby introducing a comprehensive reform of the system, as mentioned further on.
(a)	Electronic signature, security and confidential transmission systems
In 2001, the Draft “Digital Signature and Digital Certificates Law”, File No. 14,276 of 30 April 2001, was presented to the Legislative Assembly and published in the Official Journal "La Gaceta" No. 82, Supplement No. 31. This Draft Law regulates the use of digital signatures and electronic documents in Costa Rica and grants them the same validity and legal enforceability as handwritten and other similar signatures and printed documents involving a declaration of will.  It also regulates digital certificates and certification service providers and includes the principle of technological neutrality, which recognizes the use of all kinds of technologies, not merely a single one.  The aim of this draft legislation is to introduce encryption systems which guarantee communication confidentiality, inalterability and integrity.  It also permits the use of digital signatures in non-trade communications (such as judicial, computer and administrative communications and on-line government procurement) as well as those involving notaries public.

(b)	Intellectual property 
In the light of the multi-jurisdictional nature of electronic commerce, protection of elements which are traded on-line is particularly significant. Hence the importance of countries having appropriate intellectual property legislation to promote the development of electronic commerce. 
In 2000, given the importance which Costa Rica attaches to protection of the intellectual property rights established in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), a sweeping reform of national legislation in this regard was approved with a view to fulfilling the country's commitments in the framework of the Agreement.  This reform has meant that Costa Rica now boasts modern and comprehensive national intellectual property legislation which is equally applicable to electronically traded elements.
Of particular note is the passage of Law No. 7979 of 31 January 2000, which introduces a series of amendments to the Law on Copyright and Related Rights designed, inter alia, to protect works with regard to digital technology, Law No. 7968 of 22 December 1999, approving the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and Law No. 7967 of 22 December 1999 approving the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT).  Furthermore, the regulatory framework for intellectual property was extensively strengthened with the adoption of the Law on Procedures for the Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights, No. 8039 of 2 October 2000.
(c)	Payment methods, physical and electronic transport of goods
With regard to on-line payment methods, the use of credit cards in electronic transactions is not particularly well-developed in Costa Rica.  Although the country has no special legislation on the matter, consumer protection in cases of fraud in electronic transactions is the same as for transactions conducted using traditional methods;  current legislation is therefore applicable to both.  
Although there is no common practice in Costa Rica for applying other traditional payment methods to electronic commerce and the Internet, there are a number of trade practices geared towards this objective.  Thus, some banks, in conjunction with a credit card institution, offer cards with limited credit lines for network transactions and some enterprises, such as parcel services, offer cards for Internet purchases.  Nevertheless, most credit card institutions continue to hold the consumer liable in the event of fraud if a credit card has been used as a means of payment in electronic transactions.
There are no restrictions on or special licence requirements in Costa Rica for the operations of transporters of post, packages and merchandise, with the exception of universal postal delivery services, for which a licence is required.
(d)	International situation
The position taken by Costa Rica in the various fora in which it has participated has been to support the moratorium on customs duties on electronic transmissions, in line with the information technology development policy implemented in the country over the last decade.  It is important for the benefits of information technology to be available to the great majority of the population, for which reason Costa Rica will not back measures designed to raise its price.  Electronic commerce has to a great extent developed precisely because governments have refrained from imposing fiscal or other restrictions. 
In fora other than the WTO, Costa Rica has also supported the development of legal instruments which lay down rules for electronic commerce, thereby providing greater security for users and preventing fraudulent practices. Costa Rica plays an active role in the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) Joint Government-Private Sector Committee of Experts on Electronic Commerce and has signed a Joint Statement on Global Electronic Commerce within the framework of the Free-Trade Agreement between Costa Rica and Canada.  

IV.	CONCLUSION

This series of initiatives seeks to make Costa Rica take the step forward into the new digital era and secure the country's development, harnessing the opportunities arising from information technology.  Moreover, this national strategy aims to extend Internet access to all Costa Rican citizens and ensure that not merely enterprises, but also educational establishments, institutions and citizens familiarize themselves with the use of electronic commerce and enjoy its attendant benefits. 
Costa Rica must continue to promote the exchange of experience in this field. With this contribution, it hopes to contribute to the WTO discussions on electronic commerce. 

__________

 Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, "Electronic Commerce:  A Cluster Approach to the Negotiation of Input Services".  Working Party of the Trade Committee. TD/TC/WP(2000)33/Final, 15 June 2001.
 UNIMER survey published in the newspaper La Nación, 28 August 2001, San José, Costa Rica.
 Inter-American Development Bank, "On Information Technology and Competitiveness in Latin America", Santiago, Chile, 16 March 2001, 43 pp. (http://www.iadb.org/RES/pdf/infotech.pdf) World Bank,  Power and Communication Data. (http://www.worldbank.org/data/wdi2001/pdfs/tab5_9.pdf)
 UNDP, Human Development Indicators, Human Development Report 2001, 141 pp. (http://www.undp.org/hdr2001/back.pdf)
 World Bank, "Computers in School.  A Quantitative Study of Chile and Costa Rica", Education and Technology Series, Special Issue, March 1998.
 "Establecimiento de la Red de Internet Avanzada y Creación de la Red Nacional de Investigación Avanzada" (Establishment of an Advanced Internet and Creation of the Advanced National Research Network), in Seminario Costa Rica en el Mundo Digital:  Final Document, Fundación CAATEC, San José, Costa Rica, November 2001 (pp. 15-23).
	 PROCOMER.  International Marketing.  Special Programmes.  www.marketplacecostarica.com.
	 Draft Digital Signature and Digital Certificates Law (File No. 14,276); Draft Law on Internet Access (File No. 13,888);  Draft Law on Promoting Productivity Through the Incorporation of Computing Technology (File No. 14,274); Organic Law of Public Administration, Draft Organic Law of Public Administration (File No.14,483), which is of particular importance since its fundamental principles and user rights state that electronic media are a suitable tool for streamlining the Administration's operations and services, enhancing transparency and increasing public participation. This Law regulates the plurality of public sector bodies and authorities, while the Draft Law introduces the use of electronic media in public administration. The following laws of the Republic were also passed:  the Copyright Law and amendments thereto (Law No. 7979), which protects the right of reproduction, lease, use, sale or offering for sale, inter alia, as well as a series of rights protecting digital technology. Law No. 8039 on Procedures for the Enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights, prudential and judicial measures to protect this kind of rights, in particular copyright and offences related to digital technology.

WT/COMTD/M/38 Page  PAGE 36



	WT/COMTD/M/38 	Page  PAGE 35













