RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/5

15 March 1996

ORGANIZATION

(96-0933) 

Committee on Trade and Development
Fifth (Special) Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 16 FEBRUARY 1996

Chairman: Mr. Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)

A. Adoption of Agenda

1.&&  The outgoing Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD),
Ambassador Haron Siraj of Malaysia, welcomed delegates and indicated that he had a number of
comments to make. With regard to the issue of observership in the CTD, he proposed that since the
matter had not been resolved by the General Council, the Committee should agree to invite to its
Sixth Session the same organizations which were invited to this meeting. The Committee so agreed.
Turning to the reasons why he had convened the Special Session of the CTD, he recalled that at the
last session a Working Group was established and a number of studies were requested by delegations.
He wanted to know how to proceed in terms of organizing the work of the Working Group, in particular,
whether or not it should be assigned the responsibility of conducting all the studies that were requested
by delegations. He also wanted to discuss the issue of chairmanship of the CTD, and expected his
successor to be elected at this session in accordance with the Committee's rules of procedure. He
expected the new Chairman to raise the matter of chairmanship of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed
Countries. After stating that delegations couldraise any matter under the agenda item "Other Business",
the agenda for the meeting as contained in WTO/AIR/257 was adopted.

B. Election of Chairperson of the CTD

2. && The outgoing Chairman recalled that during the latter part of last year, the Chairman of the
General Council carried out informal consultations on the appointment of officers to take charge of
the various standing bodies of the WTO. In accordance with the established guidelines for the
appointment of officers, the General Council at its meeting in December of last year approved certain
nominations including that of Ambassador Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi of Morocco as Chairman of the
CTD. He proposed that the CTD confirm the nomination by acclamation. The Committee so agreed
and approved the nomination.

3. && The outgoing Chairman expressed his thanks to delegations and the Secretariat for their
understanding, cooperation and support in assisting him to discharge his duties. Upon assuming the
chairmanship of the CTD, Ambassador Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi thanked his predecessor for the
outstanding work that he had done during his tenure of office. He also expressed his appreciation
for the trust placed in him by his colleagues and assured them that he would do everything possible
to meet their expectations. With their support, and that of the Secretariat, he looked forward to a very
productive year inthe CTD. A number of delegations including Colombia, Philippines, United States,
European Communities, Japan, Canada, India, Switzerland, Peru, Morocco, Argentina and Hong Kong
congratulated Ambassador Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi on his assumption of the chairmanship of the CTD
and pledged their full support. They looked forward to working closely with him with the view to
achieving the aims of the CTD. They also congratulated the outgoing Chairman for the excellent work
that he had done.

C. Future Work of the Working Group Established by the CTD

4. && The Chairman said that the Fifth Session should focus on how the work of the Working Group
established at the last CTD session could be advanced. He reminded delegations about the requests
for studies made at that same meeting. It was his understanding that the Working Group was established
as aresult of the studies that were requested by delegations. To facilitate the discussion, he had requested
the Secretariat to prepare and distribute to delegations an informal paper which listed all the relevant
studies that were requested. The informal paper had been organized along the lines of the Programme
of Work for 1996.

5.&&  The representative of Bangladesh referred to the first sub-item in the informal paper which
read "evaluation of the impact of measures to increase trade and investment opportunities, as listed
in document WT/COMTD/W/10, on individual least-developed countries" and said he had a drafting
suggestion to make. He wanted to add the words "and the future course of action” after the end of
the sentence.

6. && The representative of Colombia said that the Programme of Work of the CTD was quite ambitious
and reflected the concerns of developing countries. It was up to delegations to inject the necessary
content into the Programme of Work. The CTD should not only monitor the progress that was being
made by developing countries in the implementation of their Uruguay Round obligations and how they
were adjusting to the liberalization process, but also how the various international organizations were
assisting them to cope with the new international trading environment through their technical cooperation
activities and other programmes. The CTD had a broad range of subjects to deal with and that should
in itself energize it. The analysis of these issues by the Committee should lead to the adoption of
practical measures to assist developing countries. The representative of Philippines also stated that
the CTD had a broad range of subjects to deal with. It was responsible in the WTO framework for
tackling all the problems of development.

7. && Referring to the informal paper prepared by the Secretariat, the representative of the United States
stated that further deliberation in the CTD was necessary before the Secretariat could be asked to
undertake the studies. It was his delegation's view that some of the requested studies were not necessary
or of high priority. The limited resources of the Secretariat should be deployed for urgent and relevant
matters. While his delegation was of the view that the Secretariat could commence work on sub-item 4,
it appeared that the elements of the study were very unbalanced. For the study to be comprehensive
and useful for Ministers, it should also examine other elements not listed in the informal paper.

8. && The representative of the European Communities supported the creation of a Working Group
on the understanding that it would only consider why some developing countries were under-performing
in terms of their participation in world trade. It would therefore seem to follow that the first three
items of the informal paper fell outside the mandate of the Working Group. These items were not
novel and had been discussed in previous sessions of the CTD, and there was no reason why they could
not be discussed in subsequent sessions of the Committee. His delegation was of the view that sub-item 4
should be redrafted to include other important elements. As it stood, it was unbalanced. Besides,
before the Working Group commenced work, its terms of reference had to be agreed. On the other
hand, if the role of the Working Group was to assist and guide the Secretariat to conduct the study
and afterwards submit it to the CTD for discussion under item B of the Programme of Work for 1996,
then it might not be necessary to establish a Working Group. The CTD could meet informally to
discharge that job. He stressed that references to Working Groups should be avoided as they normally
had specific legal tasks in the WTO. Given what was intended to be achieved, it would not be necessary
to establish a Working Group. The representative of Japan said his delegation did not have enough
time to consider the informal paper, and was thus reserving the right to come back to it at another
time. His delegation, however, saw some difficulties with the drafting suggestion made by Bangladesh.
His initial reaction was that it was only the Members who could decide on what policy responses to
adopt. His delegation would comment on this issue after consultations with Tokyo.

9.&&  The representative of Canada commented on the second item in the informal paper which required
the Secretariat to make a compilation of all provisions which prima facie appeared to confer benefits
on developing countries. It was his understanding that the delegation which requested the study had
later noted that the Secretariat had prepared a similar document in the past. If that was the case, then
he would hope that there would not be the need for a separate study to be carried out. His delegation
was of the view that since the Working Group was established to examine why some regions and
developing countries were not performing in terms of their participation in the international trading
system, it would appear that apart from sub-item 4, the rest could not be properly considered by the
Working Group. He saw no reason why they could not be considered at ordinary sessions of the CTD.
While his delegation accepted in principle that the Working Group could examine sub-item 4, he was
also in agreement with other delegations that it was unbalanced and should be redrafted to include other
elements. His delegation would submit in due course some specific ideas which could also form part
of the enquiry of the Working Group. Whereas the Secretariat could be requested to carry out an analysis
of certain subjects, it could not be expected to produce recommendations for delegations as regards
the appropriate policy responses to be adopted to enhance the performance of developing countries
in the international trading system. This was the responsibility of Members themselves. Like the
Japanese delegation, his delegation also had some problems with the proposal of Bangladesh if it meant
that the Secretariat should be authorized to prescribe some policy responses.

10.&&  The representative of India said that because of the many problems facing developing countries,
it was necessary for the Working Group to carry out all the four studies listed in the informal paper.
The conclusions reached by the Group could be presented to Ministers in Singapore for appropriate
action. Referring to sub-item 2 in the informal paper, he said that the Secretariat could analyse further
the preliminary work it had done on the provisions relating to developing countries in the Uruguay
Round Agreements. India did not agree that sub-item 2 in the informal paper should be deleted. He
added that an appreciation of the problems hindering the exports of developing countries was necessary,
if they were to increase their participation in the international trading system.

11. && The representative of Philippines said that the last paragraph of the informal paper was quite
clear. Studies 1 and 2 as listed in the informal paper were to be undertaken in the context of item A
of the Programme of Work of the CTD, namely the "review of the impact of the results of the Uruguay
Round on developing country Members, in particular on the least-developed country Members". The
third study was to be undertaken in the context of items D and E of the Programme of Work of the
CTD. She stated that the elements of the study on why some developing countries were not performing
in terms of their participation in the international trading system should be clarified as soon as practicable.
She said it was necessary for the Working Group to start its work so that its conclusions could be
presented to Ministers for their consideration. She proposed that the Chairman of the CTD should
also chair the Working Group.

12. && The Chairman stated, although the CTD established at its last session a Working Group to
consider the studies described in the informal paper, it was his impression from the views expressed.
so far and consultations that, instead of having a formal Working Group, an informal grouping of the
CTD could consider all the items listed in the informal paper. This suggestion would obviate the need
to negotiate the terms of reference of the Working Group, and make the distinction between the various
items in the informal paper superfluous, as they were all items which could properly be considered
by the CTD either formally or informally. If this suggestion was acceptable, there might, however,
be the need to prioritize the studies which had to be carried out. He stressed the importance of
completing the studies on time for their presentation to Ministers at Singapore.

13. && The representative of Bangladesh said he was disturbed by the comment that the Secretariat
could not make any policy recommendations to the CTD. He had thought that in the WTO framework,
the CTD was the only body where such issues could be discussed exhaustively. The CTD did not
exist merely for discussing the mechanical implementation of the various Uruguay Round Agreements.
The CTD was perhaps the only forum where developing countries could ventilate their grievances and
the difficulties they were facing in their quest to participate more effectively in the international trading
system. Since many developing countries, especially the least-developed ones, were not capable of
studying their own situation and adopting the appropriate policy responses, they looked to bodies such
as the CTD to assist them in this process. While the primary responsibility for development was with
countries themselves, assistance provided by bodies such as the CTD could go a long way in assisting
developing countries to adopt the right policies needed for their active and effective participation in
the international trading system. If the CTD could not provide that assistance, then its existence might
be questioned.

14.&& The representative of Switzerland said that his delegation was particularly attracted to the idea
of convening an informal meeting of the CTD, instead of establishing a Working Group. His delegation
was, however, unclear about the Secretariat's role in this process, especially the link between it and
the informal group. His delegation was of the view that the informal paper had not been sufficiently
discussed in the CTD. As such, there was the need for further discussion of the proposed subjects
and clarification of the objectives of the informal group. The representative of Canada wished to clarify
an earlier comment on the drafting suggestion made by Bangladesh. His point was that it was within
the mandate of the CTD to suggest certain policy responses to the problems being faced by developing
countries in the international trading system. He stressed that this prerogative did not belong to the
Secretariat.

15. && The representative of Peru said that as far as his delegation was concerned, the CTD actually
established a Working Group at its last session. Evidence of this could be found in item C of the agenda
for this meeting and in the summary records of the last session (WT/COMTD/M/4). However, his
delegation was prepared to accept the proposal made by the Chairman that an informal group of the
CTD should be convened to give directions to the Secretariat in the preparation of the studies. His
delegation was flexible and did not feel strongly about the name that would be given to the informal
process. What was important was the commencement of work on the four items listed in the informal
paper. It was his delegation's hope that membership of the informal group would be open to any
interested delegation. Therepresentative of Hong Kong agreed with the statement made by the Peruvian
delegation, and stated that his delegation was in support of the CTD carrying out informal consultations
on the four items.

16.&&  The Chairman assured delegations that the informal gathering of the CTD would be open to
any interested delegation. As such, there was no need to elaborate on the composition of the informal
group. He wanted to remind delegations that the CTD would meet informally to give guidance and
directions to the Secretariat in the preparation of the studies. What was outstanding from his perspective
was a substantive discussion of the subjects. It was his hope that the discussion could take place in
the informal meeting of the CTD. He expected the four items listed in the informal paper to be discussed
and amended in the light of the comments made by delegations at this meeting. The conclusions of
the informal group would be presented to the CTD. He asked delegations if his proposal was acceptable.

17.&&  The representative of the European Communities said he agreed with the proposal made by
the Chairman. He recalled the European Communities’ support for the establishment of the Working
Group at the last session of the CTD. They supported the proposal made by Singapore; the
marginalization of certain countries from the international trading system was a matter of grave concern
to the European Communities. He, however, thought that instead of concentrating on all four studies,
it would be better if the informal group concentrated on sub-item 4 of the informal paper. The rest
could be considered at formal sessions of the CTD.

18.&&  The representative of Morocco said the Chairman's proposal was acceptable to his delegation.
From his perspective, it did not matter whether it was a Working Group or an informal meeting of
the CTD which was to conduct the studies with the assistance of the Secretariat. What was important
was the commencement of work on the subjects listed in the informal paper. It was necessary, as had
been indicated by India, that the studies be comprehensive and cover all the issues raised by delegations
at the last session of the CTD. None of the subjects to be addressed was new; both the Secretariat
and delegations had worked on them, although his delegation was convinced that there was still the
possibility to deepen the analysis. Delegations could ask the Secretariat to prepare documentation on
any relevant subject.

19. && The representative of Argentina found the proposal to be very pragmatic, as it accommodated
varying interests. It was the belief of his delegation that the proposal would facilitate the process and
enable delegations to contribute effectively to it. From a procedural point of view, it should be easier
to gain consensus on the various items in an informal setting. Like the Moroccan delegation, his
delegation was not so much interested in procedures. Substance mattered more, and that was why
he was supporting the Chairman's proposal.

20.&&  The representative of Switzerland saw merit in the Chairman's proposal. His delegation was
of the view that all four items listed in the informal paper could be discussed at an informal gathering
of the CTD. In the future, titles that might be distributed should reflect that fact, so as to avoid the
misconception that there were studies requested from and prepared by the Secretariat. The Chairman
stated that since there was no consensus on the studies to be carried out, the informal paper distributed
by the Secretariat should be seen as only a draft with no implications whatsoever.

21.&&  The Chairman asked delegations whether they would agree to the CTD meeting informally
to discuss the paper prepared by the Secretariat and making recommendations thereafter to a formal
meeting. Agreement on this would pave the way for instructions to be given to the Secretariat to
commence work on the four subjects listed in the informal paper. Given the decision by the General
Council that there would not be any Preparatory Committee of Ministerial Meeting in Singapore, and
that each body should make its own preparations, it was necessary for the CTD to prioritize its work
according to what it expected to present to Ministers in Singapore. The Committee took note of the
comments made and agreed with the proposal made by the Chairman.

22. && The representative of the European Communities stressed that delegations were not establishing
an informal group of the CTD, but rather that the Committee would meet informally to discuss all
the relevant issues as and when appropriate.

D. Schedule of Meetings for 1996

23.&&  The Chairman recalled the amendment made by Ambassador Haron at the General Council
meeting of 13 December 1995 to the 1996 Programme of Work, included in the report of the Committee
to the General Council (WT/GC/W/25). He said that in view of the convening of this Special Session
of the CTD, it would be appropriate to amend the dates for the subsequent meetings of the CTD.
He had in anticipation requested the Secretariat to find suitable dates for the other meetings. The
Secretariat proposal was contained in an informal document which had been circulated to delegations.
The Sixth Session could be held on 20 May 1996 instead of 5 March 1996. The period between those
two dates should permit delegations to concentrate on the work of the informal group of the CTD.
The preliminary conclusions reached would be considered at the meeting of 20 May 1996 under item B
of the Programme of Work, which mandated a review of the participation of developing country Members
in the multilateral trading system. At that meeting, the CTD would also discuss item C (Provision
of guidelines for WTO technical cooperation activities as they relate to developing country Members)
and item G (Notification Obligations). The Seventh Session would be held over two days, preferably
on 22/23 July 1996 instead of 18 June 1996. At that session, the CTD would continue its discussion
of item B, and examine item A (Review of the impact of the results of the Uruguay Round on developing
country Members, in particular on the least-developed country Members) and item D (Consideration
of measures and initiatives to assist in the expansion of trade and investment opportunities, including
support for measures of trade liberalization of developing country Members, in particular the
least-developed country Members). He hoped that the informal group would have completed its work
by July, thus enabling the CTD to review its conclusions and decide on the next course of action.
It could, for example, draft appropriate policy responses and submit them to the General Council for
its consideration. The Chairman indicated that there would be no change in the date for the Eighth
Session, where item E (Review of the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade
Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and in particular
the least-developed country Members) and item F (Review of WTO technical cooperation activities
as they relate to developing county Members) would be considered. He enquired whether the tentative
schedule was acceptable to delegations.

24. && The representative of the United States had no particular problems with the tentative schedule
of meetings or groupings of subjects. However, since his delegation had not had ample time to fully
study the proposal, he would like to reserve the right to come back to the question should he later identify
any problems. The representative of the European Communities also reserved the right to comment
on the proposal later. The representative of Japan said his delegation had no problems with the tentative
schedule, but had a small question on the footnote appearing in the paper. If he was correct, the 1995
Programme of Work also had a footnote on the issue of net-food importing countries. It was his
understanding that the issue was being dealt with in the Committee on Agriculture and to avoid
duplication of functions, it would be better for the 1996 Programme of Work to have the same footnote
as the 1995 Programme of Work. The representative of Argentina said his delegation had no problems
with the tentative schedule of meetings or groupings of subjects. The Programme of Work had already
been agreed to by the Committee and what was outstanding was a decision on the dates for the meetings.
His delegation would not have any problems if suggestions for amendments did not affect the Programme
of Work, but only the dates for the meetings. The representative of the European Communities said
that it was not only a question of dates, but also the combination of items for discussion in the CTD.
The former to him did not raise any problems. He recalled that at the General Council meeting of
December last year, the Communities requested that technical assistance be discussed preferably at
the first meeting of the CTD in 1996. They wanted to avoid what happened at the CTD meeting in
November last year where delegations were given a paper on WTO's technical cooperation activities
at the last moment. Delegations did not have the time to go through the document and could not engage
in any serious discussion of the subject.

25.&&  The Chairman stressed the need for flexibility; the CTD should be able to convene special
sessions as and when necessary. Delegations which had suggestions could propose them as the schedule
was a draft. The Chairman then mentioned that since Members of the WTO wish to strengthen
cooperation between UNCTAD and the WTO, the CTD could consider inviting Mr. Rubens Ricupero,
the Secretary-General of UNCTAD to address it at a future session. The representative of Paraguay
said the Chairman's suggestion was acceptable to his delegation. The representative of the United States
thought the matter could be further discussed. The Chairman said that he would carry out informal
consultations on this matter. The Committee took note of the comments made.

E. Other Business

26. && The Chairman referred to Rule 12bis of the rule of procedures of the CTD which provided
that "at its first meeting of the year, the CTD shall also elect a chairperson for the Sub-Committee
on the LLDCs among the representatives of Members. The Chairperson shall hold office until a new
election takes place in the CTD", and said that the Sub-Committee met only once last year under the
chairmanship of Ms. Anne Stoddart. Its Second Session was due to take place on 27 February 1996.
He had been informed by his predecessor, Ambassador Haron of Malaysia, that it was the general
view of delegations that the election of the chairperson should be postponed. He would therefore be
carrying out informal consultations on the matter and hoped that a chairperson could be elected at the
next session of the CTD. The Committee took note of that information provided by the Chairman.
