WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/81
16 June 2011


(11-2964)


Committee on Trade and Development
Eighty-First Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 31 MARCH 2011

Chairman:  H. E. Mr. Erwidodo (Indonesia)


 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913968" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC295913968 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913969" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC295913969 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc295913970" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc295913970 \h 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc295913971" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc295913971 \h 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913972" C.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC295913972 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913973" -	gulf cooperation council (gcc) notification of customs union – communication from china, egypt and india (wt/comtd/w/175)	 PAGEREF _TOC295913973 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913974" -	notification of the agreement on trade in goods between the association of southeast asian nations (asean) and korea	 PAGEREF _TOC295913974 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913975" -	notification of the comprehensive economic partnership agreement between india and korea (goods)	 PAGEREF _TOC295913975 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913976" -	latin american integration association (laia) – biennial report to the world trade organization: information on measures taken by laia member countries under the 1980 treaty of montevideo (for the period 1/1/2008-31/12/2009) (wt/comtd/72)	 PAGEREF _TOC295913976 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913977" D.	systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the gulf cooperation customs union – communication from china, egypt and india (wt/comtd/w/175)	 PAGEREF _TOC295913977 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913978" E.	transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements (wt/l/806) – statement by the chairman	 PAGEREF _TOC295913978 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913979" F.	annual review of the implementation of the hong kong decision on duty-free and quota-free market access for least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC295913979 \H 20
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913980" G.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC295913980 \H 25
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913981" H.	election of the chairperson of the sub-committee on least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC295913981 \H 26
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC295913982" I.	election of the chairperson of the committee on trade and development	 PAGEREF _TOC295913982 \H 26


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 81st Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3725 circulated on 21 March 2011.
He said that the agenda reflected two written requests that the Secretariat had received for the same communication from China, Egypt and India on "Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council Customs Union" to appear on the agenda.  The first request, which was reflected in agenda item C, came from China, Egypt and India themselves.  These Members had asked that the agenda items pertaining to the notifications of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union and the other two regional trade agreements (RTAs) notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV – namely, those between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea, and between India and Korea – be inscribed on the agenda of the 81st Session of the CTD, in the same way as they were inscribed on the agenda of the 80th Session of the CTD.  The second request came from the European Union (EU) and the United States (US).  These Members had requested a discussion of the same paper submitted by China, Egypt and India on "Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council Customs Union", but under a separate agenda item.  This was accordingly reflected on the agenda as item D.  He indicated that he had held consultations with the two groups of Members in an endeavour to have a single agenda item on this issue, but this had not proven possible, as these Members had particular concerns.
He added that there were other important issues to be considered at the present meeting.  For example, the CTD's annual review of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for least-developed countries (LDCs) appeared on the agenda.  Under this item, he informed Members that the EU would be making a presentation on the new rules of origin in its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme, copies of which were available in the meeting room.  Also on the agenda for the present meeting was the recent General Council decision to establish a Transparency Mechanism (TM) for Preferential Trade Arrangements (PTAs), which he wished to draw Members' attention to.  He also noted that there were items on the agenda relating to the appointments of the Chairpersons of the Sub-Committee on LDCs, and of the CTD.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that he wished to thank the Chairman for his resolved efforts to convene the present, belated, 81st Session of the CTD.  He informed the Committee that his delegation had for the past six months participated in several Chair-led informal consultations – at both the technical level and the Ambassadorial level – that were predominantly consumed by discussions on proposed changes that some Members had requested to the agenda for the 81st Session.  He observed in this regard that the agenda before the Committee was the fifth in a series of drafts that had been devised for the present meeting.
His delegation was pleased to note that the rules of procedure had been safeguarded, in so far as the three RTAs with a dual notification status had been retained for consideration by the CTD, and had been placed on the agenda under item C, which concerned "Notifications under the Enabling Clause".  However, his delegation also noted that the consideration of the GCC Customs Union, as well as the communication that had been submitted by China, India and Egypt in this regard, also appeared under a separate and new item D on the agenda.  Accordingly, his delegation sought clarification on a number of points.  He firstly inquired as to the purpose of including a new item D on the agenda, which addressed the same issues that were captured under item C.  He also asked whether rule 4 of the CTD's rules of procedures had been applied to include this new item on the agenda, and in particular whether a formal request had been communicated in writing to the Secretariat to that effect.  Additionally, he inquired whether the requesting Members would be in a position, as was the practice, to introduce the communication in document WT/COMTD/W/175 which was referred to in item D, notwithstanding the fact that they were not the authors or co-sponsors of the communication.  Finally, he asked what were the specific and systemic issues – other than the ones that were being discussed under item C in relation to the GCC Agreement – that the requesting Members wished to raise under item D.
&& The Representative of India said that he wanted to thank the Chairman for having rightly retained the three sub-items relating to RTAs with a dual notification under agenda item C, "Notifications under the Enabling Clause".  He wished to clarify that China, Egypt and India had not requested to inscribe these three sub-items afresh, but rather had requested to retain the sub-items from the 80th Session of the CTD.  Discussions under these sub-items had not been exhausted, and he looked forward to continuing the discussions.  He said that his delegation was intrigued to see that agenda item D pertained to a submission which had already been listed under item C.  India wished to know the details of this agenda item.  In particular, he inquired whether the Members that had requested the item would be introducing it, and if so, what were the specific issues concerning the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union that they wanted to discuss.
&& The Representative of China said that his delegation appreciated the Chairman's tireless efforts to reconcile the different positions relating to the CTD's agenda.  He remarked that it was a great pity that the last six months had been spent only on the formulation of the agenda, and that one meeting of the CTD could not be held at the end of 2010 for this reason.  He expressed his delegation's hope that this situation, which undermined the functioning of CTD, would not arise again in the future.
He went on to say that China fully supported retaining the sub-items concerning the three "dually-notified" RTAs on the agenda of the 81st Session of CTD, since Members had not yet found a satisfactory solution to deal with these RTAs.  China looked forward to further discussion on this matter.  He recognized that Members had the right to request that an item be placed on the agenda, if the relevant requirements were fulfilled.  However, China was extremely curious about the rationale behind having two separate items for the same proposal.  In this regard, he sought clarification as to whether the Members that had requested agenda item D had fulfilled the requirement of providing a written communication to the Secretariat according to rule 4 of the rules of procedure for meetings of the CTD.  He also inquired how the requesting Members foresaw the discussion under item D.  In particular, he asked whether the Members that had requested item D found this item redundant, given that the submission by China, Egypt and India already appeared under item C.
&& The Representative of the European Union said that her delegation considered that the first three sub-items under agenda item C were a repetition of previous announcements of the notifications of the specified RTAs under the Enabling Clause.  Having fulfilled the transparency objective, her delegation failed to understand the reason why these agreements were still listed on the agenda of the CTD under the item "Notifications under the Enabling Clause".  The EU was, therefore, not able to engage under the first three sub-items of this agenda item, and could not join in any possible decision to keep them on the agenda of the CTD in the future.  She indicated, however, that her delegation was ready to have a discussion on the communication on "Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council Customs Union".  The communication was circulated on 30 September 2010, and there had not been enough time to consider it before the last CTD meeting on 4 October 2010.  She expressed her delegation's appreciation to the Chairman for his efforts to bridge Members' positions on the agenda.
&& The Representative of the United States expressed his delegation's appreciation to the Chairman for leading Members in informal consultations to resolve the agenda for the present meeting.  He indicated that his delegation found it very unfortunate that the December 2010 meeting of the CTD had had to be postponed because of continuing differences between Members on the agenda and on the CTD's annual report.  The US recognized the importance of the CTD, as spelled out in its terms of reference, to serve as a focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO.  The US was therefore sorry to see the delay in the CTD's important work, which included discussion of next steps with regard to the TM for PTAs, as well as the annual review of the implementation of DFQF market access.  It was also unfortunate that the CTD's annual report for 2010 could not be finalized and circulated because some Members could not agree to a factual representation of the Committee's discussions on notifications of RTAs.  His delegation had worked diligently in an effort to resolve the issue, but one section of the report unfortunately remained outstanding.
With respect to the agenda for the present meeting, the US continued to have concerns with agenda item C, and specifically the sub-items addressing the notifications of the GCC Customs Union, the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement.  Despite the substantive concerns, the US had demonstrated flexibility in the consultations with the Chairman, in an effort to facilitate the formal CTD meeting.  Nevertheless, his delegation would not engage in discussion under the three sub-items.  Each of these sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and should be removed from the agenda.  In line with rule 4 of the rules of procedure for the General Council – which were the same for the CTD in terms of the setting of the agenda – Members could make a written submission together with the accompanying documentation for consideration at a CTD meeting.  While China, Egypt and India had submitted a paper, the paper had not, in the past, been independently listed on the agenda in a manner reflecting the title of the paper.
He went on to say that the agenda for the present meeting included an agenda item D which correctly listed the title of the paper submitted by China, Egypt and India.  The US had recommended this correction, and would provide comments on the paper under agenda item D.  He clarified that the US would not be introducing the paper, as the main purpose was to ensure that the paper was correctly listed on the agenda.  If some Members call for the continued listing of the specific sub-items under agenda item C for the next CTD meeting, the US wished to register at this point its objection to that course of action.  A better course of action would be for the Chairman to continue holding informal consultations before setting the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  In closing, he said that he wished to be very clear up front that the US had no concern with any developing country notifying a qualifying agreement under the Enabling Clause.  His delegation would provide greater detail on this point under agenda item D.
&& The Representative of Canada expressed his delegation's concern that the CTD could not be convened at the end of 2010, in light of issues surrounding the agenda for the meeting.  He also expressed regret that the CTD could not adopt its annual report for 2010.  He suggested that discussion under the first three sub-items of agenda item C be suspended until the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR) had concluded its discussion concerning RTAs with a dual notification.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that it was the US that had requested, for the 73rd Session of the CTD, the sub-item relating to the GCC Customs Union notification under "Notifications under the Enabling Clause".  This request had not come from China, Egypt or India.  He said that it was intriguing that the US had requested two agenda items to discuss the same issue.  He indicated that this was a first for his delegation, and that it was highly irregular.  His delegation reserved the right to consult with its legal services on the procedure to be followed in this respect.  He continued by saying that Egypt did not understand the suggestion that discussions on this matter should continue under a different agenda item.  According to the rules of procedure of the CTD, the three sub-items under agenda item C could not be removed until consensus had been reached on their consideration, and only when consultations among all Members in the CTD were exhausted.  He expressed his hope in this regard that discussions would be properly launched at the present meeting.
&& The Representative of India associated his delegation with the intervention by Egypt.  Referring to the interventions by the EU and the US, he said that his delegation was confused.  The representative of the EU had indicated that the three sub-items concerning RTAs with a dual notification appeared for purposes of transparency, while the US representative had said that they appeared for informational purposes.  He noted, however, that this had not been the position of these delegations in the past.  In particular, for the 73rd Session of the CTD, it was the US that had requested the sub-item on the GCC Customs Union notification.  Furthermore, at that meeting, a detailed and substantive discussion had taken place under this sub-item.  If such a discussion had taken place at that time, he did not see why the discussion could not continue now under the same sub-item.  India insisted that a substantive discussion on the paper by China, Egypt and India take place under agenda item C.
&& The Representative of Japan said that his delegation regretted that the CTD meeting that had been scheduled for December 2010 could not take place.  He indicated in this regard that Members should find a solution to the issues surrounding the CTD's agenda.  In Japan's view, transparency and information-sharing were the purposes of the agenda item titled "Notifications under the Enabling Clause".  The three sub-items under agenda item C concerning RTAs with a dual notification had already served their purpose, and should therefore be removed from the CTD's agenda.  He also made a distinction between the sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification and the other two sub-items, since only the former concerned a customs union.  He indicated his delegation's willingness to have a substantive discussion on the GCC Customs Union notification under agenda item D.  Finally, he said that it was important for Members to note that the dual notification issue was being discussed in the NGR.
&& The Representative of China associated his delegation with the interventions by Egypt and India. He said that he was not convinced that the first three sub-items listed under agenda item C had fulfilled their purpose, since Members had not reached consensus on how to proceed with RTAs with a dual notification.  In China's view, Members needed to have a better understanding of the consideration process for these RTAs before the three sub-items could be removed from the CTD's agenda.  It was therefore appropriate to maintain the three sub-items on the agenda, at least for the present meeting.  He added that, according to the rules of procedure, the removal of an item from the agenda required the consensus of Members.
&& The Representative of Panama said that, in his view, the rules of procedures of the WTO were sufficiently flexible to accommodate the requests of all delegations to inscribe items on the agenda.  The discussions that took place in the WTO were often broad-ranging, and did not necessarily always relate to the title of a particular agenda item.  At no point had a delegation been banned from raising a point which it deemed appropriate under an agenda item, regardless of the title of the agenda item.  Furthermore, it was not necessary for every Member to intervene under every agenda item in order for an in-depth discussion to take place.  His suggestion was that the present meeting proceed with delegations participating in the discussion under those agenda items where they wished to intervene. In this way, the Committee could proceed with its work.
&& The Chairman said that he had done his best to come up with a compromise solution.  In his view, the agenda for the present meeting was a compromise, as it listed the items that both groups of Members had requested in writing.  It was clear, however, that differences remained.  He proposed that the Committee take note of all the statements that had been made.
It was so agreed.
&& The Chairman said that he wished to raise a matter under "Other Business" concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  He proposed that the agenda item relating to "Other Business" be considered before the agenda items relating to the elections of the Chairpersons of the Sub-Committee on LDCs and of the CTD.
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with an update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs.
He indicated that, since his last update to the Committee in October 2010, developments had not been significant.  For one thing, there had been no new RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  Furthermore, for a number of notified RTAs – in particular, RTAs between India and MERCOSUR, India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, and India and Bhutan – the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties.  This was in spite of the Secretariat having requested the data relating to these RTAs to be provided by various specified dates in 2010, or even in 2009 in one case.  Of these agreements, only data relating to India-MERCOSUR had been provided.  In particular, the Secretariat had received all the necessary data from MERCOSUR, but was still waiting to receive some data from India.  If the outstanding data required from India were received in good time, it was conceivable that a Dedicated Session of the CTD could be held in 2011 to consider the India-MERCOSUR Agreement.  As for the other agreements – namely, India-Nepal, India-Afghanistan and India-Bhutan – their consideration by the CTD would very much depend on when the necessary data were submitted to the Secretariat.  He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible.
Finally, he recalled that he had mentioned in past meetings that there were a number of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties.  Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), an RTA falling in this category would only be considered by the CTD after it had been ratified by all the parties.  There were three RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that fell within this category, namely the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA), the South-Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) and the ASEAN-India Agreement.  He urged the parties to these agreements to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
Having completed his update, he proposed that the Committee move to the sub-items listed under agenda item C.  He said that he wished to begin by having the Committee treat the first three sub-items together, given that China, Egypt and India had requested all three, and that all three concerned RTAs that had been "dually notified" under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. The Committee would then move on to the fourth sub-item concerning the report on the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA).
-	GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL (GCC) NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMS UNION – COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA, EGYPT AND INDIA (WT/COMTD/W/175)
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND KOREA
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT BETWEEN INDIA AND KOREA (GOODS)
&& The Chairman said that he would first give the floor to China, Egypt and India, since it was these delegations that had requested that the three sub-items concerning RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV be retained on the CTD's agenda for the present meeting.
&& The Representative of Egypt noted that the Chairman had indicated that the three sub-items under consideration appeared on the agenda of the present meeting at the request of China, Egypt and India.  In this regard, he said that he wished to clarify that the sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification had initially appeared on the CTD's agenda at the 73rd Session at the request of the US.  The other two sub-items had appeared when the RTAs to which they related had been notified under the Enabling Clause.  The understanding of China, Egypt and India was that the three sub-items did not appear on the CTD's agenda at their request.
He went on to say that the notification of the GCC Customs Union had been discussed in the CTD under the agenda item "Notifications under the Enabling Clause" since the 73rd Session held in March 2009.  This sub-agenda item was introduced at the request of the US to challenge the legality of invoking the Enabling Clause in notifying the GCC Customs Union.  Some developed country Members did not favour moving forward with the process of consideration of the GCC Customs Union until further clarification was sought on the legal justification for such a notification.  This came despite the assertion made by the former CTD Chairman at the 69th Session that the GCC Customs Union was scheduled for a factual consideration at a Dedicated Session of the CTD in October 2008.  However, pursuant consultations held between the challenging developed Members and the GCC prompted the latter to make a subsequent notification under Article XXIV of GATT.  This was deemed by some developed Members to be the legal premise for examining this RTA in the CRTA, completely ignoring the fact that there was a legal and valid notification pertaining to this RTA made under the Enabling Clause, and that this RTA was scheduled for consideration in a Dedicated Session of the CTD.
Such undertakings raised several specific and systemic concerns to developing countries. These undertakings had prompted China, India and Egypt to address some of their concerns in a submission which was introduced and presented in detail at the 80th Session of the CTD held on 4 October 2010.  The proponents of the submission had argued that several issues needed to be discussed and resolved in the CTD before a determination could be made on how to consider RTAs with a dual notification status.  The ambit of the specific and systemic concerns went well beyond the domain of the NGR, which was merely reviewing the TM for RTAs.
He went on to list a number of points which he said were among the main concerns and questions that needed to be addressed with respect to the consideration of the GCC Agreement.  He firstly inquired whether there was any legal understanding to substantiate the views of some developed Members that the Enabling Clause did not provide legal coverage for the GCC Customs Union notification or any other custom union.  If this was the case, he asked for clarification for the basis on which Members had approved several other customs unions between developing countries that had been notified to the CTD under the Enabling Clause.  He cited a number of customs unions in this regard, including the Andean Community, the East African Community, the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa and the West African Economic and Monetary Union.
He further inquired on the extent to which Members aligned themselves with the Secretariat's Legal Note of 2003 which argued that, even if GATT Article XXIV was not explicitly set aside in the first paragraph of the Enabling Clause - whereas Article I explicitly was - invoking the Enabling Clause would suffice to authorize RTAs among developing and least-developed Members, even if the requirements of Article XXIV were not completely satisfied.  If Members did not agree with the Secretariat's legal opinion, he wished to know why some developed Members had based their arguments on the Legal Note to justify their proposals on how to deal with dual notifications in the NGR.
He also asked why Members had not challenged the legality of the Unified Economic Agreement that established the GCC Customs Union, which was notified in 1984 exclusively on the basis of the Enabling Clause.  He pointed out that Members had agreed at the time to consider that Agreement in the CTD within the realm of preferential arrangements among developing countries.  He additionally indicated that if the Agreement establishing the GCC Customs Union was already notified under the Enabling Clause in 1984, it seemed that the 1995 General Council decision on avoidance of procedural and institutional duplication needed be applied in this case.  Furthermore, pointing to the 2007 and 2009 notifications of the GCC Agreement as subsequent notifications regarding implementation procedures, he suggested that these notifications should be treated as such in the context of the RTAs TM.
He additionally referred to the procedures on reporting on RTAs adopted by the CTD in 1998.  According to these procedures, any information subsequent to an initial notification made under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause regarding the modification of the preferential arrangements between developing countries was to be notified under paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause.  In this light, he inquired on the extent to which Members had adhered to these procedures in the case of the GCC Customs Union.  He also asked whether it would be legal to obtain accession commitments in violation of existing WTO provisions.  It appeared that one member country of the GCC had in 2007 notified the implementation procedures for the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause and subsequently in 2009 had notified the same implementation procedures on the basis of Article XXIV of GATT.  Furthermore, in 1984 another GCC member country had notified the GCC Economic Agreement, which established the customs union itself, under the Enabling Clause.  On this basis, he asked how such unilateral actions would affect the rights and obligations of Members.  In addition, he inquired on the legal implications of having an agreement establishing a customs union notified under the Enabling Clause, while another notification regarding an amendment to that agreement was notified under both GATT Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause.
He continued with his list of issues by inquiring on the extent to which Member's accession commitments to notify an RTA on the basis of GATT Article XXIV had precedence over, or denied the other Members party to the same RTA, the right to notify the Agreement to the CTD under the Enabling Clause.  He additionally queried whether the CTD had fulfilled its mandate in considering the GCC Agreement, in so far as the Committee's terms of reference required it to consider any questions which may arise with regard to either the application or the use of special provisions in favour of developing country Members, including the invocation of the Enabling Clause.  He also shared his concern as to whether the CTD had reported the impasse on the interpretation and scope of the Enabling Clause, as well as other specific and systemic issues arising from the GCC dual notification, to the General Council for appropriate action, as per rule 33 of the Committee's rules of procedure.
He next queried whether Members had agreed to set a practice whereby notifications of RTAs among developing countries were to be contested at first sight or on a prima facie basis, without having any factual report prepared by the Secretariat to substantiate such challenges.  In this light, he asked whether Members would be in a position to accept a similar practice in the case of RTAs that were notified to the CRTA under GATT Article XXIV, given that both the CRTA and the CTD followed the same reporting procedures on RTAs, and despite the fact that such actions were not prescribed by the RTAs TM.  Moreover, he wished to know whether Members were now in a position to revert to the practice of making legal judgments on the compatibility or conformity of RTAs notified to the WTO under GATT Article XXIV.  He observed that this would prove to be interesting since, according to the Secretariat, the only RTA notified on the basis of Article XXIV that was ever deemed to be fully WTO-compatible was the Czech-Slovak Customs Union.  This suggested that neither the North American Free Trade Agreement nor the Treaty of Rome establishing the European Economic Community had ever been decreed as being compatible with Article XXIV, given that the commissioned working party could not, upon scrutiny, reconcile the legal issues.
He additionally asked whether Members would subscribe to the view that the Enabling Clause was neither a waiver nor an exception to the MFN obligation, but rather constituted a self-standing and designated regime.  Furthermore, if Members had the right to challenge the legality of an RTA that had been notified under the Enabling Clause, he questioned the extent to which Members in doing so were respecting their previous ad referendum commitment - as prescribed in Annex C of the draft Cancun Ministerial declaration - to guarantee that the Enabling Clause would apply whenever action was taken by developing Members under the provisions of this Clause.  He also queried whether RTA transparency obligations were distinct from any action that affected Members might wish to take in other WTO bodies.  If not, he asked how Members qualified and interpreted the provisions in the RTAs TM which stated that RTA factual presentations and the consideration of RTAs should not be used as a basis for dispute settlement procedures.
He continued with the following points.  He firstly inquired how Members interpreted the obligation not to prejudge the substance of a required RTA notification and not to affect Members' rights and obligations under the WTO agreements in any way, as was specified in the RTAs TM.  He pointed to Section C of the RTAs TM in particular, which stated that upon notification and without prejudging the substance under which an RTA had been notified, that RTA would be considered by Members on the basis of a factual presentation.  Furthermore, he asked what was of most importance for the RTA transparency exercise, in particular whether it was the venue of consideration or rather the relevant applicable WTO law that had been invoked to justify the creation of the RTA.  It seemed from the reaction of some developed Members in their consideration of the GCC Customs Union, and from a number of panel and appellate body rulings - including the Turkey-Textiles case and the EC‑Bananas dispute - that the applicable WTO legal provision was the core issue here.
Finally, he raised the question of whether the CRTA could review any notification automatically and unilaterally.  In this regard, he said that, according to the CRTA's terms of reference, it could not do so.  In particular, the CRTA could only carry out an examination of agreements in accordance with the procedures and terms of reference adopted by the Council for Trade in Goods, the Council for Trade in Services or the CTD, as the case may be, and thereafter report to the relevant body for appropriate action. Moreover, there were no prescribed provisions in the RTAs TM that would allow the CRTA to proceed with the examination of an RTA that had been notified twice, each time invoking a distinct WTO legal provision.
He went on to say that these were some of the specific and systemic issues that needed to be addressed in considering the GCC Customs Union.  He emphasized that, according to the Secretariat's Legal Note of 2003, any review of the RTA – wherever it occurred – must be performed according to the legal provision that had been invoked to justify the WTO consistency of the RTA in question.  The Note went on to ascertain that any review of an RTA notified under the Enabling Clause must be carried out in accordance with the terms of reference of the CTD, and that the CTD had overall responsibility for the operation of the Enabling Clause.  The legal obligations arising from the application of the Enabling Clause were very much different from those prescribed by GATT Article XXIV, and this was why his delegation had called for prudence in addressing the specific and systemic issues at hand. Merely addressing the issue of "venue for consideration" was clearly a legal and procedural understatement.
He said that he wished to conclude by quoting the Appellate Body's ruling in the EC–Tariff Preferences case, which ascertained that the Enabling Clause had become an integral part of the GATT 1994.  The Appellate Body also noted that the relationship between trade and development, and in particular the role of the Enabling Clause, remained prominent on the agenda of the WTO.  The Enabling Clause, by its own terms, sought to promote the fuller participation of developing countries in the world trading system.  The EU even argued that the Enabling Clause was the most concrete, comprehensive and important application of the principle of special and differential treatment, and that it was the most basic principle of the international law of development and constituted lex specialis that applied to the exclusion of more general WTO rules.
It was, therefore, arguable that customs unions among developing countries should continue to be notified on the basis of the Enabling Clause.  The object and purpose of the Enabling Clause clearly distinguished it from other exceptions such as those found in Articles XXIV, XX and XXI of the GATT 1994, allowing developed and least developed Members to adopt and pursue legitimate policy objectives.  For these reasons, Egypt requested that the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union be retained on the agenda for the consideration of the CTD on the basis of the Enabling Clause, and in light of the aforementioned specific and systemic issues that had been raised in its connection.  He indicated that a discussion on these issues had not yet properly begun.
&& The Representative of India associated his delegation with the intervention by Egypt.  He recalled that the sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification was introduced by the US delegation at the CTD's 73rd Session in March 2009.  Issues of concern to the US with regard to the notification of the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause were raised in that meeting in quite some detail.  Since then, discussions had continued under the same sub-item.  Furthermore, in response to a specific request from some Members, the delegations of China, Egypt and India had made a submission on "Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union".  The representative of Egypt had elaborated on several of the points raised in the submission.  He expressed his hope that Members could have a detailed discussion on these issues of immense systemic and specific interest and concern to his delegation.
&& The Representative of China associated his delegation with the interventions by Egypt and India.  He said that the sub-item concerning the notification of the GCC Customs Union had appeared on the CTD's agenda for nine consecutive meetings over the previous two years.  Members would, therefore, be quite familiar with the history and evolution of the issue, including which delegation had brought the issue to the CTD and had subsequently insisted on dropping the sub-item from the agenda when its demands had been met.
He went on to say that, in China's view, this was not simply a procedural issue dealing with the venue of consideration.  More seriously, it related to the legal rights and obligations of Members under the WTO Agreements.  He explained that the venue of consideration would determine the legal basis for the review, as well as the threshold for measuring the reviewed RTA's conformity with WTO rules.  The consequences of a review in the various Committees were also different.  Bearing this in mind, Members should not look at the surface of the issue, but needed to consider its profound implications in a systemic and substantive way.  As his delegation had repeatedly stated, the proper solution needed to consist of a number of elements.  These included firstly the need for the rights of developing Members under the Enabling Clause to be respected, especially the right to invoke Article 2(c) to foster sound relationships and improve trade liberalization among developing Members.  Second, there was a need to maintain and strengthen the central role of the CTD in development-related issues.  Any issue relating to the application of the Enabling Clause was certainly within the competence of the CTD.
He said that China - together with India, Egypt and other Members - had seriously engaged in the discussion with an open and constructive mind. China, Egypt and India had made a joint submission to illustrate the specific and systemic concerns arising out of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union in order to enhance Members' understanding.  These three delegations had also actively participated in the informal consultations on the draft CTD and CRTA reports to the General Council, and had consistently shown flexibility through the process.  Although the best efforts of these delegations had not led to a satisfactory solution, they remained committed to continuing their efforts.  He urged other Members to proceed in the same spirit.
He observed that, on previous occasions, some Members had suggested that the issue of dual notification should be addressed in the NGR.  While his delegation did not have fundamental objections to this, it believed that the concerns illustrated in the communication under discussion could not be fully resolved in the NGR.  He cited as an example the question of whether the Enabling Clause could provide the legal justification for the formation of a customs union that involved the elimination or reduction of non-tariff measures.  Another example he provided related to the question of whether a Member's accession commitment to notify an RTA to the CRTA under GATT Article XXIV would have precedence over other Members' rights to notify the same RTA to the CTD under the Enabling Clause.  The CTD had the responsibility to discuss these issues with an aim to finding a proper solution.
Furthermore, as Members were aware, the NGR was currently conducting the review of the RTAs TM, in the context of which the dual notification issue was being discussed.  On this, he observed that sharp differences remained among Members, and not much progress had been achieved thus far.  China was particularly concerned about the recent US proposal that all RTAs, irrespective of their legal basis, would be reviewed in the CRTA simply because this body, in the view of the US, was a more efficient and effective body to conduct such work.  He said that his delegation was of the view that the US proposal would not only impair developing Members' rights under the Enabling Clause, but would also undermine the mandate and terms of reference of the CTD.  In addition, China was especially not convinced that the CRTA was more efficient and effective, given that it was the same team in the Secretariat that was undertaking work relating to RTAs in both the CTD and the CRTA.
Finally, he noted that India had tabled a valuable proposal to retain the current practice of considering RTAs notified under GATT Article XXIV in the CRTA, and those notified under Enabling Clause in the CTD, while additionally entrusting to the latter the review of "dually notified" RTAs.  China considered that this proposal, which did not fundamentally overturn the basic structure of the RTAs TM, fully respected the mandate of the CTD.  The proposal was also in line with the principle of lex specialis of the Enabling Clause over GATT Article XXIV.  His delegation looked forward to further discussion on this option in another format, which could also facilitate discussion and a decision in the CTD.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	LATIN AMERICAN INTEGRATION ASSOCIATION (LAIA) – BIENNIAL REPORT TO THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION: INFORMATION ON MEASURES TAKEN BY LAIA MEMBER COUNTRIES UNDER THE 1980 TREATY OF MONTEVIDEO (FOR THE PERIOD 1/1/2008-31/12/2009) (WT/COMTD/72)
&& The Chairman said that the present sub-item concerned a biennial report to the WTO, circulated in document WT/COMTD/72, providing information on measures taken by LAIA member countries in the period 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2009.  He inquired whether any member country of the LAIA wished to take the floor to introduce the report.
&& The Representative of Uruguay said that, in its capacity as the headquarter State of the LAIA, Uruguay had submitted on 20 October 2010 the biennial report in order to inform the CTD of the measures taken under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo by the LAIA member countries that were also WTO Members, during the period 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2009.  Pursuant to paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause, the report was composed of three chapters.  The first chapter provided a brief summary of the integration process within the LAIA framework over the reporting period for the purpose of establishing a free trade area, as agreed in Resolution 59 of the XIIIth Council of Ministers in 2004.  Accordingly, it explained the broad outlines of the preparation and content of the new work programme approved by the Association's decision-making bodies, which covered not only aspects related to trade in goods, but also issues such as the social dimension of integration, trade in services, integration of production, trade promotion and facilitation.  The second chapter of the report listed the Agreements or Additional Protocols adopted by LAIA member countries under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo during the reporting period.  The third chapter described trends in member countries' intraregional trade and trade with the rest of the world over the reporting period and also set out some conclusions.
&& The Committee took note of the report.
SYSTEMIC AND SPECIFIC ISSUES ARISING OUT OF THE DUAL NOTIFICATION OF THE GULF COOPERATION CUSTOMS UNION – COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA, EGYPT AND INDIA (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that he would first give the floor to the EU and the US, since it was these delegations that had requested the present agenda item.
&& The Representative of the United States said that he wished to thank the Chairman for having correctly reflected the communication from China, Egypt and India under the present item.  He indicated that the GCC Customs Union had been incorrectly notified as an Enabling Clause agreement.  This was subsequently corrected, and the GCC Customs Union was in the pipeline to be reviewed in the CRTA, in line with the procedures of the TM for RTAs.  Some delegations had observed that the sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification had been requested for the 73rd Session of the CTD by the US.  He recalled, however, that during the 76th Session of the CTD, the GCC Customs Union notification under GATT Article XXIV was discussed and referred to the CRTA for review.  As no Member objected, the documentation for reviewing this customs union in the CRTA was being prepared.
Some Members had raised an interest in discussing the systemic issue of dual notifications at the 76th Session, and to keep the issue on the agenda for that purpose, but not for further discussion of the GCC Customs Union.  He referred to the minutes of that meeting – contained in document WT/COMTD/M/76 – and in particular paragraph 21, which contained the following text:  "The Chairman said that, as he saw it, the concerns raised related to the fact that the notification under the Enabling Clause remained.  He had not, however, heard any delegation object to the choice made by the GCC countries to notify their agreement under GATT Article XXIV and have it considered in the CRTA.  According to the process that he had outlined in his earlier intervention, the CTD would then be informed of the outcome of this consideration.  In that sense, the matter would in any case not be completely removed from the CTD's horizon."  The US considered this issue closed, and had requested that it be removed from the CTD's agenda.  He also thanked the Chairman for clarifying in his opening remarks at the present meeting as to which delegations had requested the three sub-items under agenda item C.
He went on to say that, given the incorrect notification of the GCC Customs Union as an Enabling Clause agreement, his delegation did not consider the GCC Customs Union notification to be a "dual notification".  The US wanted to be very clear that it had no quarrel with any developing country notifying a qualifying agreement under the Enabling Clause.  That was not what the GCC Customs Union notification issue was about.  This notification concerned a customs union, which made it different from non-customs union RTA notifications.  Unless and until Members prescribed criteria for the elimination of non-tariff measures (NTMs) under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause, GATT Article XXIV provided the only avenue for notifying and examining any customs union.  The notification and examination of customs unions were specifically provided for in Article XXIV.  Given that the Enabling Clause did not address customs unions, the notification of the GCC Customs Union as an Enabling Clause agreement was incorrect.  The only valid notification of the GCC Customs Union was the notification under Article XXIV.   Therefore, the GCC Customs Union was not a case of a dual notification.
He added, more generally, that any Member engaged in a customs union that was exceeding its WTO binding in applying the common external tariff of the customs union might need to rely on the provisions of Article XXIV:6, which provided the ability to seek an exception from GATT Article II.  The Enabling Clause only provided an exception from GATT Article I.  He noted, based on information obtained from the RTAs database, that other developing country Members such as the parties to the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), had notified their customs unions under GATT Article XXIV, while notifying other agreements under the Enabling Clause.  There was no inherent contradiction in undertaking two different kinds of arrangements, and notifying them accordingly.  Furthermore, the parties' corrected notification of the GCC Custom Union and the subsequent review of the agreement in the CRTA in no way impinged upon the terms of reference of the CTD.  He added that the RTAs TM set out the WTO rules for the review of RTAs.  He in particular referred to paragraph 18 of the RTAs TM, which instructed the CRTA and the CTD to implement the Mechanism.  The CRTA was to do so for RTAs falling under Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and Article V of GATS, while the CTD was to do so for RTAs falling under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.  For purposes of performing the functions established under this Mechanism, the CTD was to convene in Dedicated Session.
Referring to his remarks under agenda item A, he reiterated his delegation's recognition of the CTD's mandate to serve as a focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO.  The US also recognized that the CTD could, within its terms of reference, consider any questions that may arise from either the application or the use of special provisions in the multilateral trade agreements and related Ministerial decisions in favour of developing country Members.  However, just because an issue might involve developing countries, this did not mean that the issue must be taken up in the CTD, particularly when the RTAs TM clearly set out that the CRTA was responsible for reviewing Article XXIV agreements.  The CTD simply did not have the capacity or technical expertise to address every WTO issue involving a developing country, and it would not be practical to examine issues assigned to another WTO body in the CTD.  This was true whether it was the CRTA reviewing Article XXIV notifications, or the NGR reviewing the RTAs TM.  The WTO had specific technical bodies for a reason, and all Members represented in the CTD also participated in these technical bodies.  He added that the parties to the GCC Customs Union, as well as the CTD, had already agreed to have the review of this agreement take place in the CRTA, in line with RTAs TM procedures.
He next turned to the paper by China, Egypt and India.  He said that, in reviewing the paper, his delegation had not seen any specific issues related to the GCC Customs Union notification.  The paper appeared to be seeking a systemic discussion of RTAs, particularly with regard to the issue of dual notifications.  As his delegation had clarified, the GCC Customs Union notification was not a dual notification, given that the Enabling Clause notification was not valid.  However, if the paper was viewed as a systemic discussion of dual notifications more generally, the US noted that it largely overlapped with the discussion currently taking place in the NGR – a discussion that China, Egypt and India had been actively engaged in.  Given that the issue of dual notifications was directly linked to the functioning of the RTAs TM, the US believed that the NGR was the appropriate forum for the discussion, and requested that the issue be removed from the CTD's agenda for the next meeting.  As had been already explained, the US did not see the NGR's work on the RTAs TM in any way impinging upon the terms of reference of the CTD.
He said that he wished to turn briefly to the notifications of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement, in order to clarify that the US saw the notifications of these agreements as being very different from the GCC Customs Union notification.  These agreements were not customs unions, and had already been listed on the CTD's agenda in 2010, informing Members of their upcoming review under the RTAs TM.  His delegation requested that these sub‑items be removed from the agenda, as they had fulfilled their purpose.  The US believed that the Members requesting that the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement remain on the CTD's agenda had made this request for the purpose of discussing dual notifications.  Paragraph 3 of the paper by China, Egypt and India noted that these delegations' systemic concerns were due to a dual notification taking place under the RTAs TM.  Again, as the issue of dual notifications was directly tied to the functioning of the RTAs TM, and as the NGR was overseeing the review of the RTAs TM, his delegation saw the NGR as being the most appropriate forum for the discussion of dual notifications to take place.
&& The Representative of the European Union said that the communication from China, Egypt and India was submitted on 30 September 2010, and that there had not been enough time to consider it before the last CTD meeting held on 4 October 2010.  The present meeting, therefore, provided an opportunity to review the arguments made in the communication.  In the view of her delegation, the communication addressed an important systemic issue, which was the fact that some RTAs had been notified under two legal provisions, namely the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.  This was an issue of outstanding systemic importance, and this was why it was being discussed in the framework of the Doha Round of negotiations, as part of the review of the RTAs TM.  The current discussions in the NGR should clarify the procedures by which an agreement that had been notified twice should follow, notably by ensuring that the transparency of the affected agreement was not hampered.  In this light, she suggested that Members not discuss this issue until a solution was found in the NGR.  She noted that the CRTA respected this way of proceeding.
She went on to say that her delegation was open to any systemic discussion on the clarification of rules governing the creation of RTAs, including the scope of the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.  This type of systemic discussion on RTAs pertained to the NGR.  While the communication from China, Egypt and India highlighted a number of systemic issues, her delegation had failed to identify any specific issue related to the GCC in the communication.  Given that the communication pertained to systemic issues relating to RTAs, the EU suggested that it should be submitted to the NGR for proper consideration.  She added that the systemic debate had been portrayed by some as attempts by developed Members to deny developing Members their right to notify under the Enabling Clause agreements that qualified under this provision.  She wished to once again assure Members that this was not the case.  The EU had one overriding systemic objective, which was to assure full transparency in the agreements notified, so that the membership could learn about them in a timely manner.  She observed in conclusion that, after a number of years of discussion on the GCC Customs Union, Members were not really on track to meet this objective.
&& The Representative of Lesotho said that he wished to clarify that SACU related to a region, and not to an individual country.  This was in light of references he had heard to a "South African Customs Union".
&& The Representative of Egypt said that he had not intended to take the floor under this agenda item, as his delegation's position had been clearly expressed earlier in the meeting.  However, for the sake of demonstrating some flexibility, he said that he would make remarks on the interventions that had been made by the US and the EU.  Before doing so, however, he asked for clarification as to whether the notification of the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause had been withdrawn.  If this was the case, he said that Members should not be discussing issues relating to the notification of this agreement at all.
&& The Chairman said that his understanding was that the GCC re-notified its customs union under Article XXIV, but that the notification under the Enabling Clause had not been withdrawn.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that, on the basis of the clarification provided by the Chairman, there remained a notification under the Enabling Clause which had not been withdrawn. He was therefore astonished that the US had stated that there was no valid notification under the Enabling Clause.  He cautioned against any Member judging whether a notification made by one or more other Members was incorrect.  While there were no GCC countries present in the meeting room, he believed that these countries would not appreciate this.
He went on to say that he wished to respond to a number of factually baseless points that had been made.  He recalled firstly that the US had stated that the only valid notification of the GCC Customs Union was the one under GATT Article XXIV.  Since the Chairman had already clarified that the notification under the Enabling Clause had not been withdrawn, the point made by the US was factually incorrect.  The US had also stated that the Enabling Clause did not deal with customs unions.  On this, he said that he advised the US delegation to refer to the notes that it had presented in the context of the EC-Tariff Preferences case.  Here, the US had emphasized that several aspects of the Enabling Clause were unrelated to Article I of the GATT, and that the Enabling Clause was incorporated into GATT 1994.  The US had also indicated that it viewed that the Enabling Clause went further than the general exceptions prescribed in Article XX, XXI and XXIV of GATT 1994.  If this was the case, he inquired why this shouldn't apply to the GCC Customs Union.
He said that the US had also indicated that the TM for RTAs should be invoked and that its procedures should be respected to consider the GCC Customs Union.  On this, he said that he advised the US delegation to look at Section E of the Mechanism, which stated that the CRTA and the CTD were instructed to implement the Transparency Mechanism.  The CRTA would do so for RTAs falling under Article XXIV of GATT 1994 and Article V of GATS, while the CTD would do so for RTAs falling under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.  For purposes of performing the functions established under this Mechanism, the CTD was to convene in dedicated session.  In view of what was stated in the RTAs TMs, he said that it was clear that the Mechanism did not specify how RTAs with a dual notification were to be considered.  He also expressed his disagreement with the US' observation that the CTD did not have the capacity to examine all development issues and added that he was surprised that no other delegation had objected to this.  To clarify, he said that he followed meetings of both the CRTA and the CTD.  In addition, as China had indicated earlier, it was the same unit in the Secretariat that prepared the factual presentations on RTAs, regardless of the body in which the RTAs were to be considered.  In light of this, the US was requested to explain what it meant by its comment on the capacity of the CTD.
He recalled that both the EU and the US had stated that they had not found any specific issues relating to the GCC Customs Union in the paper by China, Egypt and India.  In this regard, he said that the EU and the US needed only to do a word count of the number times references were made to this agreement, both in the paper itself, as well as in the interventions made in the CTD by the proponents.  He could not understand why the EU and the US were not recognizing this.  The EU had additionally indicated that systemic issues were being dealt with by the NGR.  In response, he indicated that the NGR had stopped discussing systemic issues a long time ago.  Furthermore, proposals were being made by some developed Members to not discuss systemic issues at all at this point in time, but rather to put these issues into a post-Doha Work Programme.  His delegation could not accept the idea that systemic issues only be discussed as part of a post-Doha Work Programme.
He said that another point made by the EU was that China, Egypt and India should make a submission to the NGR on their proposals.  In this regard, he recalled that the NGR Chair had requested the Chairs of the CTD and the CRTA to provide reports on any problems faced in the implementation of the RTAs TM.  Both the reports had indicated that there was a problem with dual notifications.  Furthermore, since mention had been made of the submission by China, Egypt and India, he did not see why these delegations needed to re-submit the paper in the NGR, since the NGR Chair had already been made aware of the submission.  In concluding, he requested the Chairman to remove the present item from the CTD's agenda, as the issues were already being considered under agenda item C.  He also reiterated that the CTD had the responsibility to discuss all issues pertinent to the application of the Enabling Clause as well as any other development issues.  In the view of his delegation, the CTD was certainly capable of doing so, even if some Members might think otherwise.
&& The Representative of India said that his delegation maintained its position that substantive discussion on this issue had been completed at the present meeting under agenda item C, which was the most appropriate place to have such a discussion.  When the sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification was first introduced at the 73rd Session, much discussion had taken place.  Several documents concerning the sub-item had been listed on the agenda for that meeting and several delegations took the floor. It was clear, therefore, that substantive discussion could take place under that sub-item.  India could not agree to the double standards that suggested that when a particular delegation requested an item, substantive discussion could take place, but if some other delegations requested to maintain the item, it became an item only for purposes of transparency and information sharing. India fully associated itself with the comments made by Egypt.  Furthermore, India was of the view that no decision had been taken regarding the consideration of the GCC Customs Union.  He added that this was, in fact, one of the specific issues regarding the GCC Customs Union that was still pending. While some possibilities were discussed at the 76th Session, no decision had been taken.  This was acknowledged by the CTD Chairman in the course of several informal discussions. India requested a formal statement by the CTD Chairman to this effect at the present meeting.
He went on to say that he was surprised to hear that Japan differentiated between the GCC Customs Union notification and the other two dual notifications.  The US had further stated that the GCC Customs Union did not have a dual notification at all.  In this regard, he said that if the goods component of an RTA was notified under two provisions, it was a dual notification in his view. Furthermore, it had been clarified in the case of the GCC Customs Union that the notification under the Enabling Clause had not been withdrawn.  Therefore, the GCC Customs Union was an RTA with a dual notification. India also disagreed with the US' view that the Enabling Clause did not provide a legal basis for the notification of customs unions.  In the course of discussions in the CTD in 2009, some Members had requested the Secretariat to prepare a list of customs unions that had been notified under the Enabling Clause.  The Secretariat's list, prepared in July 2009, contained six customs unions. There were the Andean Community, MERCOSUR, the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, the East African Community and the Economic Community of West African States.  The GCC Customs Union was not, therefore, the first customs union to be notified under the Enabling Clause.  Furthermore, his delegation had not found any legal challenge being made to any of the previous customs unions that were notified under the Enabling Clause.
He added that, while the issue of dual notifications was being discussed in the NGR, there was extreme reluctance on the part of some Members to even engage in a discussion on systemic issues.  This had already been pointed out by Egypt.  Some developing countries were trying their best to start a discussion on systemic issues, but they had not found any constructive engagement.  On the review of the RTAs TM, the US had made a submission proposing that, irrespective of the notification provisions, all RTAs – including those with a dual notification – be considered in the CRTA.  In India's view, such a consideration would undermine not only the Enabling Clause, but also the terms of reference of the CTD, which had a clear mandate to discuss developmental issues, and also had a mandate to review RTAs.  He agreed with China that the issues relating to the GCC notification were very profound.  Members had to bear in mind that provisions such as the Enabling Clause were an integral part of the WTO acquis.  India noted a concerted effort to dilute and undermine the Enabling Clause, not only in deliberations in the CTD, but also in the CRTA, the NGR and other WTO bodies.  The efforts to chip away at the Enabling Clause were not new.  In the context of notifications of RTAs, it dated back to at least 2002, when the notification of the India-Sri Lanka Agreement under the Enabling Clause was put into question by the US.  This was in spite of the fact that both India and Sri Lanka were developing countries and had a prerogative to notify their RTA under the Enabling Clause.
The GCC issue was merely symptomatic of the obstacles being placed in the way of discussions on issues of importance to developing and least-developed Members.  The reference to the GCC in the title of the present agenda item was incidental. Reference could just have well have been made to the India-Sri Lanka Agreement, the India-Korea Agreement or the ASEAN-Korea Agreement.  What lay beneath the surface were the persistent and longstanding attempts of some developed country Members to undermine the flexibility available to developing countries under the Enabling Clause.  In 2008, there were protracted discussions in the CTD on how some developed Members were opposing the prerogative of the developing Members of the GCC Customs Union to notify their RTA under the Enabling Clause.  Prejudging the consideration process under the RTAs TM, accusations were made regarding tariff bindings and NTMs. Similar points were repeated by the US at the present meeting.  He questioned how delegations could make such allegations even before the consideration of an RTA took place.
He also recalled that consensus had been blocked some months ago on the annual report of the CTD for 2010.  As a result, Members were denied an opportunity to discuss in the General Council extremely important issues such as the accession of LDCs, the status of the Fourth UN Conference on LDCs scheduled for May 2011, progress on the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs, progress on Aid for Trade and work related to small and vulnerable economies.  It was not coincidental that such efforts to undermine the Enabling Clause included a particular developed-country Member which consistently refused to fulfil the obligation regarding implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs.  He concluded by noting that the issue under discussion had such profound implications that it had to be discussed not only at the present meeting, but also in successive meetings.
&& The Representative of the United States thanked Egypt and India for their comments.  He believed that these formed part of the substantive discussion that Members should be having on this matter. While he had attempted to note down all the questions that had been raised – which he would presently respond to – he invited delegations to inform him if he had missed anything.
He clarified firstly his reference to an incorrect notification of the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause.  He explained that it had not been his intention to pass judgement on the GCC countries.  The US was merely pointing to its understanding that the elimination of NTMs was not covered under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.  This was also why the GCC Customs Union had been subsequently re-notified under GATT Article XXIV, and was to be considered in the CRTA.  On the question regarding whether customs unions were covered under the Enabling Clause, he noted that this was not a systemic issue, since there were no provisions in the Enabling Clause covering agreements beyond trade in goods.  Furthermore, there were no criteria or conditions established for agreements covering the mutual reduction or elimination of NTMs.  Unless and until Members had prescribed such criteria with respect to paragraph 2(c), Article XXIV provided the avenue for notification.
He moved on to the question relating to the CTD's capacity.  In this regard, he hoped that the majority of Members understood that his observations were not meant to pass a judgement on the CTD itself.  Rather, he had meant to point out that the WTO had technical bodies for a good reason, as these bodies were able to address technical issues.  On the issue of dual notifications, he said that the US agreed that the RTAs TM did not provide procedures to address dual notifications.  As such, the issue was currently being discussed in the NGR, which had the mandate to address issues relating to the RTAs TM.  He added that the phrase "dual notification" was not WTO terminology, and he was not aware of a legal understanding on whether this meant the notification of an RTA under two different legal provisions, or two different legal provisions that were accurate.  With regard to the CTD's annual report, he said that the US stood ready to agree to any factual representation of what took place in the Committee in the past year.  On the comment by India relating to the provision of DFQF market access to LDCs, he indicated that he would be happy to address it under the appropriate agenda item. Finally, he turned to Egypt's request to drop the present agenda item.  Dropping an agenda item meant that the item had been discussed, and that discussion had been exhausted.  If Members felt that the discussion was exhausted, he said that he supported Egypt's request.
&& The Representative of China said that he did not really wish to enter into this discussion, since he believed that the present agenda item was not the most appropriate one for a consideration of the submission by China, Egypt and India.  However, after hearing the intervention by the US, he felt obliged to say a few words. Since most of the concerns had been touched upon by Egypt and India, he said that he would limit himself to making two points.  He firstly said that he shared Egypt's astonishment with the US' observation that the notification of the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause was not valid.  His understanding, which had been confirmed by the Chairman, was that the GCC had not revoked the Enabling Clause notification.  In this light, he indicated that it would be useful to hear further from the US on its view of the status of the latter notification.  Second, he said that he could not agree with the US that a decision had been taken on the venue for consideration of the GCC Customs Union.  On the contrary, such a decision had not been taken, in China's view.  This was why the GCC Customs Union notification was still on the CTD's agenda.  He added that, in the course of informal consultations, he had heard a similar view being expressed by the Chairman.  The Chairman's formal announcement on this matter would facilitate Members' discussion.
&& The Representative of Japan said that there was no agreed definition in the WTO of what was meant by "dual notification".  Nevertheless, there was a clear difference in the situation regarding the GCC Customs Union on the one hand, and the situation regarding the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement on the other.  In the case of the GCC Customs Union, the same parties had notified the agreement under different provisions.  For the other two, the notifications under two provisions had been made by different parties to the same agreement.  He added that the mandate of the NGR was to review the RTAs TM, and questions relating to notifications formed an important part of the review process.  He encouraged Members to focus their efforts on discussing the dual notification issue in the NGR.  He also emphasized that his delegation had no intention to undermine the Enabling Clause, and that Japan wanted to work constructively with Members to find a solution.  He noted, however, that Japan was still unsure as to what would be the outcome of a discussion in the CTD.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that the Chairman had held informal consultations over the past six months.  These consultations had included China, Egypt, India, the EU, the US, Japan, Australia, Ecuador and others.  In the course of these consultations, the Chairman had pronounced several times that no decision had been taken regarding the consideration of the GCC Customs Union.  This was why the three RTAs which had been "dually notified" were still on the CTD's agenda.  Egypt requested that the Chairman make the same pronouncement in the CTD.  He also asked whether the Secretariat or the US delegation had any recollection of the GCC countries having made a notification of a customs union before the establishment of the WTO.  He pointed to a notification that Kuwait had made in 1984 under the Enabling Clause concerning the Unified Economic Agreement among GCC States.  Article 4 of that agreement stated that the GCC countries would establish a customs union.  The notification, circulated in GATT document L/5676, had been discussed in two successive meetings of the CTD under the heading concerning preferential agreements among developing countries that invoked the Enabling Clause.  At the time, no Member had raised any objections to this notification.  He could not understand, therefore, why objections were being raised now on what was a subsequent notification of an RTA that had been established several years ago and notified under the Enabling Clause.
&& The Representative of India noted that some delegations had stated that the term "dual notification" was not part of WTO terminology.  He wondered whether it would be useful if the Secretariat could prepare a dictionary of WTO terminology.  He added that his delegation would be happy to use any other term to discuss the issue.  For example, the term "dually notified", as used by the US in its submission to the NGR, was acceptable.  However, he also pointed out that not accepting a term did not mean that the problem did not exist.  In the course of the NGR's work, the Chairs of the CTD and the CRTA had been asked to submit reports, and both reports highlighted the dual notification issue.  The issue was, therefore, very real in India's view.  Like China and Egypt, India requested the Chairman to make an announcement concerning his position on any decision taken with regard to the consideration of the GCC Customs Union.
&& The Chairman said that it was very obvious that there were differences between Members.  As there was no consensus, this meant that the issue had not been resolved.  This was his understanding.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/806) – STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN
&& The Chairman said that the General Council had taken a decision on 14 December 2010 – contained in document WT/L/806 – to establish, on a provisional basis, a Transparency Mechanism for PTAs which was to be implemented by the CTD.  He wished to make a few preliminary remarks on the Mechanism.  Given that the Mechanism brought a whole new layer of work to the CTD, he said that it was clear that Members would only learn through experience how to make the Mechanism function best, and there would certainly be opportunities in the future to revisit the manner in which it was being implemented.  It was only gradually that all the elements of the Mechanism would come together in the most appropriate way.  That being said, he indicated that it was important to start operationalizing the Mechanism, which was the purpose of his intervention today.  He said that he would touch on three issues in particular, which he saw as being important in operationalizing the Mechanism in the immediate future.  As far as he was aware, no new PTAs had been notified since the Mechanism came into force.  Therefore, his comments would deal only with existing PTAs that had already been notified to the WTO before the Mechanism was adopted by the General Council.
The first issue concerned the factual abstracts of existing PTAs.  According to paragraph 21 of the Mechanism, the WTO Secretariat was required to prepare a factual abstract of each PTA that was in force when the transparency procedures were adopted.  The factual abstracts, for which a template was provided in Annex 3, were to be prepared in full consultation with the notifying Member.  In this regard, he informed the Committee that the Secretariat had begun an examination of the information requirements in the template in Annex 3, in light of what information was already available on some existing PTAs notified to the WTO.  A preliminary observation was that it appeared that available information was not sufficient to complete the factual abstracts, and that input from notifying Members would be necessary.  Members would be kept informed of issues relating to the factual abstracts, which the Secretariat would begin preparing as soon as possible.
The second issue, which also concerned PTAs in force and already notified to the WTO, was related to the requirements for notifying Members in sections D and E of the Mechanism.  In particular, according to paragraph 25, PTAs already notified to the WTO and in force would be subject to the procedures under these two sections.  The procedures referred to comprised, among others, the requirement in paragraph 15 to notify on an annual basis, and no later than 30 June, changes affecting the implementation of the PTA in the previous calendar year.  In addition, as laid out in paragraph 16, the notifying Member was to submit, by 31 October, specified data relating to imports in the previous year.  Paragraph 17 specified that the annual information required in paragraphs 15 and 16 need not be made available if this information had already been submitted to the Integrated Data Base or had otherwise been provided to the Secretariat in an appropriate electronic format.  Furthermore, paragraph 18 indicated that developing country Members that had technical constraints fulfilling the paragraph 16 requirements would not be expected to do so until 31 July 2013, and could submit to the CTD by 31 July 2012 an outline of the steps to be taken to fulfil the requirements.
The third point he wished to raise concerned the electronic database on PTAs that the Secretariat was required to maintain, as laid out in paragraph 24.  On this, he understood that the Secretariat had begun taking the necessary steps to design and structure the database.  While the work was still in its early stages, his understanding was that, in the coming months, the Secretariat would be in a position to provide Members with a demonstration of what the database would look like.  He concluded by saying that while he believed that these were some of the pressing issues in the context of the immediate implementation of the Mechanism, there were other questions that Members would need to consider going forward.  He indicated that he would be providing a full briefing to his successor, who would consult Members, as appropriate, so as to ensure that the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs became fully functional as soon as possible.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's statement.
ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE HONG KONG DECISION ON DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS FOR LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  At the present meeting, the CTD was to undertake its fifth annual review of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision, as mandated in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.  He proposed that the EU first make its presentation on its new GSP rules of origin, after which the floor would be opened for any comments on the presentation, as well as other interventions in the context of the CTD's annual review.
&& The Representative of the European Union said that the EU had indicated at the last CTD meeting that it was about to issue new rules of origin for its GSP scheme.  The new rules of origin had been in force since 1 January 2011, and had been formally notified under the WTO Agreement on Rules of Origin.  Information was also being provided in the CTD, given the relevance of rules of origin for the operation of the EU's GSP scheme, and in particular the advantages that the new rules provided to LDCs.  The EU was also anticipating the requirements of the new PTAs TM, in particular in the context of informing the CTD of changes in the operation of the GSP scheme.  She recalled that a full presentation by an expert from Brussels – particularly on the advantages introduced for LDCs – had been made at the last meeting of the Sub-Committee on LDCs, and she referred to this presentation for the full details.
She said that the origin of the reform went back to 2005, when the objective was stated that the rules determining the acquisition of origin should be simpler to understand and apply, and should be development-friendly – notably vis-à-vis the LDCs, which needed the most to profit from available market access.  The reform of the GSP rules of origin was based on three pillars.  The first pillar of the reform foresaw the establishment of appropriate rules determining the acquisition of origin.  It was worth noting in this regard that the new rules of origin contained elements of relaxation for all beneficiary countries, and particularly the LDCs.  The second pillar aimed to set up efficient procedures and lay down the responsibilities of operators and authorities.  In particular, the current paper-based system of certification of origin would be replaced by a statement on origin to be given directly by exporters.  The transition to the new system would take place gradually, starting in 2017.  The third pillar aimed at improving administrative cooperation between the customs authorities of the beneficiary countries and those of the EU member States.
She went on to provide some details on general provisions applicable for GSP rules of origin as a whole.  For fishery products, the direct transport rule would be replaced with a more flexible non‑manipulation principle, and beneficiary countries would also benefit in an enhanced manner from the system of derogations from rules of origin.  Beneficiary countries could apply for derogations in the case of natural catastrophes, as well as on economic grounds.  Regional cumulation was maintained and enhanced.  Cumulation allowed countries with identical rules of origin to work together to manufacture products eligible for preferential treatment.  Cumulation conditions for regional cumulation were relaxed.  In addition to the previous possibilities, cumulation between member countries of ASEAN and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) was possible.  Extended cumulation with countries with which the EU had a free-trade agreement that was in force was possible under certain conditions.  A new MERCOSUR cumulation region has also been created.  As for product-specific rules, she said that the new rules contained simple criteria which could be easily understood by operators and easily controlled by administrations.  Product‑specific rules were generally relaxed for all beneficiary countries.  She pointed, for example, to the increase in the percentage thresholds of foreign content.  In addition, relaxed and simplified sector-specific rules had been adopted in a number of sectors of interest to developing countries, both in agricultural products and in industrial products.
She highlighted that special treatment was granted to LDCs relative to other beneficiary countries.  This was the first time that the EU would introduce a differentiation to the benefit of LDCs at the level of the applicable GSP rules of origin.  Until now, only the preference made available to LDCs was more favourable.  Now, the rules of origin themselves were specifically targeted to the needs of LDCs.  This was a far reaching policy decision for the EU.  Since LDCs tended to export mainly in some sectors, the relaxation of the rules of origin focused on these products.  LDCs would, therefore, be able to comply with the rules more easily, allowing them to benefit more from the tariff preferences granted by the EU.  For example, the textiles rule for LDCs was single transformation only, instead of the previous double transformation.  For processed agricultural products, the relaxation took the form of the possibility to integrate a higher threshold of 70 per cent of foreign content. 
&& The EU believed that these changes went in the direction sought by the LDC Group, as laid out in the Group's submissions on this matter.  The EU would provide information and training in order to help beneficiary countries to reap full benefit from the reform, paying particular attention to the introduction of the system of self-certification which would start in 2017, and for which additional time until 2020 would be provided if needed.  The objective was to ensure that the necessary information and training activities for beneficiary countries was provided so as to allow all concerned parties to prepare themselves to be able to apply the new rules of origin.  She invited any delegation with queries to contact the EU.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that it would have been useful to have information on the EU's GSP rules of origin made available in advance of the meeting.  He indicated that he had a number of questions on the EU's presentation.  He noted firstly that the GSP rules of origin had been relaxed, and particularly so for textiles and agricultural products.  In this regard, he asked how different were the rules of origin relative to those under the various Economic Partnership Agreement protocols.  He also sought more information on the relationship with the "Pan Euro Med" rules of origin. He observed that the foreign content rules had been relaxed, and asked whether a drawback rule was still applied.  He additionally asked for more detail on the regional cumulation that had been referred to. Finally, in the context of the 2017 date that had been mentioned, he asked for clarification as to when the changes were to be applied.
&& The Representative of India said that paragraph 47 of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration placed an obligation on developed countries to provide DFQF market access for products originating from LDCs.  The Declaration also encouraged developing-country Members declaring themselves in a position to do so, to provide such treatment to LDCs' products.  In accordance with the Hong Kong Declaration, India became the first developing country to announce a comprehensive scheme under the DFQF mandate to provide zero-duty and preferential market access for all LDCs.  The Scheme, designated as the Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for the LDCs, was announced by the Indian Prime Minister on the occasion of the India-Africa Forum Summit of African Heads of States and Governments in New Delhi in April 2008. 
India had taken the utmost care to ensure that the DFTP Scheme provided effective and substantial market access, especially to products of export interest to the LDCs.  More importantly, the Scheme was comprehensive, simple and non-reciprocal.  It provided preferential market access on tariff lines that comprised 92.5 per cent of the global exports of all LDCs.  The duty-free list included 85 per cent of total tariff lines at the 6-digit level of the Harmonized System.  The rules of origin stipulated a change in tariff heading plus 30 per cent domestic value addition.  Only 6 per cent of lines were in the exclusion list of the Scheme.  Products of immediate interest to LDCs which were covered under the DFTP Scheme included cotton, cocoa, aluminium ores, copper ores, cashew nuts, cane‑sugar, ready-made garments, fish fillets and non-industrial diamonds. 
The Scheme was open to all 49 LDCs - including 33 LDCs in Africa - regardless of whether they were WTO Members.  The Scheme was procedurally simple to operate and required each LDC to submit a letter of intent and the list of agencies and officials authorized to issue the certificate of origin.  To date, letters of intent had been received from 26 LDCs, namely Bangladesh, Benin, Burundi, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Central Republic of Africa, Timor Leste, Eritrea, Ethiopia, the Gambia, Lao PDR, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Mozambique, Myanmar, Rwanda, Samoa, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia.  Of these, only Burundi, Timor Leste, Eritrea, Lesotho, Mali and Zambia had yet to submit details of agencies authorized to issue a certificate of origin. 
His delegation urged the remaining LDCs to finalize their internal processes, and to intimate to India their willingness to avail of the benefits under this Scheme, and more generally to benefit from India's substantial market access opening to the LDCs.  He additionally pointed to some other activities being jointly organized by the Department of Commerce and the Ministry of External Affairs of India. These included the training of Trade and Commerce Ministries' officials from LDCs by the WTO Studies Centre in New Delhi, capacity building programmes for countries acceding to the WTO, and cotton development intervention.
&& The Representative of Switzerland said that it was with great pleasure that her delegation wished to inform Members that the Swiss Government had decided to go in the same direction as the EU with regard to GSP rules of origin.  In particular, the Swiss Federal Council had adopted a revised ordinance on origin rules for tariff preferences for developing countries.  The revised ordinance, which was due to enter into force on 1 May 2011, would pave the way to enhanced access to the Swiss market for goods from developing countries.  It aimed to boost the use of the Swiss GSP by developing countries.  The Swiss GSP was currently being used to 40 per cent of its potential because of, among other things, the complexity of rules conferring national origin to goods.  In 2010, goods imported into Switzerland under the Swiss GSP amounted to CHF4.3 billion.  They could have amounted to CHF10.5 billion, had all exporters potentially qualifying for the Swiss GSP made use of it. 
The softening of origin rules, as foreseen in the revised ordinance, enhanced access to the Swiss market for products from developing countries.  The main modifications were a reduction in the number of specific rules and in the local value-added requested.  Moreover, a large number of goods from LDCs were granted softer rules than goods from other developing countries.  In adopting its revised ordinance, Switzerland had adapted its preferential origin rules to be consistent with those the EU adopted at the end of 2010.  The similarity of the rules with those of the EU - as well as with those of Norway and Turkey - greatly facilitated the transit of products qualifying for GSP treatment on the European continent.  Producers from developing countries could thus take advantage of a unified European market with respect to origin rules.
&& The Representative of the United States said that his delegation had a longstanding commitment to transparency, and was pleased to participate in the present annual review.  He stressed that the US remained fully committed to implementing the DFQF Decision on the terms agreed to at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference, together with the results of an agreement on the overall negotiations under the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).  Backed by the results of many studies, his delegation reiterated its strong belief that the best result for all developing countries - including the LDCs - was an ambitious package that opened new markets worldwide.  As such, the Doha Round was a single undertaking for a good reason, since the best package could be achieved if all contributions were tied up together.  The US was also committed to implementing the DFQF Decision in a manner that would result in meaningful opportunities for the products of LDCs, concurrent with implementing the results of a successful completion of the overall DDA.
To ensure meaningful US implementation of DFQF for LDCs, the US was carefully assessing the existing level of market share of specific LDCs, and the extent to which the LDCs were already benefitting from US preference programmes.  The US was already particularly open to Sub‑Saharan African (SSA) countries.  In 2010, 99.7 per cent of non-oil US imports from beneficiary countries of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) entered the US duty free.  Many SSA LDCs were active users of US trade preference programmes.  This was also true for Haiti, the only LDC in the western hemisphere.
In its analysis of DFQF implementation, the US was considering how best to ensure that a range of LDCs, such as SSA LDCs and Haiti, could continue to have some market access and benefit from US preference programmes.  One area under review concerned apparel trade.  Data on chapters 61 and 62 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule (HTS) of the US showed that between 2004 and 2010, US apparel imports from Bangladesh increased by 105 per cent and from Cambodia by 56 per cent, even though both countries were currently suppliers on a most-favoured-nation (MFN) basis.  During the same period, US imports from AGOA beneficiary countries dropped by 58 per cent and from African LDCs by 57 per cent.  While Bangladesh and Cambodia had gained US market share, up 89 per cent and 44 per cent respectively, Sub-Saharan Africa's market share had dropped by 61 per cent for AGOA beneficiaries and by 60 per cent for AGOA LDCs.  He reiterated the US' full commitment to implement the DFQF Decision in a manner consistent with its commitment at Hong Kong and that would result in meaningful opportunities for the products of LDCs.  The US was also working to ensure a strong overall market opening result in the Doha Round that would benefit all LDCs.
&& The Representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed regret that the convening of the 81st Session of the CTD had been delayed.  He, however, noted with appreciation the Chairman's efforts to resolve the differences over the agenda for the present meeting. 
He went on to say that the LDC Group reiterated that the enhancement of market access was a critical step in the integration of LDCs into the global economy and the multilateral trading system.  The LDCs remained thankful to those Members that were providing enhanced market access for products originating from LDCs.  He recalled that a commitment had been made during the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference to notify on an annual basis the implementation of the schemes adopted under Decision 36 in Annex F, so as to enable the CTD to annually review the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to LDCs and to report to the General Council for appropriate action.  Accordingly, the LDC Group welcomed and appreciated the steps that had been taken by several Members to meaningfully enhance market access for products originating from LDCs.  However, the LDCs also reiterated that there was still room for further work to be done by developed countries, and developing countries in a position to do so, in order to fully and effectively implement the Decision, including with regard to the simplification and transparency of rules of origin.  He called on Members to live up to the spirit and letter of the mandate in the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration. 
While the LDCs appreciated the updates that had been made to preferential schemes, they remained concerned over the rather limited amount of information made available to the CTD.  && The LDC Group hoped that Members would give further attention to the matter in view of its critical importance for LDCs.  The Group remained ready to engage constructively with Members on outstanding issues concerning DFQF market access and rules of origin.  He highlighted in particular that LDCs faced constraints in properly utilizing certain preferential schemes, due to stringent rules of origin.  In this regard, he recalled that Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration urged developed countries, and developing countries in a position to do so, to ensure that preferential rules of origin applicable to imports from LDCs were transparent, simple and contributed to facilitating market access.  The LDC Group had recently submitted a modified rules-of-origin proposal, and looked forward to having substantive discussions on this proposal.  In the meantime, the Group was also further modifying the proposal to bring about greater clarity.  He also expressed the LDCs' appreciation to the EU for its recent operationalization of its new GSP rules of origin.  The Group was currently examining the actual impact of the new rules of origin on LDCs' exports and would provide feedback in due course. 
He said that, at the last meeting of the Sub-Committee on LDCs, the LDC Group had made some observations on a similar presentation by the EU, especially in relation to registration procedures and the costs and export benchmarks for micro and small enterprises.  He hoped that the EU had taken note of those points.  The LDCs would continue to have discussions with the EU on any additional points that they might wish to highlight.  He expressed appreciation for the EU's understanding of the particular challenges faced by LDCs, and the initiative to accordingly calibrate its GSP rules of origin to address some of these concerns.  The Group also welcomed the recent announcement by Switzerland to go in the same direction as the EU in terms of simplifying the GSP rules of origin. 
He additionally underscored the continued need for appropriate technical assistance and capacity building support for LDCs.  In this regard, he expressed appreciation for the contributions made by various development partners to the DDA Global Trust Fund, the Enhanced Integrated Framework and other bilateral arrangements targeted at enhancing the capacities of LDCs.  Finally, he expressed hope that the Programme of Action to be adopted by the upcoming Fourth UN Conference on LDCs would reflect substantive provisions with regard to preferential schemes for LDCs.  The Istanbul Programme of Action for LDCs should further build on the gains and achievements made through the Brussels Programme of Action adopted in 2001.
&& The Representative of Egypt thanked the US and India for the information they had shared under the present agenda item.  He asked whether the US could shed some light on the obstacles that it was facing in renewing its GSP scheme.
&& The Chairman inquired whether the EU and the US representatives wished to respond to the questions that had been posed on their interventions under the present agenda item.
&& The Representative of the European Union invited Egypt to submit its questions in writing, so that these could be forwarded to Brussels.
&& The Representative of the United States similarly invited Egypt so submit its question in writing, so that the question could be forwarded to his capital.
&& The Representative of Bangladesh said that he wished to make a comment on the US' intervention, and particularly on the point that was made concerning Bangladesh's performance relative to other countries.  He noted in this regard that the comments made by the US representative did not provide the full picture of Bangladesh's situation, and that he did not subscribe to them.  Since Bangladesh was engaging with the US on such issues, he hoped that this matter would soon be clarified.   
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to raise a matter concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  He said that it had been the CTD's practice to hold a discussion on this subject every two years or so.  On previous occasions when this item had been placed on the CTD's agenda, the Secretariat had updated its statistical background paper on the participation of developing countries in global trade, in order to assist Members in their discussion.  He noted that the last such discussion by the CTD on this subject had taken place in December 2009.  He proposed that the CTD have another discussion on the subject at its last meeting of 2011, for which the Secretariat would once again update its background paper using the most recent trade statistics.
It was so agreed.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that he had undertaken consultations with Members concerning the Chairmanship of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  On the basis of his consultations, he was pleased to inform the Committee that a consensus had emerged for H.E. Steffen Smidt, Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Denmark to the UN and other international organizations in Geneva, to serve as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  He said that Ambassador Smidt had vast experience in the international arena, especially on development issues.  As Chairman of the Working Party on the Accession of Ethiopia, Ambassador Smidt was playing an instrumental role in advancing the accession of Ethiopia to the WTO.  Among Ambassador Smidt's previous positions were his tenure as Director-General of the Directorate-General for Development at the European Commission in Brussels from 1995 to 1997, and his time as Ambassador to the OECD and UNESCO in Paris in 2006 and 2007.  Before taking up his present position, Ambassador Smidt was the Ambassador and Under-Secretary for Global Challenges at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Copenhagen.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Smidt as Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.
&& The Chairman congratulated Ambassador Smidt on his election, and wished him all success in his new responsibilities, which began immediately.  He also expressed his appreciation to the outgoing Chairman, Ambassador Feyder of Luxembourg, for all his efforts and initiatives in steering the Sub-Committee over the past few years.
&& The Representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, welcomed the election of Ambassador Smidt.  He said that the LDC Group attached great importance to the work of the Sub‑Committee on LDCs, and believed that the Sub-Committee would be able continue to work to achieve its mandate under the able guidance of Ambassador Smidt.  He noted that Ambassador Smidt was eminently qualified to serve as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs, and that all LDC Ambassadors enjoyed a very good relationship with him.
The incoming Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs said that he was honoured to be entrusted with the task of chairing the Sub-Committee, and would do his utmost to carry out his responsibilities in this position.  He indicated that he would welcome the guidance and advice of the Secretariat.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
&& The Chairman said that the General Council at its meeting on 22 February had announced the new Chairpersons for 2010.  He was pleased to inform the Committee that H.E. Dr. Anthony Mothae Maruping of Lesotho, Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the UN and other international organizations in Geneva, had been chosen as the new Chairman of the CTD.  He said that Ambassador Maruping had been in his current Ambassadorial position in Geneva since October 2006, and had served as the Chairman of the Enhanced Integrated Framework Board since 2007.  Ambassador Maruping was chosen as Chairman of the Council for Trade in Goods in 2010 by the General Council and had held a number of other prominent positions in the WTO, including the Chair of the African Group of Ambassadors in 2006 and the Coordinator of the LDC Group in 2008 and up to mid-2009.  Since 2010, Ambassador Maruping had served as the Vice-Chairman of UNCTAD's Trade and Development Board, and was currently the President of the Geneva Chapter of the G-77 and China.
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Maruping as Chairman of the CTD.
The incoming Chairman thanked Members for having placed their trust in him to chair the CTD, and expressed appreciation to the outgoing Chairman for his work over the last year.  He also congratulated Ambassador Smidt for his election as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  He noted the challenges he faced as the Chairman of the CTD, given that the CTD was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO.  He assured Members of his intention to continue to give a high profile to the work of the Committee, which included the work of the CTD in Regular Session, the work on Aid for Trade, and the work of the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs and Small Economies.  He added that he looked forward to working with Members on the various CTD issues, and in particular on the new Transparency Mechanism for PTAs, so as to ensure that the Mechanism became fully functional as soon as possible.
Looking ahead to development-related events in the course of 2011, he mentioned the Fourth UN Conference on LDCs, the Third Global Review of Aid for Trade, and the meeting of the UN's Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).  He also highlighted the importance of the on-going preparations for the UNCTAD XIII Conference, which would be held in 2012.  He noted that the recovery from the recent global economic and financial crisis was selective and fragile, and was sluggish on job creation.  There was a risk of speculative bubbles being created, which could eventually burst and lead to a relapse of the crisis. Vigilance was therefore advised, and challenges remained.
&& The Representative of Bangladesh, on behalf of the LDC Group, welcomed Ambassador Maruping and assured him of the full support of the LDCs.  The LDC Group was confident that the incoming Chairman would carry out his responsibilities with the highest degree of efficiency.  Appreciation was also expressed to the outgoing Chairman for his constructive engagement with the LDC Group, as well as for his sustained efforts to resolve the differences between some Members so as to advance the work of the Committee.
&& The Representative of Egypt congratulated Ambassador Maruping on assuming the Chairmanship of the CTD, and wished him all success in steering the Committee's work over the coming months.  Egypt believed that the experience the incoming Chairman brought to the CTD would be an addition to the valuable work that the Committee undertook as the focal point for consideration and coordination of all work on development issues in the WTO.  His delegation looked forward to working constructively with him.  With regard to the outgoing Chairman, he said that Egypt wished to give credit where credit was due.  Although his delegation would have liked Ambassador Erwidodo to pronounce that no decision had been taken by the CTD on the GCC issue, he expressed his sincere appreciation for the outgoing Chairman's tireless efforts.  He said that Ambassador Erwidodo had eloquently steered the work of the CTD through some very rough waters, and with all neutrality and objectivity.  The outgoing Chairman's patience and valuable contributions would not go unnoticed in the CTD.
&& The Representative of India congratulated Ambassador Maruping on his election as Chairman of the CTD, and assured him of India's full cooperation.  He also expressed his appreciation for the tireless efforts of Ambassador Erwidodo in steering the work of the CTD.
&& The Representative of the European Union welcomed Ambassador Maruping as the new Chairman of the CTD.  She also thanked Ambassador Erwidodo for his hard work and his patience over the past year.
&& The Representative of the United States thanked Ambassador Erwidodo for his efforts in steering the work of the CTD.  He also welcomed Ambassador Maruping, and indicated that the US looked forward to his leadership of the Committee.
The meeting was adjourned. 
__________
 Information on the EU's new GSP rules of origin was circulated after the meeting in document WT/COMTD/N/4/Add.5. 









WT/COMTD/M/81 Page  PAGE 26



	WT/COMTD/M/81 	Page  PAGE 27



 

 

 

 



