
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 17 JULY 2013


Chairperson: H.E. Ms. Marion Williams (Barbados)
 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC365280807" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC365280807 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC365280808" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC365280808 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280809" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc365280809 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280810" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc365280810 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC365280811" C.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC365280811 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280812" -	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training - 2012 (WT/COMTD/W/197)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280812 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280813" -	Annual Report on Monitoring and Evaluation of Technical Assistance and Training - 2012 (WT/COMTD/W/199)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280813 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280814" -	Preparations for the 2014-2015 Technical Assistance and Training Plan - briefing by the Secretariat	 PAGEREF _Toc365280814 \h 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC365280815" D.	report of the 47th session of the joint advisory group on the international trade centre unctad/wto (ITC/AG(XLVII)/251)	 PAGEREF _TOC365280815 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC365280816" E.	trade and development - work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (WT/MIN(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC365280816 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280817" (i)	Special and differential treatment provisions in WTO Agreements and Decisions (WT/COMTD/W/196) - updated note by the Secretariat	 PAGEREF _Toc365280817 \h 11
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280818" (ii)	Proposals by Members	 PAGEREF _Toc365280818 \h 12
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280819" -	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280819 \h 12
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280820" -	Supporting Ministers' guidance for focused work in the Committee on Trade and Development - proposal from Australia, Chile, Colombia and Singapore (WT/COMTD/W/191)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280820 \h 15
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280821" -	Strengthening of the Committee on Trade and Development - proposal from Barbados on behalf of the Group of Small, Vulnerable Economies (WT/COMTD/W/195)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280821 \h 16
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC365280822" F.	electronic commerce - decision of 17 december 2011 (WT/L/843)	 PAGEREF _TOC365280822 \H 16
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280823" -	Report on the Workshop on "E-commerce, Development and SMEs" (8‑9 April 2013) (WT/COMTD/W/198)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280823 \h 16
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC365280824" G.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC365280824 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280825" -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280825 \h 18
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280826" -	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc365280826 \h 18
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280827" -	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement  between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280827 \h 19
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280828" -	Generalized System of Preferences - notification by Norway (WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.5)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280828 \h 19
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280829" -	Generalized System of Preferences - notification by the European Union (WT/COMTD/N/4/Add.6)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280829 \h 20
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC365280830" H.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC365280830 \H 21
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC365280831" I.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to Least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC365280831 \H 21
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280832" -	Market information and analysis tools - presentation by the Secretariat and the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO	 PAGEREF _Toc365280832 \h 21
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc365280833" -	Better utilization of the market access provided to LDCs under duty free and quota free - communication from Nepal, on behalf of the LDC Group (WT/COMTD/W/194)	 PAGEREF _Toc365280833 \h 22
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC365280834" J.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC365280834 \H 23

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairperson said that the draft agenda for the 88th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/4149/Rev.1 circulated on 26 June 2013. 
The agenda was adopted.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairperson recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis. These included the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. She proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairperson said that the positions of delegations were on the record. She said that if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
&& The Chairperson said that the Director-General would speak first under this agenda item. The Committee would then consider the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2012 - circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/197 - and the Annual Report on Monitoring and Evaluation of Technical Assistance and Training - circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/199. Finally, the Secretariat would brief Members on preparations for the Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan) for 2014 and 2015.
&& The Director-General said that he had recently informed the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration that 35% of the budget and resources of the WTO was focused on designing, implementing and monitoring trade capacity building including through Aid for Trade, trade-related technical assistance (TA), the Enhanced Integrated Framework (EIF), the Standards and Trade Development Facility (STDF), the trade facilitation needs assessments and the work of the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC). He explained that since becoming Director‑General in 2005, and building on the initiatives of his predecessors, he had made all efforts to situate the trade-related capacity building of developing countries, especially the least‑developed countries (LDCs), as one of the central pillars of the work of the WTO. He was confident that trade capacity building was now firmly embedded in the psyche of the organization.
The WTO's TA was a key contribution to strengthening the human and institutional capacity of Members to take full advantage of the rules-based multilateral trading system, to deal with emerging challenges and to enforce Members' rights and obligations. It was as much an ownership boosting mechanism as it was a capacity building one. Increased knowledge of the multilateral trading system increased that ownership. Increased ownership in turn clarified trade priorities and participation, while increased participation of developing countries in multilateral rule making improved the functioning of the multilateral trading system and strengthened its legitimacy. The implementation of the WTO's TA programme had made steady progress over the past eight years. In 2006, the first external evaluation of TA was conducted, the findings of which had inspired a number of improvements. Subsequently, in 2009, a new vision for TA was launched, with the objective of ensuring cumulative, progressive and sustainable capacity building and enhancing the efficiency and impact of the WTO's TA. He noted that the TA-related issues for discussion at the present meeting would cover how the WTO had delivered TA in the recent past, as well as how the Secretariat judged this delivery and what improvements it planned to make. In addition, the discussion would touch upon how the results-based management (RBM) framework and the discussions with Members were feeding into the crafting, programming and implementation of future TA activities.
He went on to say that building capacity in developing countries and continuing to financially support the WTO's TA programmes was especially important in light of the changes that were occurring in world trade. The global debate was increasingly moving away from one based on tariff reduction and market access to one based on non-tariff barriers, including trade facilitation issues, compliance with standards of various types, and services regulations. Developing country requests for TA reflected these changes and the WTO had to maintain enough flexibility to adjust its services to the changing needs of developing countries. In delivering on its TA mandate in 2012, the WTO had managed to expand where needed, condense where required, move into new areas, and establish a structure to better monitor and evaluate the design and delivery of TA. This had been done under some budget strain, given that traditional donors had had their budgets squeezed by the global crisis. However, the needs of developing countries for more sophisticated TA in different areas had increased as a result of the same crisis. While this had meant some rationalization in the way that the WTO delivered TA, it had had no adverse effect on the quality of the services that were offered. In fact, it had led to a more robust and transparent system at both the input and output streams. 
At the level of inputs, a multi-layered architecture of training modules had been created and the Secretariat had increasingly moved to the delivery of e-learning - a move that had allowed an exponential increase in the reach and depth of training at marginal additional costs. At the output level, the RBM system allowed a more transparent assessment of the impact of TA delivery. The Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training had evolved from an activity-centred one to include a results-focused monitoring report. For the first time, a Logframe had been developed which encapsulated the outcomes and outputs to be achieved, as well as the indicators and baselines to assist in measuring progress. As more data was collected to measure against the baseline objectives, the Secretariat would have a clearer picture of where the greatest impact was being felt and where improvements could be made. A TA Monitoring and Evaluation team had been established within the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) to consolidate the monitoring and evaluation skills and capacity of the Secretariat and ensure a sustained focus on results. This would be an important tool for both donors and beneficiaries.
He said that the WTO had been delivering more than 300 TA activities annually in the last decade. Thousands of officials had gained valuable knowledge and skills that had enabled them to carry out their roles more effectively. This assistance continued to evolve. In 2012 and 2013 several new e-learning courses and training materials had been introduced. Technological advancement and access to information technology tools had allowed the WTO to widen its net in the area of e-learning, which he considered to be the most important TA innovation during his term as Director-General. The organization's e-learning strategy, introduced in 2012, had further contributed to the expansion of e-learning as the training tool for the 21st century. The new e‑learning platform would allow an even greater number of simultaneous users and an enhanced level of interaction with and amongst participants using a variety of innovations such as simulation exercises and video conference applications. The investment in e-learning and the e-campus had led to a number of positive results. For example, the number of e-learning courses had increased from one in 2005 to 14 in 2013. In 2005 there were approximately 250 enrolled participants, while in 2012 the figure had increased to almost 5,000. By the end of 2012, the Secretariat had provided access to e-learning to over 20,000 participants.
The centrality given to e-learning had also permeated other TA products. Through e‑learning the Secretariat had been able to better incorporate the Progressive Learning Strategy (PLS), which had brought a welcome reorganization of the WTO's TA products. Participants could register for different training levels - introductory, intermediate or advanced - depending on their familiarity with the subject. They could also choose a generalist or a specialist path, according to their professional needs. All these changes had been introduced with the purpose of making TA more relevant and useful and had enabled the Secretariat to encourage progressive and sustained capacity building for existing and new clients.
He said that the integration of LDCs into the multilateral trading system continued to be one of the WTO's TA priorities. In 2012, LDCs were invited to more than half of all the organized activities and to three quarters of the activities organized in Geneva. Another priority was to increase the participation of women in the activities. In 2012, 45% of the participants - both in traditional activities and in e-learning modules - were women. The challenge was to continue to increase that figure and achieve greater gender parity in specific regions such as in Africa and in the Middle East. Africa, which remained a priority region for trade-related capacity building in 2012, had benefited from the greatest number of activities and from the largest part of the budget. When looked at from the broader perspective of the institutional building led by the EIF and the private sector capacity upgrade supported by the ITC in Africa, it was clear that the WTO was delivering for those Members that required it the most. 
He went on to emphasize the importance of partnerships for the effective delivery of TA. He explained that partnerships allowed a pooling of increasingly scarce resources, as well as a combination and blend of expertise, experience and focus. Partnership was the WTO's path to better understanding on-the-ground needs and ensuring that TA would have the greatest efficacy. In 2012 about 30% of all TA activities had been implemented jointly with one or more partners and close to 10% had been co-funded. The ITTC had entered into nearly 20 formal agreements. Partnerships, which had been expanded to include collaboration with regional development banks and regional secretariats, allowed the ITTC to do more with less.  The WTO Chairs' programme, which was a partnership with academia, had recently been extended for an additional four-year period. He additionally emphasized the focus on results, interaction and ownership in the WTO‑supported European Law Students' Association (ELSA) Moot Court Competition, and also mentioned that the re-launch in 2010 of the strategy for the WTO Reference Centres Programme had led to concrete dividends.  
Turning to the issue of funding, he said that the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF) was the main funding mechanism for the WTO's TA. To enable expectations regarding the WTO's TA to be met, there was a need for secure funding. While the extra-budgetary funding requirements had remained at the same level for the last four years, contributions to the DDAGTF had started to decline since 2008. This meant a focus on doing more but with less. In this regard, he credited the ITTC and the budget arms of the WTO for maintaining the standards and expectations with fewer resources. He noted, however, that there was very little space for manoeuvring and in this light called on development partners to recommit to the DDAGTF as Members moved to endorse the next TA Plan.
He concluded by reiterating his confidence that the WTO had delivered on its trade-related capacity building mandate. Institutionally, the organization was in a structurally sounder place than before, with the ITTC reorganized to reflect a focus on results. There was a robust results‑based framework in place and e-learning had increased the reach of the WTO's TA services. In addition, several interns were exposed every year to WTO issues. He said that a sign of the success of the WTO's TA was the clear message that he had received recently from the G-90, which had called for TA in new areas such as non-tariff barriers and trade finance. The G-90 had also called for a greater focus on following the progress of the participants in TA activities, for expanded e-learning and for increased internship opportunities. He added that, after the 4th Global Review of Aid for Trade held on 8-10 July 2013, he had heard calls for more exposure to value chain analysis and trade in value-added. In essence, the need was for a deepened and increasingly progressive and sophisticated approach to TA. He saw this as the greatest proof that the WTO had delivered on capacity building.
-	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training - 2012 (WT/COMTD/W/197)
-	Annual Report on Monitoring and Evaluation of Technical Assistance and Training - 2012 (WT/COMTD/W/199)	
&& In introducing the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2012, the Director of the ITTC said that the 2012 report was more analytical than was the case in previous years and provided Members with a better understanding of the rationale guiding the WTO's TA. In 2012, the Secretariat had continued to apply tight management of TA resources in order to maintain a stable volume of activities. Although slightly more activities were implemented than in 2011, there had been a reduction in resources relative to the previous year. She explained that in 2011 the DDAGTF had received contributions from 19 Members, while in 2012 only 14 Members had contributed. She added that the year 2012 had seen a slight increase in soft earmarking for specific programmes.
With regard to the PLS, she said that a rigorous selection process in 2012 had contributed to more homogenous groups of participants, making it easier to deliver the intended training at the planned level. The advanced level training offered was enriched with the organization of three new courses. She added that the introduction of the PLS had led to changes in TA activities in order to incorporate progressivity in the training offered. The effectiveness of these changes was, however, difficult to assess at the present time in the absence of clear benchmarks defining the substantive content of each training level on a subject-by-subject basis. Establishing such benchmarks was one of the ITTC's priorities going forward. 
The year 2012 had seen the development of a new e-learning strategy, as well as the introduction of four new e-learning courses. She highlighted in particular the new innovative course titled "My Course", which was based on a modular approach relating to the individual participant's needs. The French and Spanish versions of the new courses introduced in 2012 were currently under development and would be available in 2013. Turning to the regional trade policy courses (RTPCs), she said that these had been reformed in order to improve their cost efficiency. The cost of an RTPC, which was previously about Sw F 900,000, now averaged about Sw F 420,000. The coverage of RTPCs had also been extended to all regions. The planned RTPC for the Caribbean region could not, however, take place in 2012, and would instead be held in early 2014. In addition, there was no RTPC for French-speaking African countries in 2012, as a host partner was being selected. In 2013, partners would be selected for the RTPCs for English-speaking African countries and for the Latin American region. 
She went on to say that, as in previous years, the LDCs had remained a priority in 2012. For example, 44% of the WTO Reference Centres that were upgraded were for LDCs, and a specific course for LDCs had additionally been developed. Africa also continued to receive priority in TA delivery at both national and regional levels. She informed Members that e-learning had trained about 40% of the total number of participants, but at a cost of only 4% of the total. The proportion between national and regional activities was the same across all the regions, with two thirds of activities being national and one third being regional. Regional activities represented more than two thirds of the expenses across all regions. The bulk of the training was provided at the intermediate level. In terms of the language mix for face-to-face activities, English represented 60% of the activities, Spanish accounted for 20% and French for 15%. With regard to the gender mix, the Caribbean region had the highest number of female participants followed by the Central and Eastern Europe, Central Asia and the Caucus (CEECAC) region and Latin America. 
&& The Head of the ITTC's TA Monitoring and Evaluation introduced the Annual Report on Monitoring and Evaluation of Technical Assistance and Training for 2012. He said that the introduction of RBM for TA activities had led to the establishment of a monitoring and evaluation team within the ITTC. The existing evaluation system was reviewed and some new elements were introduced in order to have a complete RBM monitoring and evaluation system, which was currently being implemented. The system would keep relying on a self-evaluation of immediate results by the trainers. Future reviews and ex-post evaluations of programmes to measure longer term results would have to be based on a deeper analysis of facts and would use key indicators of performance.
He went on to say that the e-learning courses were very successful in 2012, with an average success rate of 81%. Courses on sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures and on trade and environment had traditionally been the most successful among the e-learning courses. For face-to-face TA activities, he said that the Secretariat was designing better performance indicators to help measure immediate results. A pilot on the use of a final exam in two RTPCs confirmed that more objective indicators could also be used, as had always been the case for e-learning. The mid‑term review of the WTO Chairs Programme showed that this programme had been successful in stimulating academic activity on trade-related issues, but less so in monitoring the quality of the output and in reaching out to business communities or policy makers. Changes and improvements had been suggested at the last meeting of the Chairs Programme. A number of changes could also be noted since 2006 in the areas in which WTO TA had concentrated in Kenya and Senegal. However, these two pilot country reviews showed the difficulty of gathering enough precise data. Synergies with Trade Policy Reviews needed to be explored to overcome this challenge.
On recommendations and lessons learned, he stressed the importance of continuing to have contingency plans to deal with constraints in human and financial resources. He highlighted the need to benchmark each of the three levels of progressive learning to ensure progressivity in the training activities. He also highlighted the need to improve needs assessments in order to ensure that TA activities were designed to better respond to the identified needs, while also promoting quality instead of quantity. Finally, he indicated that the WTO needed to continue to ensure that effective modes of delivery of TA were employed. In the coming years, the organization had to move from measuring outputs to measuring outcomes, with the full participation and support of the stakeholders.
&& The representative  of the United States said that his delegation continued to support work on the monitoring and evaluation framework. He noted the finding that e-learning was rated as the most effective form of TA, particularly in the areas of SPS and trade and environment. In this regard, he observed that while e-learning was effective at a certain level, it did not necessarily test for the application and implementation of a rule or regulation. He suggested that it could be useful to consider whether designing face-to-face trainings as follow-on to e-learning would help to measure impact more effectively. He also noted that participants conducted self-assessments of face-to-face training by answering questions such as, "how effective was the training?" or "how well did the objectives meet your needs?" His delegation encouraged the consideration of building in stronger criteria and measurements to determine if participants understood and knew how to apply what they had learned.
&& The representative  of Oman expressed appreciation for the TA activities her country had benefited from in 2012. Her delegation looked forward to continued cooperation with the ITTC in raising awareness and building capacity in Oman. Noting the high success rate of the e-learning programme, she said that in 2012 there were 28 Omanis out of 210 Arab participants who took part in e-learning courses. This increase in Omani participation relative to previous years was due to greater awareness among government officials, and possibly also to the fact that the e-learning courses were pre-requisites for participation in other WTO activities. While the increase in participation from Omani officials was a positive development, she noted that the Arab region was under-represented in e-learning. The reports under consideration did not, however, mention the reasons for this under-representation or the challenges faced by the region. She suggested that some of the reasons could be related to limited access to technology and limited awareness, as well as the language factor. 
She went on to say that language would always put the Arab region at a disadvantage relative to other regions, whether in training or in negotiations. Ownership in the Arab region could never be achieved if TA was not conducted in Arabic. In this light, her delegation requested the Secretariat to introduce an Arabic e-learning course. By doing so, the number of participants from the Arab region would increase. Also because of the language factor, the Arab region faced challenges in finding participants for the RTPC. Her delegation requested the Secretariat to conduct a pilot country review in the region, similar to the ones that were conducted in Kenya and Senegal. The review could start with Oman, as well as with any other Arab country. Such a review would help to measure the longer-term results in individual countries and the areas where there was a need for further improvements. 
Her delegation agreed with the recommendations for 2014-2015 mentioned in document WT/COMTD/W/199. While they were all important, she said that she wished to make some points on a few of them. With regard to the recommendation for the Secretariat to focus on face-to-face activities in areas and content where value could be added, she said that the participation of regional organizations such as the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) or the League of Arab States would add value to regional activities. On the recommendation for the Secretariat to dedicate more resources to e-learning, she reiterated the importance of introducing an Arabic e-learning course. As for the future involvement of the WTO with the academic world, her delegation believed that the focus should not only be on teachers or professors. A programme accommodating a mix of students and teachers could be envisaged.
&& The representative  of Nepal, on behalf of the LDC Group, emphasized the importance of TA for developing countries and LDCs. He said that the LDC Group welcomed the efforts being made to make the WTO's TA activities more relevant and responsive to the needs of beneficiaries. He appreciated that new areas had been identified for various courses, including for the course on LDCs’ interests and priorities. Noting that the Secretariat acknowledged the importance of making courses more interactive, he inquired how this could be done, given that lectures dominated a large portion of the training time. On e-learning, he said that the subject coverage, outreach and interactivity needed be improved. In the meantime, he welcomed the recommendation for the Secretariat to focus on face-to-face activities where value could be added. He also supported the identification of common needs at national, regional and global levels so as to avoid a duplication of activities. Given that the objective of TA activities was to enhance participants’ knowledge and understanding, he additionally supported the introduction of new means of testing participants' knowledge at the end of face-to-face activities. 
He went on to say that shrinking contributions to the DDAGTF was a cause for concern and could be a constraint in the effective implementation of TA activities. While the LDC Group appreciated the ITTC’s effort to ensure that results were delivered at less cost, it was nevertheless important to make additional resources available to address increased needs. The reports under consideration indicated that, while the overall number of activities in 2012 had remained broadly similar to the number implemented in 2011, there was a reduction in some areas. For example, the number of national activities was reduced by 13%. He suggested that it was not sufficient to simply attribute this to a decrease in demand without delving into the reasons behind the demand reduction. With regard to interns, he observed that the number of long-term interns from LDCs was lower in 2012 relative to 2011. He wished to know the reasons for this. 
&& The representative  of Norway said that the reported figures relating to the participation of LDCs and the participation of women in WTO TA activities were positive. He encouraged the ITTC to continue its efforts in this regard.
&& The representative  of the European Union noted the continued decline in resources for WTO TA activities. In this regard, she expressed appreciation for the ITTC's efforts to do more with less, as well as the continued priority given to LDCs and to Africa in the TA activities. She also recalled the EU's continued and stable contributions to the DDAGTF. While welcoming the RBM monitoring and evaluation framework, she observed that there was a need to put in place more objective performance indicators, especially with regard to face-to-face activities. 
&& The representative  of Morocco, on behalf of the African Group, stressed the importance of TA for African countries and noted the positive evolution in the WTO's TA in recent years. He said that the African Group had recently had a fruitful discussion with the Secretariat on several matters relating to TA. While the African Group was satisfied with the TA provided by the WTO, the Group also believed that improvements could be made in terms of both quantity and quality. This could be achieved by more dialogue between the Secretariat and the African Group before the implementation of activities. The objectives of TA could only be fully achieved if the beneficiaries were consulted during the design phase so that their needs were addressed. He noted the benefits of e-learning and encouraged the ITTC to continue to enhance the e-learning programme. He also suggested that a one-week training programme each September for newly arrived delegates in Geneva would be useful. In addition, the Secretariat could work with Members in undertaking national assessments of TA needs and impact.  
&& The representative  of Australia welcomed the changes in the WTO's TA activities in recent years. He said that Australia currently had a multi-year funding agreement to provide $A 6 million to the DDAGTF. This was in addition to funding for trade facilitation needs assessments, for the ITC and for the EIF. A priority for Australia was to ensure that the WTO’s TA supported the participation of Members and Observers from the Pacific region in the multilateral trading system. The participation at a high level by Pacific Island delegations in the 4th Global Review of Aid for Trade reflected the level interest in the WTO and its work in the Pacific. The role of the internship programmes in helping to bring officials from the Pacific region to the WTO was also very welcome. Given the distance from Geneva and the high costs involved, the importance of the internship programmes for the Pacific islands could not be overemphasized. His delegation strongly encouraged the ITTC to continue to use the internship programmes to bring Pacific officials to Geneva. He also noted the importance of activities focused on LDCs and the need to continue supporting LDC participation in the multilateral trading system. Turning to the two reports under consideration, he said that the preliminary assessment of his delegation was that the more robust and thorough monitoring and evaluation was supporting Australia's own monitoring and evaluation through the Australian Agency for International Development. His delegation would continue to work with the ITTC on the implementation of the WTO’s TA activities.
&& The representative  of Jordan said that his delegation supported the proposal from Oman for an Arabic e-learning course to be introduced. He believed that this would allow more officials and stakeholders from the Arab region to benefit from training on WTO issues.  
&& The representative  of Iran said that, as an acceding country, Iran attached importance to a wide range of WTO-provided TA. He believed that the provision of reliable expertise to acceding countries would ease the process of their accession. He hoped that TA to acceding countries would continue to be provided and would be further enhanced.
The Committee took note of the two reports and of all interventions.
-	Preparations for the 2014-2015 Technical Assistance and Training Plan - briefing by the Secretariat
&& The Director of the ITTC said that effective capacity building required the involvement of beneficiaries and other stakeholders at every stage of the process. This ensured a sense of ownership and accountability by all parties so as to achieve the targeted results. In this context, the ITTC had held a series of consultations with various regional groupings to gauge views on what activities would best address beneficiaries' priorities. The consultations were conducted on the basis of the replies that had been received to the TA questionnaire that the ITTC had sent to Members. The results of the consultations, which were contained in document JOB/TC/6, were discussed at a meeting with the G-90 held in June 2013. The ITTC had also met informally with donors to share the results of the consultations and get their views on funding possibilities for proposed activities.
She went on to summarize some of the results of the consultations. She noted firstly that beneficiaries had expressed strong appreciation and support for the quality and effectiveness of the WTO's TA over the 2012-2013 period. Some concerns were, however, raised about the WTO's "zero-growth budgetary approach", in particular in light of the consequences that this would have on the TA activities. It was suggested that the ITTC should continue to provide TA programmes on the DDA and on the WTO Agreements, but should also design activities on new trade topics such as trade in energy and climate change. The consultations had additionally brought out the need for the WTO to enhance or maintain cooperation with regional institutions and organizations in the delivery of TA and to increase engagement with other stakeholders such as academia, parliamentarians and the private sector. The Trade Policy Review process was identified as a tool that could be used for needs assessments and evaluations of the impact of TA. Appreciation was expressed for the PLS, with e-learning seen as the best tool to deliver introductory training and face-to-face activities perceived as being more effective for intermediate and advanced training. The consultations highlighted the need to continue to consider experience as an equivalent prerequisite for participation in WTO activities. It was suggested that equal importance be given to accession and post-accession activities. All regions highlighted SPS measures, technical barriers to trade (TBT) and trade in services as priority areas. 
She said that the 2014-2015 TA Plan would take into account the outcome of the consultations, and would additionally take into account the lessons learned during the implementation of the 2012-2013 TA Plan. The new TA Plan would also be different from previous ones, as it would focus on results. An assessment would be made on whether government officials were implementing WTO Agreements and making full use of Member's rights, whether beneficiary countries were complying with WTO accession processes and procedures, whether Members were accessing and using information enabling them to raise awareness of WTO matters with all their stakeholders, and whether educational institutions and the WTO-supported Chairs were applying WTO-related subjects in their courses and research.
Going forward, the changing needs of Members would continue to determine the kind of TA provided. While this was particularly true at the national level, Members' needs would also guide the nature of the activities delivered at the regional level. There was, therefore, a need to move away from systematically offering regional seminars across all regions on every subject. While some of the traditional Geneva programmes such as the internship programmes and the Geneva‑based courses would continue, some evolution would also be observed in this respect. For example, in response to the needs expressed by beneficiaries, it was envisaged that the content and structure of the Advanced Trade Policy Course would be modified. Overall, Members could expect a mix of traditional products and new products. Africa and the LDCs would, however, still be given priority in the overall TA programme. She added that Australia's comments concerning the Pacific region would also be taken into account. In concluding, she said that the Secretariat intended to submit the new TA Plan for Members' consideration at the last CTD meeting of the year. Consultations with Members would continue in the preparation of the Plan. She emphasized the need for flexibility in order to adjust the Plan to the evolving needs of beneficiaries, and to possibly take into account any relevant outcomes from the Ninth Ministerial Conference (MC9).
&& The representative  of China said that discussions were taking place in the Committee on Import Licensing on a possible workshop on notifications to be held in 2014. A number of developing countries, including China, had expressed their interest in holding such a workshop in order to improve their notifications concerning import licensing regimes. His delegation hoped that this workshop could be reflected in the 2014-2015 TA Plan.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
REPORT OF THE 47TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XLVII)/251)
&& The Chairperson said that the report of the 47th Session of the ITC's Joint Advisory Group was contained in ITC document ITC/AG(XLVII)/251. She welcomed Ambassador Karen Pierce of the United Kingdom, the Chairperson of the 47th Session of the JAG, and Mr. Ashish Shah, the Acting Deputy Executive Director of the ITC. She invited Ambassador Pierce to introduce the report.
&& The Chairperson of the JAG said that the Group had held its 47th Session on 6 and 7 May 2013. The meeting was convened to discuss the ITC’s Annual Report for 2012 and strategic orientations for the future. Government representatives had also announced their voluntary contributions to the ITC trust fund and had participated in the general discussion on the ITC’s activities and the future of the organization.
She went on to say that the Director-General of the WTO and the Secretary General of UNCTAD had in their opening statements reiterated the importance of the ITC’s work in supporting the private sector in LDCs. They had paid tribute to Ms. Patricia Francis, the ITC's Executive Director, for the manner in which she had guided the organization in the last seven years. They commended the ITC for its efforts to embed RBM and encouraged the organization to continue to deliver value for money. The Director-General of the WTO had identified four priorities for the ITC in the coming years, which were continued efforts in the area of non-tariff measures, investment in trade in services, assisting small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) gain access to global and regional value chains, and South-South trade as a means to diversify exports towards emerging markets. The Director-General had noted that the element that tied these areas together was trade facilitation. The Secretary General of UNCTAD had highlighted the need for the ITC to continue promoting regional integration between developing countries and to focus on the link between export development, job creation and poverty reduction. He noted that sustainable inclusive growth could only be achieved through growing the real economy and called for an honest study on the impact of global value chains on the participation of the most vulnerable countries in international trade.
The Executive Director of the ITC had, in her statement, reviewed her seven-year term and the accomplishments of the organization in addressing the challenges identified in the 2005 Danish Evaluation. It was noted that the ITC had moved from an organization which delivered most of its work through small one-off projects to an organization which used large multi-year integrated programmes to increase the value and impact of TA. The ITC had developed internal procedures for improved project management and delivery, and tools to better respond to beneficiaries' needs. These changes had contributed to a greater level of trust through consolidated partnerships with donors and beneficiaries. The organization had delivered US$40 million in TA in 2012, in line with predictions made at the 2012 JAG meeting. The organization had remained committed to the most vulnerable countries, which benefitted from 69% of country-specific and region-specific delivery. While this represented a slight decrease relative to 2011, the proportion remained higher than in preceding years. The goal was to maintain or increase this high ratio of delivery to LDCs. The Executive Director had also highlighted the recent impact evaluation of the Ethical Fashion Initiative, the achievements of the ITC’s first generation of large programmes and the importance of the Women and Trade Programme. It was stressed that ITC had become a champion of women’s economic empowerment. In particular, the Global Platform for Action on Sourcing from Women Vendors had acted as a catalyst to generate opportunities for businesswomen in developing countries. 
The Deputy Executive Director of the ITC had then given an overview of achievements and challenges in implementing the ITC’s corporate strategy, which was adopted by the JAG in 2012. Significant progress was reported in implementing RBM, in the establishment of a quality control architecture, and in the upcoming integration of the ITC’s resource mobilization strategy with a novel approach to needs assessment and project development. The Deputy Executive Director had noted that the first challenge was to regenerate the ITC’s pipeline of large programmes in order to maintain and increase the volume of delivery. The level of funding needed to sustain the ITC’s current level of performance was between US$40 million and US$45 million.
The Group had broadly welcomed the Annual Report for 2012 and had encouraged the ITC to continue building the export capacity of the private sector in developing countries and to support the integration of SMEs in global and regional value chains. The ITC was recognized as a model of good practice in RBM. Delegations took note of the ITC’s endeavour to progress on impact measurement methodologies for the next biennium and expressed support for the new processes that were being developed to improve needs assessments and to better integrate products and services across the organization. Support was also expressed for the ITC’s efforts to promote regional integration and intraregional trade, and for the organization's strong emphasis on non-tariff measures and on trade intelligence for LDCs. The ITC's Women and Trade focus was appreciated, as were efforts to further expand mainstreaming activities to promote an inclusive and sustainable model of development, focusing on poor communities, trade and the environment, and the empowerment of youth. Delegations confirmed the strategic importance of large, integrated programmes for the sustainability of the ITC’s impact-oriented strategy. There was a wide call for renewed support from donors for the next generation of large programmes. The ITC was asked to not forget the challenges faced by middle-income countries that had the potential to contribute significantly to South-South trade. Finally, on behalf of the Group, the JAG Chairperson thanked the governments of Australia, Canada, China, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland for their expressions of financial support to the organization. 
&& The Committee took note of the report of the 47th Session of the JAG and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption. 
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairperson recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the link between trade and development and called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. The CTD had been directed to report the results of its work under the MC8 mandate to Ministers at the Ninth Session.  
She said that the MC8 mandate had been discussed at each of the formal CTD meetings since the beginning of 2012. In addition, several informal consultations had been convened to hear Members' views and suggestions on what specifically could be done by the CTD under this mandate. She recalled that she had particularly encouraged Members to consider submitting written proposals on concrete areas of work for the CTD, since written proposals were more conducive to a focused discussion and would also ensure a Member-driven process. Three submissions containing proposals for work under the MC8 mandate were currently under discussion in the CTD. One submission - by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group - was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. Another submission - by Australia, Chile, Colombia and Singapore - was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191. The third submission under consideration by the CTD was by Barbados, on behalf of the Group of Small, Vulnerable Economies (SVEs). 
She went on to say that, at the 87th Session, the Committee had agreed to one of the proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192. The proposal was for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its document on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. The updated Secretariat note had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/196 and was the subject of the first sub-item for discussion under the present agenda item. She invited the Committee to address the first sub-item, after which Members could turn to the second sub-item which concerned the remaining proposals by Members.
Special and differential treatment provisions in WTO Agreements and Decisions (WT/COMTD/W/196) - updated note by the Secretariat
&& The Chairperson said that the Secretariat compilation contained in document WT/COMTD/W/196 was an update of document WT/COMTD/W/77/Rev.1 of 21 September 2001 on the "Implementation of Special and Differential Treatment Provisions in WTO Agreements and Decisions". It built on a previous update prepared for the Special Session of the CTD, which was contained in document TN/CTD/W/33 of 8 June 2010. The focus was on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. 	
Like its predecessor, the updated compilation listed each S&D provision in the WTO Agreements, and provided a space for comments, particularly with regard to the implementation of each provision. The S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements had been classified according to the typology developed by the Secretariat in 2001. This six-fold typology had been retained and included: (i) Provisions aimed at increasing the trade opportunities of developing country Members; (ii) Provisions under which WTO Members should safeguard the interests of developing country Members; (iii) Flexibility of commitments, of action, and use of policy instruments; (iv) Transitional time periods; (v) Technical assistance; and (vi) Provisions relating to LDC Members. A table in the Introduction of the document provided a numerical breakdown of S&D provisions by type and by Agreement. In addition, the update separately listed a number of Ministerial, General Council and other relevant Decisions that allowed for special treatment to developing countries and LDCs. Finally, she noted that the updated compilation identified the S&D provisions relating to which proposals had been made in the Work Programme on S&D under paragraph 44 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration.
&& The representative  of Cuba welcomed the updated Secretariat paper, which in the view of his delegation satisfied the request that had been made by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group in the first proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192.  
&& The representative  of Egypt expressed appreciation for the updated Secretariat paper, which his delegation would study in detail. He added that that there were three proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192, and the update of the Secretariat document only satisfied the first proposal. The proponents wanted Members to consider the three proposals as a package.   
&& The representative  of the United States added his delegation's voice in expressing appreciation for the updated Secretariat paper.  
&& The Committee took note of the updated Secretariat paper and of all interventions.
Proposals by Members
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
&& The Chairperson recalled that there were three proposals contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. The request in the first proposal had already been satisfied through the preparation of the updated Secretariat paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. Under the present sub-item, the Committee would continue its consideration of the second and third proposals in the submission. The second proposal was for the CTD to report on the development-related work of other WTO bodies and make recommendations to the General Council on achieving better coordination on development issues. The third proposal was for the CTD make a recommendation for parties to regional trade agreements (RTAs) to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. She invited the proponents to take the floor.
&& The representative  of Egypt said that he wished to outline certain aspects of the two remaining proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192. He recalled the first paragraph of the CTD's terms of reference, which specified that the CTD served as a focal point for the consideration and coordination of development-related work in the WTO. He then recalled that Ministers at MC8 had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. He explained that the second proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 was in direct response to the instructions from Ministers. Turning to the third proposal, he clarified that the proponents were not aiming to change any WTO rules through the proposal. He urged Members to consider the two remaining proposals positively.     
&& The representative  of Cuba supported the intervention by Egypt and expressed his hope that the Committee could agree to the two remaining proposals.  
&& The representative  of Venezuela said that her delegation supported the proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192.  
&& The representative  of the United States said that he had comments on both the second and third proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192. On the second proposal, he said that his delegation remained concerned about how it would operate and continued to question its impact. His delegation also shared the concerns voiced previously by other Members regarding difficulties in delineating development activities, given the broad range of work in WTO bodies. It was additionally unclear what specific problem needed to be addressed through recommendations to the General Council. While the US had previously requested the proponents to identify specific examples of problems they had encountered that would call for the proposal, no examples had yet been provided. 
Given that the CTD already had the ability to make recommendations to the General Council, his delegation questioned the need for a proposal that directed the Committee to do so. Mandating the CTD to make recommendations would not bring Members any closer to finding ways of improving coordination. More importantly, the US did not understand what problem existed that would suggest that better coordination was necessary, as there did not appear to be a lack of coordination. The CTD already worked on issues addressed by other Committees. For example, the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training addressed TA needs related to Agreements covered by other Committees. While some Members claimed that the CTD was not informed on all development-related work taking place in the WTO, the US had difficulty understanding this concern given that the same Members were represented in other WTO bodies. In this light, his delegation saw no reason to mandate the CTD to report on all development-related activities.
With regard to the third proposal, he said that his delegation maintained its view that parties to an RTA should work together to the extent possible so that individual RTAs could be reviewed in a timely manner, thereby providing valuable information to the membership as a whole. His delegation had been very clear that it had no quarrel with any developing country notifying a qualifying agreement under the Enabling Clause.  However, not all RTAs qualified under the Enabling Clause. Ultimately, it was up to individual Members to comply with WTO notification and reporting requirements, including those in the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for RTAs. Although the proposal was stated as a recommendation, in so much as it could be used to push all developing countries to notify their RTAs under the Enabling Clause, the US could not agree to it. 
He also indicated that the CTD was not the appropriate place to modify the RTAs TM. The RTAs TM outlined a procedure for both the CTD and the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), and the CTD therefore only implemented a piece of the Mechanism. Even though the CTD's implementation of the RTAs TM was only with regard to RTAs falling under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause, the proposal had a broader reach and would also affect RTAs notified under GATT Article XXIV. Since the RTAs TM was negotiated in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR), changes to the Mechanism would need to be agreed to in that body. Furthermore, the US continued to see this proposal as unnecessary. He explained that the vast majority of Members already notified their RTAs jointly and that there was no need for a recommendation suggesting that Members do so. The proposal would not provide a fix to the issues relating to dual notifications that had been discussed in the Committee.
&& The representative  of Nepal said that he wished to reiterate his delegation's support for the proposals contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. The adoption and implementation of the proposals would greatly contribute to operationalizing the mandate of the CTD as the focal point for development issues in the WTO. He noted that the Secretariat had satisfied the request made in the first proposal. It was now important to resolve issues relating to the remaining two proposals.
&& The representative  of South Africa expressed support for the proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192. She noted that the proposals contributed to operationalizing the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development-related issues in the WTO, as called for by Ministers at MC8. She suggested that the proposals be considered for endorsement as a package.
&& The representative  of the European Union reiterated the concerns that her delegation had previously raised on the second proposal. She said that it was unnecessary and impracticable to give the CTD the mandate to report on the development-related activities of other WTO bodies and make recommendations to the General Council. It was unnecessary because the CTD already had a mandate to look into development issues and report where necessary. It was impracticable in light of the difficulties in delineating development issues from non-development issues. Furthermore, her delegation was concerned that implementing the proposal might interfere with the work of other WTO bodies, which would be counterproductive. Finally, she said that her delegation did not see how the proposal responded to the call from Ministers at MC8 for the CTD to undertake focused work, since it was a rather broad proposal.
&& The Chairperson suggested that the Committee conclude its discussion on the second proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 before moving to the third proposal. She noted that there was no consensus on the second proposal. That being the case, she said that she wished to inform the Committee that she had met with a legal counsel in the Legal Affairs Division to discuss matters relating to the CTD's mandate. The legal counsel's view was that the CTD already had the mandate to report on development-related work in the WTO.
&& The representative  of Egypt agreed that the CTD already had the mandate to report on development-related work in the WTO. This was laid out in the CTD's terms of reference, which specified that the CTD was a focal point for the consideration and coordination of development‑related work in the WTO. However, what was lacking was a mechanism to operationalize the CTD's role as a focal point. This was what the second proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 addressed. The proposal was a response to the call from Ministers at MC8 to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work.
&& The representative  of the United States noted the legal counsel's view that the CTD's mandate already permitted it to report on the development-related work of other bodies. He said that this raised the question of why the proponents had made the second proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192, given that the proposal was for an existing text to be amended. He requested that the view of the legal counsel be shared with Members in writing.  
&& The Chairperson clarified that the legal counsel's comments were made in relation to the CTD's mandate, and not in relation to the second proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192. 
&& The representative  of Egypt, in response to the comments by the US, explained that the proponents were suggesting an amendment to an existing text in order to fully operationalize the CTD's mandate as a focal point for development work. At the present time, the Committee was not provided with the information that would enable it to report on development-related work in the WTO. It was necessary for other WTO bodies to provide the relevant information to the CTD. While this had been done in specific cases, for example for the updated Secretariat paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in WTO Agreements and Decisions, it had never been done in a systematic way for the WTO's development-related work as a whole.  
&& The Chairperson said that she would follow up on matters relating to the CTD's mandate to see if any further clarifications could be provided to Members. She invited the Committee to move on to the third proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192.
&& The representative  of Egypt, building on his earlier comments on the third proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192, recalled that his delegation, along with the delegations of China and India, had raised several concerns in the CTD relating to the three RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. The proposal had the objective of avoiding such problems in the future with other RTAs. He added that the proposal did not specify that the CTD should work to resolve issues relating to dual notifications, even though the view of the proponents was that the CTD had the right to do so. This was a compromise on the part of the proponents.
&& The representative  of Cuba expressed support for the intervention by Egypt.  
&& The representative  of the European Union said that it was desirable for the parties to an RTA to jointly submit their notification and information requirements. However, it was not appropriate for the CTD to make a recommendation in this regard. In the view of her delegation it was the NGR that had the mandate to discuss issues relating to dual notifications. Furthermore, notifications remained the responsibility of Members.        
&& The representative  of Egypt, in response to the intervention by the EU, said that the systemic issues relating to dual notifications needed to be dealt with. However, Members had different views on the body in which such issues should be addressed. Furthermore, it would take time for a solution to be found. Until a solution was found, it was important to avoid similar problems arising with other RTAs. This was the rationale behind the third proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192. He indicated that if there were concerns with the CTD issuing the proposed recommendation by itself, alternative approaches could be explored.
&& The Chairperson encouraged Members to consider what possibilities might exist to move forward on the third proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192, including through any possible collaboration between the CTD and the CRTA.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Supporting Ministers' guidance for focused work in the Committee on Trade and Development - proposal from Australia, Chile, Colombia and Singapore (WT/COMTD/W/191)
&& The Chairperson recalled that the proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/191 was for Members to share their trade and development experiences in the Committee. She also recalled that interventions by Members in earlier CTD meetings had suggested that it could potentially be useful if the ideas in document WT/COMTD/W/191 were merged with some of the ideas in the proposal by Barbados on behalf of the SVEs contained in document WT/COMTD/W/195. Her understanding, however, was that the proponents' preference was to keep the proposals separate. The two proposals would, therefore, be considered separately by the Committee. She invited the proponents of document WT/COMTD/W/191 to take the floor.
&& The representative  of Australia said that, since the 87th Session, the co-sponsors of document WT/COMTD/W/191 had benefited from discussions with other delegations. Several delegations had indicated their interest in the proposal. He drew attention to copies of an informal document that had been placed in the meeting room by the proponents, which provided some further information on how the proponents envisaged the country presentations to take place. He explained that a Member that wished to make a presentation would request that an item be included on the CTD's agenda, in accordance with existing rules and procedures. The informal document also laid out some indicative questions that a Member could draw on, including "What is the role of trade in your development?", "What challenges do you face?", "What successes have been achieved?" and "What lessons would you identify for other Members?". However, it would be for individual Members to decide the topic of their presentations, including with regard to any focus on a particular sector. He said that the proposal was intended to be modest, but would still add value to the work of the CTD. It was designed to maximize flexibility and minimize the burden on small delegations with capacity constraints. With regard to the relationship between the proposal under consideration and the proposal by Barbados on behalf of the SVEs, he said that the two proposals were distinct but could be complementary.
&& The representative  of Chile expressed support for the intervention by Australia.
&& The representative  of the United States said that the proposal was helpful. His delegation appreciated that the proposal left Members with significant flexibility to discuss their individual experience of using trade in the service of development. The proposal could also provide a useful platform for Members to gain valuable insights on the relationship between trade and development.
&& The representative  of Barbados, on behalf of the SVE Group, said that the SVEs and the proponents of WT/COMTD/W/191 had had exchanges on their respective proposals and had decided to keep them separate. She said that the SVEs were not opposed to the idea of experience sharing, but believed that the proposal under consideration could benefit from additional clarification. The informal document that had been made available would be studied and discussed within the SVE Group. She hoped that the information in the informal document could be incorporated into a revised proposal.
&& The representative  of the European Union said that the proposal under consideration would add value to the work of the CTD, and in particular would allow focused discussions on trade and development.  
&& The representative  of South Africa said that there were positive aspects to the proposal under consideration, which could be merged with other proposals relating to the MC8 mandate. However, the proposal under consideration would not, on its own, fulfil this mandate. More concrete work would be required to assist developing countries enhance their development prospects and their participation in the multilateral trading system. She suggested that it would be useful if the points contained in the informal document could be incorporated into a revision of the proposal.
&& The representative  of Venezuela said that the proposal and the additional information provided would be forwarded to her capital for review.     
&& The representative  of Nepal said that some questions still remained on the proposal. For example, the outcome of the proposed discussions and the follow-up process were unclear. His delegation also wished to know how and to what extent the country presentations would contribute to ensuring the CTD's effective coordination of development-related work in the WTO.
&& The representative  of Australia said that the proposal on its own could not fulfil the MC8 mandate. However, the proponents believed that the proposal would add value to the CTD's work and would therefore make a contribution to fulfilling the mandate.  
&& The Chairperson noted that a number of Members had raised questions on the proposal and that further discussions on the proposal would be required.  
&& The representative  of Barbados requested that any further information on the proposal be shared with all Members.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
-	Strengthening of the Committee on Trade and Development - proposal from Barbados on behalf of the Group of Small, Vulnerable Economies (WT/COMTD/W/195)
&& The Chairperson recalled that the proposal by Barbados, on behalf of the SVE Group, was for workshops to be held under the auspices of the CTD. She invited the proponents to take the floor. 
&& The representative  of Barbados, on behalf of the SVE Group, said that the SVEs were of the view that a systematic approach to facilitate the identification and discussion of issues and areas relevant to trade and development would be useful. Only two workshops had been organized under the auspices of the CTD in the past 11 years, which pointed to the need for a systematic approach in organizing such workshops. She said that the SVE Group had been consulting with Members since the last CTD meeting. On the basis of these consultations and the concerns expressed by some Members, the Group had formulated a revision to its proposal, copies of which were available in the meeting room. The amendments explicitly recognized the trade and development link as well as the concerns that had been raised on the periodicity of the workshops. She looked forward to Members' positive feedback on the revised document.
&& The representative  of the United States said that the revised proposal would be forwarded to his capital for review. He noted that some questions remained on the proposal, which he hoped could be discussed further with the proponents. For example, he noted that the proposal called for the topic or focus of a workshop to be responsive to the requests and inputs from developing country Members.   
&& The representative  of Venezuela said that the revised proposal would be sent to her capital for review.
&& The Chairperson noted that Members would need to consult with their capitals on the revised proposal. Further discussions on the proposal were therefore required. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE - DECISION OF 17 DECEMBER 2011 (WT/L/843)
-	Report on the Workshop on "E-commerce, Development and SMEs" (8‑9 April 2013) (WT/COMTD/W/198)
&& The Chairperson said that the CTD's discussion on electronic commerce (e-commerce) since the beginning of 2012 had been in relation to the 17 December 2011 Decision taken at MC8, which was contained in document WT/L/843.
She recalled that, at the 86th Session, the Committee had agreed that a Workshop on "E‑Commerce, Development and SMEs" would be held on 8 and 9 April 2013. She believed that Members would agree that the workshop had turned out to be a successful event. The report from the workshop which had been prepared by the Secretariat was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/198. She said that she wished to highlight some of the main outcomes of the workshop which were mentioned in the report.
One main outcome of the workshop was the interplay of e-commerce with customs clearance issues, trade facilitation and Aid for Trade. Also highlighted was the need for an increased awareness by governments in developing and least-developed countries to learn more about the challenges and opportunities posed by e-commerce, and especially the important role e‑commerce played in assisting SMEs gain access to domestic and international markets. It was clear that a main focus of current and future work had to be on assisting the "least-connected countries". Presenters and participants had also helped increase awareness of the variety of tools which existed on the internet - many of them free of cost - and which could greatly assist entrepreneurs and SMEs in bringing their businesses online.
She went on to highlight some of the challenges that remained for developing countries. Infrastructure problems were a major hurdle and much time was spent during the workshop discussing the need to upgrade power grids to counter the lack of regular electricity supply, difficulties with the physical distribution of products bought online and a general lack of electronic payment systems in developing countries. Another key handicap in many countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America was the lack of a reliable access to broadband, high speed cables. A further message from the workshop was the need for an entrepreneurial spirit when it came to overcoming the challenges posed by e-commerce. The refrain "Where there are problems, there are opportunities" was heard several times by private sector presenters keen on convincing reluctant government officials of the benefits of using e-commerce to help stimulate the sale of online food products, fish or handicrafts by poor, rural villagers.
She informed the Committee that, in her capacity as CTD Chairperson, she had made an oral report at the Workshop on Services and E-commerce - held on 17 and 18 June 2013 - on some of the main outcomes of the April 2013 CTD workshop, so as to ensure that Members were informed about work under way on the development-related issues in the Work Programme on E‑Commerce. On the way forward, the CTD's activities under the Work Programme on E‑Commerce - and in particular the outcomes of the workshop - would need be reported to the General Council, as specified in the Ministerial Decision of 2011. In keeping with the Decision, she said that she would make an oral report on her own responsibility on the CTD's work on e‑commerce at the General Council meeting of 24 July 2013. She also noted that the CTD's activities, as well as the activities of the other WTO bodies implementing the Work Programme on E-commerce, would feed into the process leading to MC9. In this regard, she believed that the outcomes of the Workshop on "E-Commerce, Development and SMEs" provided some interesting possibilities for future work in the CTD, which Members would need to define.
&& The Committee took note of the report of the workshop and of the Chairperson's comments concerning the Work Programme on E-Commerce. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairperson said that she wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs.
She firstly informed the Committee that the goods aspects of the India-Malaysia Agreement would be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD on 16 September 2013. This Dedicated Session of the CTD was being held back-to-back with the 70th Session of the CRTA, where the services aspects of the Agreement would be considered. The factual presentation on the India-Malaysia Agreement had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/RTA/5/1 and WT/REG329/1. Members had been requested by fax to submit any written questions on the Agreement by 6 August 2013. 
Turning to the India-ASEAN Agreement, she said that the factual presentation on the Agreement was being drafted and would soon be sent to the parties for comments. She went on to say that for a number of RTAs - namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan and India and Bhutan – the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties. The Secretariat was also still waiting to receive some data relating to the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Community Customs Union. She urged the parties to these Agreements to provide the data as soon as possible.  Finally, she said that that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the CRTA, a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the Agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
-	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairperson said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The representative  of the United States said that his delegation continued to have concerns with the present sub-item being listed on the agenda. The sub-item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made, and needed to be removed from the agenda. He regretted that this matter had taken up so much of the Committee’s time over the past few years. These were the types of issues that took time, resources, and attention away from other pressing development matters. The US had stated its position on this issue clearly and there was no need to rehash those points. He expressed hope that, in line with his delegation's earlier interventions, the Committee could move forward constructively, recognizing that the GCC Customs Union was not an issue of dual notification, but rather something to be addressed under the RTAs TM in the CRTA. His delegation looked forward to the transparency review of the GCC Customs Union in the CRTA.
&& The representative  of the European Union expressed support for the intervention by the US.   
&& The representative  of China said that his delegation's position on this matter remained unchanged. He noted that the representatives of Egypt and India were not present for the discussion under this sub-item, and requested that the sub-item remain on the agenda for further discussion when the key stakeholders were present.   
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea
&& The Chairperson said that the second sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement.
&& The representative  of the United States said that his intervention related to both the second and third sub-items. He said that his delegation continued to have concerns with these sub-items being listed on the agenda. The sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and should have already been removed from the agenda. The issue of dual notifications was directly linked to the functioning of the RTAs TM and went beyond the CTD alone.  
&& The Committee took note of the intervention by the US.
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement 	between India and Korea (Goods)
&& The Chairperson said that the third sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the India-Korea Agreement.
&& The representative  of the European Union said that her delegation continued to have concerns with the second and third sub-items being listed on the agenda. These sub-items needed to be removed from the CTD's agenda, as they had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made. 
&& The representative  of Australia indicated his support for the interventions by the EU and the US under the second and third sub-items. He noted that he had not heard any requests for these sub-items to be retained on the CTD's agenda.  
&& The Chairperson informed the Committee that a written communication had been received from the delegation of Egypt, requesting that the first three sub-items under the present agenda item be retained on the CTD's agenda for the next meeting. 
&& The representative  of China expressed support for the request by Egypt. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Generalized System of Preferences - notification by Norway (WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.5)
&& The Chairperson said that Norway's notification concerning its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme was contained in document WT/COMTD/N/6/Add.5. She invited Norway to introduce the notification.
&& The representative  of Norway said that Norway’s GSP scheme had been revised several times since its establishment in 1971. Some amendments had been introduced on 1 January 2008, when the provision establishing duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access to the Norwegian market for all goods from LDCs was extended to include 14 low-income countries (LICs) with a population of less than 75 million. 
She went on to say that Norway had made several more improvements to its GSP scheme with effect from 1 January 2013. In terms of the background to these changes, she said that in 2011 the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs had carried out a study of Norway’s GSP scheme. In the first half of 2012, an inter-ministerial working group made its recommendations regarding a revised GSP scheme. These were endorsed by the Government, and the Parliament made the necessary decisions as part of the State Budget for 2013. The most extensive change under the recent revision was to establish a new category of GSP beneficiaries. The new category of beneficiaries, which were lower-middle income countries and territories (LMICs) with a population of less than 75 million, had been established on the basis of the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee (DAC) list of recipients of official development assistance (ODA). This category of beneficiaries was granted more preferential market access than ordinary GSP beneficiaries as part of a new sub-scheme called "GSP+". One of the intentions behind the establishment of the GSP+ group was to soften the transition for countries graduating from an income group which benefited from DFQF market access to an income group for which ordinary GSP preferences applied. She explained that the provision of DFQF market access through the "GSP zero" sub-scheme remained limited to LDCs, as well as to LICs with a population of less than 75 million.
The benefits of GSP+ included duty-free access for all industrial goods. In addition, improvements in tariff preferences for agricultural goods had been made, including duty-free access for an additional 49 tariff lines and a 50% reduction on 15 tariff lines. Improvements had also been made to the ordinary GSP scheme, which benefitted upper-middle income countries and LMICs with a population exceeding 75 million. As part of these improvements, preferences on administratively reduced tariffs on cereals and soy bean oil cakes for animal feed had been increased from 10% to 20%. In addition, duty-free access was offered on fish oil for animal feed and a duty-free quota for molasses had been established. Existing quotas for preserved ham, beans and green beans had also been made more flexible. 
The list of GSP beneficiaries would continue to be based on the DAC list of ODA recipients, though beneficiary countries entering into a free trade agreement with Norway would be withdrawn from GSP preferences. Clear routines for dealing with changes to the DAC list had been established. In particular, in the case of a country that graduated to a higher income group, the preferences that applied to the higher income group would take effect at the beginning of the year after the country had been placed in a higher income group in two successive DAC revisions. Countries that moved to a lower income group would be granted the same preferences as other countries in the lower income group from the beginning of the following year. In conclusion, she indicated that the Norwegian Government would continue to reach out to beneficiaries to allow them to better understand the functioning of the GSP scheme.
&& The representative  of Uruguay expressed appreciation for Norway's GSP scheme and indicated that his delegation would study the recent changes closely.  
&& The Committee took note of the notification by Norway.
-	Generalized System of Preferences - notification by the European Union (WT/COMTD/N/4/Add.6)
&& The Chairperson said that the EU's notification concerning its GSP scheme was contained in document WT/COMTD/N/4/Add.6. She invited the EU to introduce the notification.
&& The representative  of the European Union said that the EU's revised GSP scheme would enter into force on 1 January 2014, which was 14 months after the publication of the relevant EU Regulation. This gave ample time for countries and economic operators to adapt. He said that an analysis of the current GSP scheme had revealed that, while the scheme was working properly, it was apparent that the time had come to take stock of recent developments in international trade. Notably, a number of economies had successfully integrated into world trade, while others were still lagging behind. The revised GSP scheme therefore focused on those countries which needed GSP benefits the most, taking into consideration their financial, development and trade needs. The new scheme was more dynamic and would adapt to the changing needs of developing countries by using objective and clear economic and trade criteria. The revised scheme was also more predictable and stable. 
He went on to say that the revised scheme maintained the arrangement of a standard GSP, a GSP+ sub-scheme and the Everything but Arms (EBA) initiative for LDCs. However, the standard GSP and the GSP+ sub-scheme now had a validity of 10 years, instead of three. The EBA, which granted DFQF market access to the EU market for all products from LDCs apart from arms and ammunition, remained open-ended. The GSP's potential for the support of sustainable development has been strengthened by the revision. The GSP+ was now more generous with countries which ratified and effectively implemented international conventions in the fields of human rights, core labour standards, sustainable development and good governance. The GSP+ monitoring mechanism had been enhanced and clarified, so as to allow a better understanding of how the effective implementation of these conventions could be ensured. More countries could also apply for the GSP+, and could do so at any time. 
The revised scheme also improved the transparency of procedures, making it easier for economic operators and beneficiary countries to make use of the system and understand its mechanisms. This was particularly true for withdrawal and safeguards procedures, which would not change much in substance but were now more clearly detailed. The revision had been done in full and continued accordance with WTO requirements. The scheme was also compliant with the GSP's scope, which was to support economic growth and diversification in developing countries through enhanced trade opportunities. 
&& The Committee took note of the notification by the EU.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairperson said that she wished to provide Members with a brief update on the preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on PTAs. 
With regard to the EU's trade preferences for Pakistan, she said that the draft factual presentation had been sent to the EU for comments and it therefore appeared that the PTA could be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD broadly within the timelines indicated in the TM for PTAs. Turning to new notifications under the PTAs TM, she informed the Committee that, on 28 March 2013, the Russian Federation had notified its GSP scheme. The notification was circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/42. The Secretariat was waiting to receive the required data from the Russian Federation which would allow the factual presentation of the GSP scheme to be prepared. She urged the Russian Federation to provide the data as soon as possible. 
Finally, for the three PTAs previously notified under the PTAs TM - PTAs being implemented by India, China, and Chinese Taipei - she said that there had been no significant developments since her last report to the Committee. In particular, the full set of data required for the preparation of the factual presentations of the three PTAs had not yet been provided to the Secretariat. She urged the Members that had notified these PTAs to provide the required data as soon as possible.  
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairperson said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered.   
&& -	Market information and analysis tools - presentation by the Secretariat and the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO
&& The Chairperson said that a representative of the Integrated Database (IDB) Section would make a presentation on behalf of the Secretariat. From the ITC side, she welcomed Mr. Yvan Decreux and Ms. Helen Lassen, who were both Senior Market Analysts in the ITC's Market Analysis and Research Section.
&& The representative  of the IDB Section presented the WTO's Database on PTAs ( HYPERLINK "http://ptadb.wto.org" http://ptadb.wto.org). He recalled that the PTAs Database had been set up as an outcome of the General Council Decision of 14 December 2010, contained in document WT/L/806, which established the TM for PTAs. He demonstrated the various types of information on the PTAs being implemented by Members that were contained in the PTAs Database, including the beneficiaries of each PTA, regulations and other documentation, as well as preferential national tariff duties. He drew particular attention to the data concerning imports by duty scheme that could be viewed from the Database. He explained that the provision of this type of data, which was now a requirement under the PTA TM for Members implementing PTAs, allowed a calculation of the utilization of each PTA by beneficiaries. The PTAs Database was also linked to the WTO's Tariff Analysis Online tool ( HYPERLINK "http://tao.wto.org" http://tao.wto.org), which provided detailed information at the tariff line level. Finally, he reminded Members of their obligations to submit to the Secretariat the data specified in the PTAs TM. 
&& The representative s of the ITC presented the ITC's Market Access Map tool ( HYPERLINK "http://www.macmap.org" http://www.macmap.org). They informed the Committee that Market Access Map had been developed by the ITC to support the needs of exporters, trade support institutions, trade policy makers and academic institutions in developing countries. It provided information on tariffs applied by 191 countries and faced by 239 countries and territories. It also covered tariff rate quotas, trade remedies, rules and certificates of origin, WTO bound tariffs, non-tariff measures and trade flows to help users prioritize and analyze export markets as well as prepare for market access negotiations. Users could also find ad valorem equivalents for all non ad valorem duties and perform aggregations of products and countries as well as simulate tariff reduction scenarios. In their presentation, they made several demonstrations of how Market Access Map could be used in various types of searches concerning particular products and markets.     
&& The representative  of Australia noted the useful market information and analysis tools that were available to Members, and in particular to LDCs. He inquired what information existed on the users of these tools, and whether training was offered on how to make the best use of the tools. 
&& The representative s of the ITC responded that the ITC collected user data through the registrations that were required for the use of their tools. There were around 320,000 users of their tools across the world. Annual surveys were conducted to assess the usefulness of the tools. The ITC organized regular training activities in Geneva, as well as in other locations across the world. In this regard, they expressed appreciation for the financial support that was being provided to fund activities relating to Market Access Map and other tools developed by the ITC. They informed the Committee that online training was also conducted. For this purpose, the Committee was directed to the website  HYPERLINK "http://www.itc-learning.org" http://www.itc-learning.org. In addition, free seminars over the internet were offered.
&& The representative  of Nepal noted the usefulness of the tools presented and suggested that efforts should continue to be made to promote them to stakeholders.       
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
-	Better utilization of the market access provided to LDCs under duty free and quota free - communication from Nepal, on behalf of the LDC Group (WT/COMTD/W/194)
&& The Chairperson said that the communication from Nepal on behalf of the LDC Group, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/194, was introduced and discussed at the 87th Session. Nepal had requested that the communication remain on the agenda for the present meeting. She invited Nepal to take the floor to make any further comments on the communication.
&& The representative  of Nepal, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that the Hong Kong Decision specified that Members would notify the implementation of DFQF schemes annually to the CTD. The CTD was to annually review the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to LDCs and report to the General Council for appropriate action. He recalled that the LDC Group had requested Members that had not already done so to submit full and complete information on their implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs, including their plans for implementing the Hong Kong Decision. The purpose of the request was to maintain transparency and to be better informed. Many Members that offered DFQF market access to LDCs had met the notification requirements of the Hong Kong Decision. However, full and complete information was not available, which was why the LDC Group had made the request. He said that the LDC Group had taken note of the suggestions made by Members in the discussion on this matter at the 87th Session. Members had recognized the usefulness of enhanced transparency regarding the implementation of DFQF schemes being offered to LDCs. It had been suggested that the PTAs Database and other existing databases already contained the detailed tariff line information that the LDCs were seeking. 
&& In light of the suggestion, the LDC Group had requested the Secretariat to provide detailed information on the line-by-line tariff treatment in LDC-specific preferential schemes, and on any dutiable tariff lines and existing quotas. The Group had also requested information on the value of imports under LDC-specific preferential schemes, as well as the value of imports under dutiable tariff lines. He expressed appreciation to the Secretariat for having provided the requested information and indicated that the information could be shared with interested Members. The information received showed that all developed countries, with one exception, granted full or close to full DFQF market access to LDC products, thus fulfilling the terms of the Hong Kong Decision. In the case of one developed country, the DFQF coverage under its GSP scheme stood at 82.5%, which did not satisfy the Hong Kong Decision. At present, DFQF market access was being considered in the context of deliverables for MC9, at which the LDC Group hoped to achieve a meaningful outcome on the matter. 
He went on to say that DFQF market access was an important tool to help LDCs expand their trade, meaningfully integrate into the international trading system and address poverty and hunger through increased export earnings. Enhanced market access had been a continued call of the LDCs. Without easy market access, LDCs' trade volumes could not improve and their marginalization would not be reversed. Given the continued concentration of LDCs' exports on a limited number of products, enhanced market access conditions were of fundamental importance. He called for a timely and expeditious implementation of the Hong Kong Decision and expressed his hope that MC9 would make a significant contribution to further enhance market access opportunities for LDCs.
&& The representative  of the United States said that his delegation fully supported efforts to promote transparency with regard to trade preference programmes. In this light, he expressed appreciation for the information provided by the presenters from the Secretariat and the ITC under the previous sub-item. He said that, in implementing DFQF market access consistent with the Hong Kong Decision, it was important for the US to carefully consider the potential negative impact on other LDCs, including those LDCs that already had considerable access to the US market through preference programmes. The US had long held the view that LDCs and low-income countries were unique and that one size did not fit all. It had therefore tailored its preference programmes and technical assistance to target specific development needs. Any potential negative impact on LDC and developing country trading partners that already had access to the US market would need to be carefully weighed against the potential benefits to LDCs that did not currently have such access. 
&& The Committee took note of the communication from Nepal on behalf of the LDC Group, and of all interventions.    
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business". 
On behalf of the CTD, the Chairperson expressed appreciation for the work of the outgoing Director-General. 
The meeting was adjourned. 

__________



 The revision was circulated after the meeting in document WT/COMTD/W/195/Rev.1.









WT/COMTD/M/88

-  PAGE 1 -


WT/COMTD/M/88

-  PAGE 23 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/88

26 August 2013
(13-4540)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/ NUMPAGES  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1
Committee on Trade and Development
Eighty-Eighth Session
 




