RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/9

14 October 1996

ORGANIZATION

(96-4257)

 
Committee on Trade and Development
Ninth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 12 SEPTEMBER 1996

Chairman: Mr. Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)

A. Adoption of the Agenda
1. The Committee adopted the following agenda:

A. Adoption of the Agenda

B. Implementation of Uruguay Round Provisions in Favour of Developing Country
Members

Cc. Provision of Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation

D. Review of the Participation of Developing Country Members in the Multilateral Trading

System, including the Review of the Impact of the Results of the Uruguay Round on
Developing Country Members

E. Other Business

23 &&The Chairman suggested taking up the question of observer status at a future meeting, noting
the adoption by the General Council of guidelines on the attendance of international organizations.
For the time being, he intended to follow the Committee's ad hoc procedure of inviting the same
organizations for the next meeting which were invited to this meeting.

3 &&The Committee so agreed.
B. Implementation of Uruguay Round Provisions in Favour of Developing Country Members
4. &&The Chairman recalled that the work programme of the CTD for 1996 was directed at making
a significant input into the Ministerial meeting and that review of the implementation of Uruguay Round
provisions in favour of developing countries was one of its priorities. He drew delegations’ attention
to the following documents: WT/COMTD/W/16, containing responses received so far from the
Chairpersons of the subsidiary bodies of the General Council responsible for WTO Agreements containing
provisions in favour of developing countries; WT/COMTD/W/17, containing a specific response from
the Textiles Monitoring Body on the implementation of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing with
particular reference to aspects of direct relevance to developing and least-developed country members;

5. &&The Chairman urged delegations to inform the Committee of their experience with the
implementation of those provisions, since some of them were only triggered if specific requests were
made. Unless information based on individual experience of countries was received, any evaluation
of the implementation risked being incomplete. The debate served to evaluate the extent to which,
and how, the different provisions were applied or used by developing countries since the entry into
force of the WTO in January 1995, and to help provide an input into the Committee's report to Ministers
with appropriate recommendations on this matter.

6.&& The representative of the European Communities welcomed document WT/COMTD/W/16
as the first document to show the extent to which provisions in favour of developing countries had
been implemented as well as the extent to which developing countries had been able to take advantage
of them. Though incomplete, it nevertheless showed positive evidence of the flexibility of the multilateral
trading system and its ability to take into consideration the special needs of developing countries. He
hoped that in coordination with other WTO Bodies further information in the form of addenda to the
document would become available.

7. &&The representative of Canada suggested that the Committee request the Secretariat to prepare
an outline of those provisions which would only be triggered upon request. He also referred to the
Questionnaire on Technical Assistance Needs, which had been circulated earlier to delegations, and
suggested that replies to it would be a useful input to determine the extent to which the provisions in
favour of developing countries relating to the needs for technical assistance were considered effective.
This, in turn, would enable technical cooperation agencies in countries such as his to put together an
effective technical assistance package.

8.&& The representative of Norway said that document WT/COMTD/W/16 took a systematic approach
to survey the practical application of the concessionary provisions and looked forward to receiving
inputs from delegations on their individual experiences, as well as further information from other WTO
Bodies. Since these provisions were intended to facilitate the integration of developing countries into
the legal framework of the multilateral trading system, the Committee's report to the Ministers in
Singapore had to reflect their use. It was possible to conclude, even at this stage, that developing
countries had made use of these special provisions.

9. &&The representative of Korea underlined the importance of the special provisions in the WTO
Agreements for the integration of developing countries, particularly the least-developed, into the
multilateral trading system. The survey set out in document WT/COMTD/W/16 was an important
input into the Committee's report to the Ministerial Meeting. There was room to elaborate the note
with supplementary information; the development perspectives of the implementation of the WTO
Agreements merited examination on a regular basis.

 

10.&& The representative of India, supported by the representative of Pakistan, said that the
implementation of the special provisions ought not to be viewed in a formalistic way, in terms of the
legal provisions, but rather at a substantive level. An evaluation of the provision allowing for transitional
periods was desirable since they constituted the majority of the provisions. Additional substantive
information was useful, for example on safeguard actions involving developing countries’ exports under
the provisions of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing. Although this was not legally included
in the realm of special provision listed in favour of developing countries, these types of action
nevertheless had an impact on the export performance of developing countries. Likewise, even if there
were no specific provision in the Anti-Dumping Agreement relating to developing countries, a large
number of products exported by developing countries had been subject to anti-dumping actions. Actions
taken resulting in negative effects for market access for products exported by developing countries
should also be listed in the document with a view to presenting Ministers with a complete picture.

11. &&The representative of Canada said that the suggestion made by the representative of India went
beyond the Committee's mandate. The Secretariat had been requested to provide a clear picture of
the implementation of the provisions in favour of developing countries, rather than evaluate such
implementation. Document WT/COMTD/W/16 gave such a picture. The Committee on Trade and
Development was not the proper forum to evaluate such elements.

12.&& The representative of Tanzania said that delegations such as his attributed great significance
to provisions contained in the preamble paragraphs of the various agreements and in the Decision on
Measures in Favour of Least-Developed Countries in assisting their countries to expand their export
base and escape the constraints on their economies. He therefore questioned their exclusion from the
information contained in document WT/COMTD/W/16. He asked how the Secretariat intended to
evaluate the implementation of the Decision on Measures in Favour of Least-Developed Countries.

13.&& A representative of the Secretariat recalled that the Committee had requested the Secretariat
to compile the responses received from the Chairpersons of other WTO Bodies on the implementation
of the measures in favour of developing and least-developed countries. The Secretariat had not been
requested to evaluate the implementation.

14. &&The representative of India, in his capacity as Chairman of the Council on Trade in Goods,
said that he would ensure the prompt dispatch to the Secretariat of all additional responses from WTO
Bodies with a view to complement information in document WT/COMTD/W/16.

15.&& The representative of Uruguay said that it would be useful to analyse whether the special and
differential provisions in favour of developing countries, which were contained in the agreements, were
actually of use to developing countries. This would be useful in deciding initiatives in future rounds
of negotiations.

16. &&The Chairman said that it was up to the Committee, rather than the Secretariat, to discuss and
evaluate the implementation against the background of the document. He said that he intended to conduct
private consultations with a view to identifying points to be included in any recommendation on
implementation to Ministers.

17.&& The Committee took note of the statements made and agreed to revert to this item at a future
meeting.

Cc. Provisions of Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation

18. &&The Chairman recalled that, at its July meeting, the Committee had a comprehensive and fruitful
discussion on this item on the basis of a non-paper from the delegation of Switzerland, an Informal
Note by the Chairman containing a checklist of points related to Guidelines for WTO Technical
Cooperation, and a Secretariat's status report on technical cooperation activities contained in document
WT/COMTD/W/14/Add.1. Based on the outcome of that discussion and comments received from
delegations, the Committee had agreed that he come forward with a revised version of Draft Guidelines
for WTO Technical Cooperation for discussion at today's meeting. Such guidelines had been circulated
to delegations and incorporated comments received from them. The revised draft guidelines contained
a framework for considering specific action as well as the specific matters addressed. He also recalled
that, at the Committee's last meeting, he had noted that a number of replies had been received from
Members to the questionnaire which he had sent in May of this year to ascertain the overall needs for
assistance in trade-related matters. He urged those Members who had not yet done so to provide
comments, since a critical mass of replies was needed before an authoritative picture could be drawn.
He invited comments with a view to the Committee agreeing on a set of guidelines as soon as possible.

19. &&The representative of Switzerland said that the practical modalities for providing technical
assistance still had to be defined. Referring to her delegation's proposal that an annual review be
conducted by the CTD, she suggested that this review would be based on these guidelines. It was
not clear to her delegation what a balanced relationship between trade and development signified. Her
delegation continued to question the appropriateness of including representatives of the private sector
in capacity building activities. Representation at the WTO was at governmental level and given its
limited resources, activities directed at the private sector should be left to organizations such as the
ITC.

20.&& The representative of Egypt thanked the Chairman for his efforts in drawing up the revised
guidelines and said that they should note, as had been done in the informal note presented by the
delegation of Switzerland, that the entry into force of the Uruguay Agreements had increased the need
for technical assistance. The Preamble to the Agreement establishing the WTO noted the need to ensure
that developing countries, specially the least-developed, secured a share in the growth of international
trade commensurate with the needs of economic development. The guidelines needed to underline
both the importance of technical assistance and the vital importance of implementing the commitments
on technical assistance. She questioned whether the aim of maintaining geographic balance was
compatible with the priorities implied in the draft guidelines and the designation of African countries
as priority countries. She furthermore recalled that the General Council's Decision of 31 January 1995
relating to technical cooperation activities referred only to developing countries. Additional funds would
therefore need to be secured for assistance to economies in transition. The section headed "Principles
and Objectives” rather than "Subject Matter" should mention that increased knowledge of the multilateral
trading rules was vital for the full integration of developing countries in the trading system. She
furthermore suggested to include the supply of data bases and training in their effective use and
information technology in general as one of the principles and objectives.

21.&& The representative of Tanzania said that he agreed with the representative of Egypt, but that
he would refrain from further elaboration in deference to the Chairman's remarks. He agreed that
technical assistance should be above all demand-driven, but nevertheless called on the Secretariat to
also engage in a proactive role in this respect, with a view to assisting developing countries in identifying
their technical assistance needs.

22: &&The representative of Norway clarified that the subject matter of technical assistance activities
was also of relevance to Members other than developing countries, and welcomed the fact that Norway’ s
comments made at previous meetings had been taken into account in the revised draft which he could
agree to with the exception of its reference to the private sector as beneficiary of WTO technical
assistance. Technical assistance activities of each organization should be restricted to areas of their
competence. He agreed with the Chairman that this was neither the stage nor the forum to make general
declarations or to ask for additional funds. An agreement on the guidelines could however act as a
spur for increased funding.

23.&& The representative of India suggested that the first inset should be redrafted to say "contribute
to expansion of trade and development”. As presently drafted it could be interpreted to mean that
technical assistance was conditional on full integration in the global system. He also asked that priorities
not exclude other developing countries than those specified. He had doubts whether the guidelines
needed to include principles for technical assistance and suggested that Section 1 be entitled simply
"Objectives", rather than "Principles, Objectives and Priorities”.

24.&& The representative of Japan thanked the Chairman for the revised guidelines and suggested
the following wording to be included among objectives: "Address the difficulties developing countries
may face in implementing the WTO Agreements with a view to ensuring a steady implementation
thereof”. He said that, in addition to coordination, cooperation among international organizations would
sometimes be necessary and suggested that the relevant item be redrafted as follows: "Be in full
cooperation and coordination with other assistance provided by multilateral and bilateral institutions”.

25; &&The representative of Pakistan stressed that needs, rather than geographical considerations,
should be the basis for determining priorities.

26.&& The representative of Australia supported the objective that technical assistance be demand
driven and responded to specific needs. It was her understanding that the UN list of least-developed
countries and the World Bank definition of low-income countries would be used and that
Papua-New Guinea and some Pacific Island countries would be among countries in the priority groups.

27. &&The representative of Cuba thanked the Chairman for his enthusiastic efforts in establishing
the draft guidelines. He suggested the addition of the words "entrepreneurial sector" to the concept
of "private sector", referring to joint ventures between the public and private sectors. He emphasized
the importance, particularly for smaller developing countries, of technical assistance in the area of
information technology with a view to enhancing their capacity for analysis and decision making, and
to providing them access to information on ongoing programmes.

28. &&The representative of the European Communities said that, at this stage of the discussions,
the Committee should be finalizing the document. The guidelines were operational rather than political
and should set an operational framework for technical assistance activities. His delegation was satisfied
with the broad principles underlying the revised version of the draft guidelines. He acknowledged
that there could be disagreement on details; such as to whom, in addition to the public sector, activities
should be extended, and on the modalities for their review. While agreeing that beneficiaries should
be primarily those countries in greatest need, others should not be excluded. Technical assistance
activities should remain as flexible as possible. He warned that a tight definition of implementation
modalities would give the programmes not enough flexibility to respond to future needs. While he
did not think it was reasonable to exclude economies in transition from the programmes, he was willing
to discuss this further.

29. &&The representative of Paraguay thanked the Chairman for his efforts and commitment. He
questioned whether the aim of maintaining geographic balance was compatible with the priorities implied
in the draft guidelines and the designation of African countries as priority countries, unless referring
specifically to African least-developed countries. What were the criteria for defining low-income
countries? While he agreed that the private sector should not be the principal beneficiary of WTO's
technical assistance activities, their total exclusion was not acceptable.


30. &&The representative of El Salvador supported the intervention made by the Egyptian representative
and disagreed that it was too late to open up discussion on such an issue. She did not agree with the
representative of Norway that a rapid finalising of the guidelines would result in an increase of funds
for such activities. She asked that traineeships within the WTO Secretariat be included as part of
technical assistance provided by the WTO. She stressed the importance of the private sector and agreed
that participation of the private sector in technical assistance activities should be organized in consultation
with the government. Criteria for evaluation were necessary. There seemed to be a conflict between
the objective of keeping a geographical balance and giving priority to a geographical region.

31.&& The representative of Hungary said that it was inappropriate to question the extension of technical
assistance to economies in transition. The broadest participation of these countries in the multilateral
trading system was in the common interest of all Members, and technical assistance was of vital
importance.

32: &&The representative of Thailand welcomed the Chairman's latest draft and suggested that the
inclusion of the private sector should be considered on a case-by-case basis. He agreed that the
establishment of priorities must not have the effect of denying technical assistance to any developing
country.

33.&& The representative of Brazil said that the criteria used by the Secretariat in selecting officials
to participate in seminars should be clear, since this would help governments in their nomination of
candidates.

 

34.&& The representative of Argentina expressed concerned that priority to low-income countries could
deprive countries such as his from access to activities such as trade policy courses and national and
regional seminars in which his country had a particular interest. He suggested that reference be made
to "other developing countries”.

35; &&The representative of Romania agreed with the Chairman that, at this stage, the Committee’ s
work should not be concerned with operational details and that work on evaluation criteria and modalities
would continue. As an economy in transition, his country looked forward to continuing to benefit
from WTO technical assistance activities.

36. &&The representative of the United States considered the guidelines balanced. They were sufficiently
flexible to permit a geographical balance and yet not to exclude any developing country. He was of
the view that WTO should be involved, in collaboration with ITC, in technical assistance activities
including the private sector.

37. &&The representative of the Czech Republic said that the exclusion of economies in transition
from the technical assistance activities would diminish WTO's role in this area.

38.&& The representative of Switzerland said that she had taken note of the Chairman's assurance
that the priorities established would not exclude any developing country nor any economy in transition.
She suggested that the guidelines be clearer on the concept of low-income countries and in that context
supported the definition by the World Bank which was on the basis of precise criteria. She wondered
whether, in addition to the subjects listed under "Priorities", there would be other subject priorities.
Her delegation was of the opinion that, rather than at national level, trade policy courses conducted
at a regional level or conducted on the basis of language would be more cost-effective. She wondered
whether the resources of a multilateral institution such as WTO should be used for bilateral assistance
programmes. If this were the case, what types of programmes would they be funding? Would finances
come from the regular budget? Her delegation placed particular importance on the Decision of the
General Council establishing certain modalities for managing trust funds. She proposed that the relevant
language in the draft guidelines be redrafted as follows: "The WTO Trust Fund shall be managed
in conformity with the Decision adopted by the General Council on 18 July 1996." Inall, she considered
the draft a good basis.

39.&& The representative of El Salvador suggested that, if categorization of priority countries were
to be maintained, the section on "Priorities" be redrafted as follows: "least-developed countries, in
particular African countries, low-income developing countries and small economies”. She furthermore
suggested the deletion of "and at the national and regional level” in relation to the comprehensive trade
policy courses in Geneva. She suggested that short courses be given for officials coming to Geneva,
since courses in Geneva gave candidates the widest possible exposure to experts and officials.

40.&& The representative of Japan suggested that non-Member countries in the accession process be
included in the list of countries eligible for technical assistance as a demonstration of goodwill. He
also recalled that the modes of delivery in the draft were not exhaustive. In his delegation's view,
national and regional seminars were more cost-effective.

41.&& The representative of Egypt said that the difference between technical missions and technical
seminars as set out under "Modes of Delivery” was unclear. The modes of delivery depended on the
requirements and no attempt should therefore be made to establish priorities. She proposed the following
reformulation of the item on coordination: coordination and cooperation with relevant international
organizations, with a view to ensuring coordination and the complementing of various programmes
as well as to avoiding duplication. She also suggested that specific reference be made to joint efforts
with the ITC and UNCTAD, particularly in establishing a central inventory of programmes. She
suggested to add the exchange of information with recipient countries so as to attain a more complete
picture of different technical assistance programmes. She proposed, for management purposes, a
two-year, rather than a three-year plan to coincide with the cycle of Ministerial conferences, with
adjustments on an annual basis. She agreed that the plan be submitted to appropriate bodies of WTO.
The role of the General Council and the Budget Committee should be further elaborated. The concept
of national cost sharing should be clarified: it should not become a precondition for technical assistance,
particularly to least-developed countries. She suggested that dispute settlement be specified as an area
eligible for technical assistance. She would sent her observations in writing.

42. && The representative of Tanzania recalled an earlier statement that countries such as his needed
much wider, much more targeted and coordinated technical assistance which would lead to improvements
in their economies and make them viable trading partners. Measures such as seminars and technical
missions did not suffice.

43. && The representative of Paraguay shared the concerns of the delegation of El Salvador concerning
the need to maintain geographical balance in establishing priorities. Technical assistance could be
directed towards assessing the weaknesses and strengths of national trade and economic policy: this
would increase the interest of his country in technical assistance. An integrated approach with other
international organizations was essential for technical assistance activities to bear results. In this context
he recalled the Director-General’ s observation that programmes needed to be tailored to meet the specific
circumstances of a country, and that they not be restricted to any one activity.

44. && The representative of Australia recalled that the draft guidelines under discussion could not
extend to countries in the process of accession: the Decision of the General Council of January 1995
specifically excluded technical assistance for acceding governments. Such assistance was best left to
the relevant Working Party. She requested specific information on the resource implications of the
proposal to provide specialized advisory services in capitals and in Geneva. The relationship between
WTO and ITC warranted a reference to joint technical cooperation activities with ITC.

45. && The representative of New Zealand recognized the guidelines as an appropriate tool to foster
development and trade. She suggested to add regional institutions dealing with trade matters in the
Section dealing with international coordination. The South Pacific Forum Secretariat was a key institution
for discussing and coordinating trade policy issues in that area. She supported Australia's suggestion
to include a reference to the ITC in the section on international coordination. Her delegation was of
the view that a regular schedule be established for a Secretariat's status report. Her delegation was
supportive of the establishment of an independent oversight mechanism and suggested that an external
review be carried out at appropriate times.

46. &&The representative of India agreed with the representative of Egypt that national cost sharing
not become a precondition for receiving technical assistance. It was his understanding that the main
sources of funding would be the regular WTO Budget and Trust Funds. He suggested to add internships
in the WTO Secretariat under Modes of delivery, as this would provide hands-on experience.

47. &&The Chairman invited Members to work with him to prepare a further revision of the guidelines.
Such guidelines were not designed to be a political statement but rather an instrument to manage resources
efficiently, equitably and with flexibility. After the Committee had finalized the guidelines, it would
be the time to consider the criteria on which to evaluate technical assistance. A political statement
on the importance of technical assistance would be contained in the CTD's report to Ministers. In
response to comments made by delegations, he drew attention to the headnote in the draft guidelines
which referred only to developing countries as beneficiaries of WTO technical assistance and not to
economies in transition. However, he pointed out that the periodic review by Ministers of the operational
directives and implementation modalities would provide an opportunity to modify the priorities. While
it was clear to which countries in Africa the draft guidelines referred, he would nevertheless consult
with Members whether more precision was needed. He clarified that the draft guidelines in no way
intended to interfere with national policy, but that rather, they intended to fully acquaint officials involved
in the shaping of national policy with WTO rules. He also noted that the WTO was a young organization
and that priorities could be adjusted as experience was gained in implementing the guidelines. The
more fundamental concerns of capacity building could be addressed in collaboration with other
institutions.

D.Review of the Participation of Developing Country Members in the Multilateral Trading
System, including the Review of the Impact of the Results of the Uruguay Round on
Developing Country Members

48.&& The Chairman recalled that the Committee had requested the Secretariat to prepare a study
on the subject of the review of the participation of developing country members in the multilateral
trading system, including the review of the impact of the results of the Uruguay Round on developing
country Members, in accordance with an outline agreed by the Committee at its June 1996 meeting.
This study was now available and had been circulated to delegation in document WT/COMTD/W/15.


49. &&The representative of the United States noted that the analysis contained in document
WT/COMTD/W/15 confirmed that both domestic and external factors, many inter-related, influenced
the performance of low and medium-income countries in world trade, and did so in different ways.
The first conclusion he drew from the report was that a liberal trade regime was good for the economy;
lower import protection gave stronger export growth. Second, stable domestic economic policies attracted
investment. Third, access to foreign markets was not the single determinant of export performances:
some countries with poor export performance had better access to industrial country markets than some
whose exports expanded rapidly. Many industrialized countries gave preferential access to low and
medium-income developing countries, which was not fully utilized due to domestic reasons. Evidence
of the benefits from the results of the Uruguay Round already existed, which would increase as
implementation advanced. Developing countries should adopt liberal trade and investment regimes
and foster strong vibrant and stable economies. This would permit them to take full advantage of the
multilateral trading system.

50. && The representative of Norway said that the analysis in document WI/COMTD/W/15 confirmed
that trade stimulated growth and was a means to reduce poverty. The report noted that, with appropriate
policies, commodity poor countries could achieve high growth. Trade was more important than aid
and economic growth in the poorer and most aid-dependent countries needed the best possible climate
for trade. Stimulating trade among developing countries and with industrialized countries was a priority
and his country supported WTO's efforts to increase developing countries' understanding of the
multilateral trading framework in order to benefit from it.

51. && The representative of Japan said that the integration into the global economy of developing
countries was a means of encouraging sustainable development. Economic development depended
to a large extent on developing countries’ ability to promote institutional and human development.
It was useful to note the contrast in economic policies adopted by certain fast growing Asian economies
and those adopted by certain least-developed countries, particularly those in Africa, which were being
marginalized in the world economy. Such successful policies promoted agriculture, promoted small
and medium-sized industries, increased productivity in the agricultural sector and encouraged the
production of value-added products in agriculture-based industries. Domestic competition among small
and medium-sized industries had the potential of raising productivity.

52.&& The representative of India said that the study contained in document WT/COMTD/W/15 was
a useful attempt taking into consideration the constraints under which the Secretariat worked. He could
not conclude from the document, as the representative of the United States had done, that domestic
policies were primarily responsible for poor economic growth. This appeared an over-simplification
of a complex situation. He noted a heavy reliance on IMF and World Bank documentation and was
of the view that more use could have been made of information from other sources which were also
in the public domain. While he acknowledged the role of foreign investment, the document’ s emphasis
on the importance of foreign investment seemed to overlook the fact that domestic investment was
critical for economic growth. The analysis seemed to take little account of the importance of domestic
saving ratios. In that context, he noted that the observation that the lack of national saving was among
the factors that accounted for the lion's share of responsibility for the lack of economic growth, as
quoted in a footnote, should have received more prominence in the body of the report. The observation
that Asian countries were increasing their participation in the globalization process should have been
made at a less aggregate level: it was not applicable to a country such as his. The document pointed
to the strong investment performance of Asian countries. However, figures in UNCTAD's World
Investment Report showed that, if the figures relating to China were excluded, no dramatic changes
in the trends of investment flows to developing countries had taken place. He welcomed the
acknowledgement of the poor quality of international statistics on foreign direct investment. He was
also pleased to see specific reference made to the effect of anti-dumping measures on the export
performance of developing and least-developed countries. The observation that Uruguay Round tariff
reduction had limited effect on preferences was followed by a statement that a large share of exports
to the European Communities by African countries consisted of petroleum products at zero duty.
Countries imported products at zero duty for domestic reasons, as his country did in the case of
foodgrains at times of food shortage. Were there other measures which improved market access for
petroleum products exported by African countries to the European Communities? He noted that tariff
escalation had a significant effect on the capability of developing countries to export, unlike the
conclusions in the study, supported by a quote from a World Bank Report. The study should perhaps
more appropriately have highlighted products affected by tariff escalation rather than those which were
not. The constraints on foreign investment as described in the study supported his earlier observation
on the role of domestic saving. The description of the difficulties facing African countries illustrated
the complexity of the issue. Given the study's WTO origin, disapproval of protectionist policies was
to be expected. He took it that both the protectionist policy adopted by developed and developing
countries were disapproved of. He wondered how the identification of domestic protection as the main
source of distortion could be reconciled with evidence that fast growing east Asian economies had high
rates of protection in the initial years. The causes and effects relation of the macroeconomic policies
mentioned in paragraph 60 (trade performance, exchange rates, budget deficits), could perhaps be
clarified. Moreover, there was enough research available on the positive and the negative effects of
FDI and commenting only on the positive aspects, as in paragraph 70, distorted reality.

53)&& The representative of Brazil drew attention to the penultimate paragraph of document
WT/COMTD/W/15, which referred to the interdependence of external and domestic factors.
Paragraph 29 noted the obstacles faced by exports of developing countries.

54.&& The representative of Canada said that the study in document WT/COMTD/W/15 had struck
a good balance between external and internal factors which affected the participation of developing
countries in the multilateral trading system. Domestic factors were the prime determinant of the level
of participation in the multilateral trading system. The Secretariat had been fairly rigorous in its analysis.
The inability of least-developed countries to benefit from the market opening opportunities following
the Uruguay Round illustrated that in the case of such countries capacity building was more important
than market access. The paper could perhaps have dealt more with the inter-linkages between domestic
trade policy and domestic investment policy. He agreed with the representative of India that domestic
savings were important, but was of the view that the report dealt with it adequately. He would have
preferred that the study also included trade in services. Developing countries had made significant
progress in trade in this sector and the opportunities for greater participation contributing to growth
and development were significant.

55.&& The representative of Cuba agreed with the representative of India that the report attributed
lack of growth unduly to national policies. The distortion of the sugar trade due to foreign subsidies
and import quotas was a clear example of the adverse effect of such policies on developing countries.
A recent seminar had highlighted the negative and positive aspects of foreign investment. While he
agreed that FDI could have positive effects, he was nevertheless of the view that commitments in the
area of transfer of technology and the employment of nationals would ensure that FDI would promote
national economic policy.

56.&& The representative of the European Communities noted that document WT/COMTD/W/15
dealt in a well-balanced manner with a complex subject. He was of the view that the two concluding
paragraphs should have been developed in more detail. As noted in the report, market access was
only one factor affecting the export performance of developing countries. There were reports which
demonstrated that the effect of tariff escalation on the export capabilities was sometimes exaggerated.
He agreed that domestic savings represented an important factor in economic growth and suggested
that a study on income distribution policies was warranted as well.

57.&& The representative of Switzerland welcomed the Secretariat's study in document
WT/COMTD/W/15, which had fully used available information. The complexity of the situation
analysed in the document pointed to measures which had to be taken. It was clear that for many it
was not the lack of market access but the lack of capacity that stopped them benefiting fully from the
results of the Uruguay Round. This was a problem which could be met primarily at the national level
but could be supplemented by technical assistance to develop human capacity and to make full use
of resources.

58. &&The representative of New Zealand said that the Secretariat's paper provided a good background
and had distilled previous studies on similar issues. The diverse experience among developing countries
did not lend itself to easy explanations. Some common factors were the high correlation between the
share of manufactured goods in merchandise export and export performance as well as the positive
correlation between exports and share of investment in GDP. It was noteworthy that countries with
strong export growth had lower levels of protection and less exchange rate volatility. In some sectors
such as agriculture, textiles, clothing, fish and fish products problems of market access persisted.
Her delegation was of the view that multilateral liberalization efforts needed to tackle tariff peaks and
tariffescalation since these discouraged further processing of basic commodities in developing countries.
The study also clearly pointed out the need for an appropriate domestic economic and trade policy
environment. The dynamic linkages between such a policy environment and economic and trade growth
was clearly demonstrated by her country's own experience, which was of particular relevance, given
the high share of production of agricultural, forestry and other primary products. Along with appropriate
domestic policies and improved market access and a hospitable and facilitating environment, development
assistance and technical assistance were required to strengthen the infrastructure and the institutional
and human resource capacities, particularly in least-developed countries. She urged cooperation with
UNCTAD and ITC in the area of technical assistance.

59.&& A representative from the Secretariat said that, first, the perceived lack of emphasis in the study
on the importance of domestic savings simply resulted from the fact that its importance was so evident
that it had been taken for granted as a basic assumption: it was clear that foreign direct investment
could in no way take the place of a high rate of domestic savings. Though certainly macroeconomic
stability, exchange rate variability and export growth were interlinked, the dominant direction was
from better macroeconomic policies to better export performance and better flows of FDI. In the study,
the Secretariat had attempted to provide a balanced and objective reflection of the views which were
available in the existing literature on the subject, rather than to come to any conclusion or to advance
solutions.

60.&& The Committee took note of the statements made and agreed to continue its discussion on the
basis of document WT/COMTD/W/15 at a following meeting with a view to identifying any
recommendations for the Ministerial Conference in Singapore.

E. Other Business
61. && The Chairman recalled that the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries would meet on
13 September to take up consideration of specific measures to assist and facilitate the expansion of
the least-developed countries’ trade and investment opportunities with a view to enabling them to
achieving their development objectives. A subsequent meeting of the Sub-Committee was scheduled
for 23 September, following the Tenth Session of the Committee on Trade and Development. At that
meeting, the CTD intended to continue its fruitful dialogue with other international institutions, which
it had started at its Seventh Session. He recalled that, with that objective in mind, he had invited
H.E. Mr. Mohammed E] Kabbaj, Chairman of the Joint IMF/World Bank Development Committee
to address the Committee on 23 September. The Director-General of the WTO would also join the
meeting. A subsequent meeting of the Sub-Committee would follow on. The Trust Fund, set up by
the Government of Norway, would be used to bring representatives of least-developed countries, who
were not represented in Geneva, from other European cities to this meeting. Briefing sessions would
be organized for them on 24 September. Representatives would be given question and answer
opportunities following presentations on various areas of the WTO work and on the Singapore Ministerial
Conference.

62. &&The Committee took note of the statement made.
