WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/72
17 February 2009

(09-0803)


Committee on Trade and Development
Seventy-Second Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 3 DECEMBER 2008

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)

 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558046" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC222558046 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558047" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC222558047 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc222558048" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc222558048 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc222558049" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc222558049 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558050" C.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC222558050 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558051" -	communication from brazil on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558051 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558052" -	communication from china on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558052 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558053" -	communication from india on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558053 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558054" -	communication from pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558054 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558055" -	communication from the european communities – responses to questions submitted by brazil, china, india and pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558055 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558056" -	communications from brazil on the generalized system of preferences scheme of norway (WT/COMTD/65 and WT/COMTD/65/ADD.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558056 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558057" -	communications from norway – responses to questions submitted by brazil on the generalized system of preferences scheme of norway (WT/COMTD/65/ADD.1 and WT/COMTD/65/ADD.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558057 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558058" -	pacific island countries trade agreement (picta) (WT/COMTD/N/29)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558058 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558059" -	generalized system of preferences – notification by the united states (WT/COMTD/N/1/ADD.6)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558059 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558060" D.	declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries	 PAGEREF _TOC222558060 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558061" E.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (WT/L/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558061 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558062" F.	annual review of the implementation of the hong kong decision on duty-free and quota-free market access for least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC222558062 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558063" -	communication from the united states (WT/COMTD/W/149/ADD.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558063 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558064" G.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC222558064 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558065" -	biennial technical assistance and training plan – status of implementation and programme for 2009:  information by the secretariat	 PAGEREF _TOC222558065 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558066" H.	draft annual report 2008 (WT/COMTD/W/167)	 PAGEREF _TOC222558066 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC222558067" I.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC222558067 \H 12


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 72nd Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3279/Rev.1 issued on 27 November 2008.  He recalled that the Committee had agreed at its last meeting to revert to the matter concerning the change in the notification status of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union from Article XXIV of GATT 1994 to the Enabling Clause.  He said that this matter would be treated under "Other Business". 
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.3)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4, respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that this item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.  He noted that the current GSP scheme of the EC would expire on 31 December 2008, and that the CTD was working towards establishing a Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements (PTAs).  In this light, he proposed that the item be taken off the CTD's agenda. 
&& The Representative of Pakistan said that he had been directed by his capital to request that the  item remain on the CTD's agenda.  He explained that his delegation had still not received satisfactory responses to the questions that it had posed to the EC.  In addition, the EC's new GSP scheme – which would enter into force on 1 January 2009 – did not differ fundamentally from the one that would shortly be expiring.  That being said, his delegation was willing to engage bilaterally with the EC to try to find a solution before the next CTD meeting.
&& The Representative of India said that the responses provided by the EC had not fully addressed India's questions.  His delegation had, therefore, sought follow-up clarifications relating to the transparency and objectivity of the EC's GSP scheme.  These were conveyed to the EC in July 2008, prior to the 70th Session of the CTD.  While the EC's attention had been once again drawn to these follow-up queries at the 71st Session of the CTD, India had still not received any responses.  He noted that the EC's new GSP scheme would enter into force on 1 January 2009, and therefore wondered how relevant these responses would be, if they were ever received.  Given that the current GSP scheme would expire at the end of 2008, he indicated that India would not insist on maintaining this item on the CTD's agenda. 
&& The Representative of Brazil said that more than two years had elapsed since the CTD had begun discussing the current version of the EC's GSP scheme, which was due to expire at the end of 2008.  Brazil regretted that, throughout this period, the EC had not responded in full to all the questions that had been posed, nor had it provided the requested trade statistics in their entirety.  Rather, the EC had limited itself to providing partial information, declaring that the rest could only be provided on a bilateral basis.  He additionally observed that the EC, in an apparent attempt to unilaterally put an end to the matter, had on several occasions declared that the discussions were exhausted, and that there was no further reason to maintain this item on the CTD's agenda.
He informed the Committee that Brazil had received trade statistics from the EC regarding its GSP scheme.  These had, however, been provided on a bilateral basis, and had not been made publicly available.  He also noted that the EC seemed to have a rather restrictive understanding of the concept of "bilateral basis", in particular since the statistics provided referred to trade with Brazil only.  He added that his delegation had experienced difficulties accessing information that was publicly available through the Eurostat system.  Moreover, for countries benefiting from more than one of the EC's preferential schemes, the Eurostat system did not seem to provide disaggregated trade flows by individual scheme.  This made it impossible in certain cases to obtain the exact figures concerning trade under the GSP scheme, and prevented WTO Members from having a full understanding of the scheme, its rules and its application.  His delegation did not understand why information that could easily be made available was treated in such a secretive manner.  In light of the fact that many WTO Members sponsoring similar schemes did not seem to have problems sharing relevant information about their preferential trade, this attitude from the EC was incomprehensible, and not in keeping with the EC's numerous statements in support of transparency. 
He observed that a preferential trade arrangement such as the GSP might be seen by many as a "giveth and taketh away" programme, in the sense that Members sponsoring such schemes may, at any time, modify or withdraw the preferences granted.  It was, however, an indisputable fact that the rules set out in the Enabling Clause, which had been further clarified by decisions of the Dispute Settlement Body of the WTO, imposed limitations on this prerogative, mainly for the purposes of non-discrimination and the balanced treatment of recipients.  The existence of these parameters reinforced even further the need for an adequate and constant flow of freely accessible information.  It was, therefore, time that a satisfactory level of transparency was guaranteed not only in form, but also in substance, thereby giving meaning to the relevant provisions of the Enabling Clause and the GATT 1994. 
Noting that the present meeting would be the CTD's last before the expiry of the current version of the EC's GSP scheme, he said that Brazil expected that all the information that had been requested of the EC – including trade statistics – would be provided as soon as possible for the whole period of application of the scheme.  While reserving the right to come back to this matter in the future as appropriate, his delegation did not find it necessary to maintain this item on the CTD's agenda.  Brazil sincerely hoped that the new GSP scheme of the EC, which would enter into force on 1 January 2009 and would hopefully be notified without delay, would represent the beginning of a new era of openness and effective respect for Members' rights in every regard.  
&& The Representative of the European Communities supported the Chairman's proposal that the present item be taken off the CTD's agenda.  On the issue of data provision, he said that, according to his understanding, 2007 data had been provided by his delegation.  The EC would continue to provide import data on a bilateral basis at the written request of any Member, when the data become available.  In this regard, he reminded Members that the EC was a customs union of 27 member States, and that the time required to put together the relevant data for a given year might therefore be longer than for individual countries.  With regard to the points raised by Brazil on the Eurostat system, he confirmed that the data from this source did not distinguish between the different preferential schemes of the EC.  However, there was no intention to be secretive with data.  The EC's view had always been that the impact of preferences was best assessed when all preferential schemes were considered together, thereby avoiding misinterpretations about trade flows under an individual scheme.  He also observed that, in his view, the intervention by Brazil went in some instances beyond the substance of the discussion on the EC's notification.  He concluded by saying that efforts would be made by the EC to notify its new GSP scheme in the spirit of what was currently on the table in the draft proposal on a Transparency Mechanism for PTAs. 
&& The Representative of Brazil said that paragraph 4 of the Enabling Clause required that a Member taking action to introduce a preferential scheme should notify other Members and furnish them with all the information they may deem appropriate relating to such action.  He added that, in his delegation's view, it was very important that any Member notifying a preferential scheme should provide import data relating to that particular preferential scheme.  
&& The Chairman said that, in light of Pakistan's request, this item would need to remain on the CTD's agenda for the next meeting.  
&& The Representative of the European Communities said that his delegation did not see the utility of keeping this item on the CTD's agenda, and wished to see it removed.
&& The Representative of Pakistan said that his instructions were to request that the item remain on the CTD's agenda, at least until the next meeting of the Committee.
&& The Chairman noted that Pakistan would be engaging bilaterally with the EC on this matter.  He said that he would also consult informally with Pakistan.  The item would remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  
It was so agreed.
-	COMMUNICATIONS FROM BRAZIL ON THE GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF NORWAY (WT/COMTD/65 AND WT/COMTD/65/ADD.2)
-	COMMUNICATIONS FROM NORWAY – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL ON THE GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF NORWAY (WT/COMTD/65/ADD.1 AND WT/COMTD/65/ADD.3)
&& The Chairman recalled that Norway had made a notification at the 69th Session of the CTD concerning its GSP scheme.  Two sets of questions from Brazil on the scheme had been circulated in documents WT/COMTD/65 and WT/COMTD/65/Add.2.  Responses to Brazil's questions were circulated by Norway in documents WT/COMTD/65/Add.1 and Add.3.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that this item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.
&& The Representative of Brazil thanked Norway for the constructive exchange of information that had taken place with his delegation since the last meeting of the CTD.  The bilateral dialogue had allowed a better understanding of Norway's GSP scheme and its rules.  However, some points still needed clarification and further discussion, including by means of having access to documentation pending translation.  Brazil looked forward to receiving the remaining information as soon as possible.
&& The Chairman said that this item would remain on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
-	PACIFIC ISLAND COUNTRIES TRADE AGREEMENT (PICTA) (WT/COMTD/N/29)
&& The Chairman said that the PICTA notification – by Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Tonga – had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/29.  He invited one of the notifying Members to introduce the notification.
&& The Representative of Tonga, also on behalf of Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands, said that PICTA was a free-trade agreement among Pacific Island States that were members of the Pacific Islands Forum.  Of these Forum Island Countries (FICs), four – Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Tonga – were WTO Members and two – Vanuatu and Samoa – were in the process of accession to the WTO.  Although Australia and New Zealand were members of the Pacific Islands Forum, they were not part of PICTA.  The Agreement – which was signed in August 2001 and entered into force in 2003 – had three categories of member states, namely the small island states, the least-developed countries (LDCs) and the developing countries.  After a slow initial implementation of the Agreement, Trade Ministers of the Pacific segment of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries had agreed in 2006 that PICTA should be made operational by 2007.  Six member states were currently trading under the Agreement.  Four had completed their notification requirements but had yet to complete domestic legislative processes, while one had signed and ratified the Agreement but had not completed its notification requirements. 
The objectives of PICTA, as contained in Article 2 of the Agreement, were to strengthen, expand and diversify trade between the Parties;  promote and facilitate this expansion and diversification through the elimination of tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade between the Parties in a gradual and progressive manner, under an agreed timetable and with minimum disruption;  develop trade between the Parties under conditions of fair competition;  promote and facilitate commercial, industrial, agricultural and technical cooperation between the Parties;  further the development and use of the resources of the Pacific Region with a view to the eventual creation of a single regional market among the Pacific Island economies in accordance with the respective social and economic objectives of the Parties, including the advancement of indigenous peoples;  and contribute to the harmonious development and expansion of world trade in goods and services and to the progressive removal of barriers to it.
He added that these objectives encapsulated the aspirations of the PICTA members.  It was their hope that freer trade amongst the FICs, as a result of PICTA, would encourage specialization and greater efficiency in their economies.  It was also hoped that the resulting increase in trade amongst PICTA members would reflect enhanced efficiency and improved consumer welfare – leading to the overall creation of jobs – and that the establishment of a regional market would encourage increased investment in the FICs.  He explained in this regard that many FICs, because of their small domestic markets, struggled to attract investment.  The opportunity to reach the regional market of six million people, at zero tariff rates, could encourage more investment flows.  He recognized, however, that challenges relating to logistics and supply-side constraints had to be overcome before optimal benefits could be realized.  PICTA was viewed by the FICs as a stepping stone towards their more complete integration into the international economy.  Through the Agreement, it was envisaged that businesses would become used to the idea of outside competition.  In addition, some governments would have to commence implementing needed reforms in preparation for more extensive trade liberalization in the future.
PICTA provided for the progressive phasing out of tariffs on trade among the FICs and the gradual establishment of a free-trade area, with the understanding that small island states and LDCs would be integrated with different structures and different time-frames.  There were, therefore, different schedules for developing countries, small island states and LDCs.  In addition, there were separate schedules for the reduction and elimination of ad valorem tariffs and specific or fixed tariffs.  Table 1 of Annex II of the Agreement contained the tariff reduction schedule for developing member states' ad valorem tariffs, while Table 3 contained the schedule for the reduction and elimination of their specific tariffs or fixed tariffs.  Tables 2 and 4 contained the same information for small island states and LDCs.  Trade barriers other than tariffs had to be eliminated immediately upon entry into force of the Agreement.
The Agreement covered all trade in goods between its member states, though trade in alcohol and tobacco products were exempted for at least two years, after which a decision would be taken on their status.  In order to qualify for preferential entry, goods needed to comply with the rules of origin as referred to in Article 5 and Annex I of the Agreement, which were based on a 40 per cent local content requirement.  The Agreement also provided for a list of exceptions, ensuring that the Parties could continue to restrict trade for the range of reasons generally allowed in international trade agreements.  Annex III contained member states' lists of excepted imports, while Annex IV contained the timetable for the elimination of tariffs on excepted imports.  Although trade in services, capital or labour movement were not covered, one of the stated long-term objectives of the Agreement was the creation of a single market amongst the FICs.  This would entail extending, in stages, the coverage to include trade in services, as well as the movement of capital and labour.  The coverage would be extended either through an amendment of the main text, or through the addition of a specific protocol.  Amendments could only be made with the Agreement of all the Parties, while a protocol would only be binding on those who signed it.  Either way, therefore, the Parties would retain complete control as to their involvement in future extensions.
He also noted that there had been various amendments to PICTA.  Of significance were the amendments to the tariff reduction schedules.  He explained in this regard that a revised timetable had been agreed to by Ministers in December 2006, whereby tariff reductions by FICs, other than small island states and LDCs, would begin in 2007 and be completed by 2015 for non-excepted imports, and by 2020 for excepted imports.  Tariff reductions by small island states and LDCs, which would begin in 2009, were to be completed by 2017 for non-excepted imports, and by 2021 for excepted imports.  The Pacific leaders in their meeting in August 2008 had called on Parties that were yet to announce readiness to trade under PICTA, to do so by 2009.  In this regard, the leaders had tasked the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat to work together with the Parties to put in place time-bound action plans.
&& The Representative of the United States recognized that regional trade agreements could, and should, be complementary to multilateral trade liberalization.  As the US had made clear on numerous occasions, however, this complementarity could be achieved only where such agreements fell within the parameters of WTO rules.  The US, therefore, noted its concern that consideration was taking place of the notification of yet another regional trade agreement (RTA) that sought to discriminate against WTO Members by granting preferential market access to non-WTO Members.
&& The Committee took note of the PICTA notification, and of all interventions.
-	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES – NOTIFICATION BY THE UNITED STATES (WT/COMTD/N/1/ADD.6) 
&& The Chairman said that the notification by the US concerning its GSP scheme was circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.6.  He invited the US representative to introduce the communication. 
&& The Representative of the United States said that her delegation was pleased to have the opportunity to present its notification concerning the 2007 Annual Review of the US GSP programme, which had been completed in July 2008.  Efforts to foster the further integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system were a vital part of US trade policy.  US efforts spanned a number of fronts, including promoting broad-based multilateral trade reforms conducive to further integration, supporting integration of trade strategies into the development plans of national authorities, and providing significant amounts of capacity-building assistance.  A long‑standing element in US efforts to increase developing country participation in the global trading system was the provision of duty-free access for products from beneficiary developing countries entering the US market.  The US GSP programme, in operation since 1975, was a cornerstone of this effort.  
As stated in the notification, the programme had been extended through 31 December 2009.  The notification also provided information on the designation of the Republic of Serbia and the Republic of Montenegro each as a beneficiary developing country for purposes of the GSP programme, and of the Solomon Islands as a least-developed beneficiary developing country.  It also noted that the US had terminated the designation of Trinidad and Tobago as a beneficiary developing country – effective 1 January 2010 – after concluding that the latter had become a "high income" country as defined by the official statistics of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.  Currently, the US GSP programme provided preferential duty-free treatment for nearly 5,000 products from the 132  designated beneficiary countries and territories.  Duty-free benefits were the only preferential tariff treatment provided under the GSP programme, as the statute did not allow for less than full tariff reduction.  A single, transparent rules of origin regime governed all US imports under the GSP. 
In the 2007 Annual Review, the US had designated certain additional products as eligible for duty-free treatment, as outlined in Annex I of the notification.  Additionally, the US had granted waivers to the statutory "competitive need limitations" to ensure continued GSP duty-free benefits for certain products.  These were outlined in Annex II and Annex III of the notification.  Annexes IV and V of the notification identified those specific products from specific beneficiary countries for which GSP eligibility was terminated or revoked based on a determination that imports from those beneficiary countries could compete effectively in the US market.  The notification also provided the publicly accessible website where the results of the 2007 GSP Annual Review could be viewed.  She concluded by saying that while her delegation recognized the successes of the US GSP programme – which covered nearly US$31 billion in imports in 2007 – it was also committed to continue working to improve the effectiveness of US efforts to integrate developing countries more fully into the global trading system. 
&& The Committee took note of the notification by the US. 
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would continue his consultations with Members as to how commodities could henceforth be treated in the Committee.  He said that, under this agenda item, the Committee had heard presentations from several international organizations working on commodity issues.  These included the Common Fund for Commodities, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), the International Coffee Organization, the International Cocoa Organization and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).  The CTD had also heard from Nestlé, a private sector organization.  He believed that these presentations had been useful in allowing the Committee to gain a better appreciation of the commodities-related work being undertaken by these organizations. 
Based on his consultations with Members – in particular in the African Group – as to how commodities could henceforth be treated in the CTD, he proposed that the item relating to commodities need not appear on the agenda of all meetings of the Committee.  Rather, the commodities item could be placed on the agenda of any particular CTD meeting, at the request of any Member.  The Committee could also revert to the commodities item at any particular CTD meeting, should it be decided to invite one or more relevant international organizations – notably among those that had participated in previous CTD meetings – to present any new commodities-related work.
It was so agreed.  
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The Council had since extended the deadline to its December 2008 meeting.
He recalled that the proponents of a Transparency Mechanism for PTAs – Brazil, China, India and the US – had presented their draft proposal, circulated in document JOB(08)/103, at the last CTD meeting in October 2008.  He had hoped to be in a position to call an informal, open-ended CTD meeting soon after to consider the draft proposal in some detail, and to subsequently have it considered by the Committee at the present formal session.  To that end, after the October CTD meeting, he had continued with his small-group informal consultations to try to iron out as many outstanding issues as possible.  He had held a number of rounds of informal consultations in the small-group format, and believed that important progress had been made.  That being said, there remained some issues to be settled.  Furthermore, given that this was the last CTD meeting of 2008, he would not be able to convene an informal, open-ended CTD meeting this year.  While he was optimistic that Members would be able to sort out the outstanding issues, it was clear that more time would be required before this could be achieved.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The Representative of Brazil expressed regret that, almost two years after the General Council Decision, it had not yet been possible for the CTD to fulfil its mandate.  Throughout this period, the proponents had made every effort to present a balanced proposal that would represent a real achievement in transparency for PTAs, taking into account the specific nature of the preferences granted and the schemes that supported them.  In drafting the proposal, the aim of the proponents had been to guarantee an appropriate level of transparency for beneficiaries of preferential treatment, as well as for the broader WTO membership, while at the same time avoiding disproportionate burdens on notifying Members.  One further objective of the proposal was to design procedures for the notification of relevant information in a periodical and predictable manner.  This would avoid the need for ad hoc requests in the CTD for information regarding particular schemes.  While Brazil strongly supported all forms of transparency, and not only for PTAs, his delegation believed that the draft proposal stood on its own merits and should not depend on any other processes.  In this regard, his delegation was confident that, when the time was ripe, the General Council would approve this and other initiatives.  He recognized the need for further work on this matter, and informed the Committee that the proponents stood ready to discuss any aspects of the proposal.
&& The Representative of India joined Brazil in expressing regret that, after two years of painstaking discussion, the CTD had not been able to fulfil the mandate from the General Council.  At the same time, his delegation recognized that progress had been made, in particular given that several rounds of informal consultations had led to the circulation of the proponents' draft proposal.  He agreed with the Chairman's assessment that more time would be needed before the CTD could come to a decision on this matter.  He expressed his delegation's hope that this would be the last time‑extension that the Chairman would be seeking from the General Council.
&& The Representative of the United States shared the sentiments expressed by Brazil and India and reiterated the proponents' interest in further facilitating transparency for PTAs.  The US appreciated the interest expressed by other Members on this matter and their active participation in the informal consultations.  Her delegation looked forward to continuing the work in advancing the Transparency Mechanism toward a positive outcome.  
&& The Representative of China said that his delegation shared the disappointment of the other proponents that Members had not been able to reach a consensus on this issue.  At the same time, China was encouraged by the progress that had been made in the informal consultations.  He noted that the Chair would need to request a time‑extension for the CTD to consider this matter.  China was ready to work with Members to allow the CTD to complete its task as soon as possible. 
&& The Chairman said that he would need to report to the General Council at its December 2008 meeting on the status of the CTD's consideration of this matter.  He said that he would inform the Council of the progress that had been made since July 2008, and would essentially provide the Council with the same information that he had been providing to the Committee.  He proposed to also ask the Council to grant the CTD additional time – until July 2009 – to consider the matter and report back for appropriate action.  He said that he would continue to work informally with Members starting from early 2009, and would open the matter up for discussion once again at the next formal meeting of the CTD.  The item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.
It was so agreed.
ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE HONG KONG DECISION ON DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS FOR LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& 	COMMUNICATION FROM THE UNITED STATES (WT/COMTD/W/149/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda for its earlier meetings in 2008.  At the present meeting, the CTD was to undertake its third annual review of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision, as mandated in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.  Under this agenda item, a communication had been received from the US, and had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.5.  He invited the US representative to introduce this communication.
&& The Representative of the United States said that her delegation, which had a long‑standing commitment to transparency, was pleased to provide this notification outlining the steps being taken by the US to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  She stressed that the US remained fully committed to implementing the DFQF Decision on the terms agreed to at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference, together with the results of an agreement on the overall negotiations under the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).  Successful completion of the DDA was, therefore, a prerequisite for the US' implementation of the DFQF initiative.  The US was also fully committed to implementing the Decision in a manner that would result in meaningful market opportunities for LDC products.  
While the US already provided extensive duty-free treatment to the products of LDCs, new statutory authority would be needed to grant the benefits laid out in the Hong Kong Decision.  The steps required for the US to develop the necessary legislation were outlined in the notification.  The US would continue its internal consultation process to implement the Decision, along with its commitment to achieving an ambitious result in the DDA negotiations.  Backed by the results of several studies, her delegation strongly believed that the best result for all developing countries – including the LDCs – was an ambitious package that would open new markets.  As such, the Doha Round was a single undertaking for a good reason, since the best package could be achieved when all contributions were tied together.  Her delegation looked forward to seeing renewed energy in the coming days to follow through on the political commitments made by Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), G-20 and LDC leaders.  It was hoped that these political commitments would be translated into real showings of flexibility and contributions, leading to a modalities package that would ensure that the negotiations ultimately yielded meaningful new trade flows and economic opportunity.
&& The Representative of Bangladesh expressed concern on the amount of time that the US was taking to complete its internal procedures to implement the Hong Kong Decision.  He wondered whether the US would take a similar approach in implementing the results of the DDA negotiations.  He also referred to paragraph 4 of the communication from the US, which stated that the US was continuing to evaluate the effect on current preference programmes of implementing the Hong Kong Decision.  He said in this regard that, according to the Hong Kong mandate, such an evaluation should not apply to the 97 per cent of products on which the LDCs should be granted DFQF market access.  Rather, an evaluation of this nature should only apply to the remaining 3 per cent, on which DFQF market access was to be provided to LDCs on a progressive basis.  It was a concern to his delegation that such evaluation studies were being conducted when the LDCs still did not have a commitment of 97 per cent DFQF access into the US market.  
&& The Representative of the European Communities observed that, three years after the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference, the US was still continuing its internal procedures to implement the DFQF Decision.  He also expressed regret that the US had elected to defer implementation of the Decision until it implemented the results of the Doha Round.  Noting the concentration of LDC exports on a relatively limited number of tariff lines, he inquired whether the US was aiming to provide DFQF market access for all products at the start of the implementation period, or whether it would start with a 97 per cent product coverage.  If the latter option was retained, the EC was interested to learn whether the US had a time-frame in mind for incrementally building on the initial 97 per cent, in particular in view of the stated aim of offering meaningful market access to LDCs.  
&& The Committee took note of the communication from the US, and of all interventions.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	BIENNIAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING PLAN – STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION AND PROGRAMME FOR 2009:  INFORMATION BY THE SECRETARIAT
&& The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) said that he wished to provide some preliminary information on the WTO's technical assistance (TA) activities in 2008.  A detailed report on these activities would be circulated to Members in the early part of 2009, and would subsequently be considered by the CTD.  He said that the projected total number of activities for 2008 was 485 – slightly more than in 2007, but around the same number as in 2006.  Of these activities, 227 were national TA activities, 159 were regional or global activities, and 99 related to conferences.  A large part of the activities – 32 per cent – had been held in Africa, which was the most important beneficiary region.  He welcomed the fact that 50 per cent of the activities concerned specialized and advanced training, which indicated an evolution in the nature of the TA provided by the WTO.  Training concerning non-agricultural market access (NAMA) was the most demanded among the specialized and advanced activities (17 per cent of the total), followed by Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) and Services (10 per cent each).  
With regard to the planning of activities for 2009, he said that the Secretariat had sent a communication to Members asking them to submit their 2009 TA requests.  Based on the responses that had been received thus far, a programme of national activities was being put together.  The Secretariat was also beginning its planning of the various regional activities that would be held.  In this context, he referred specifically to the three-month regional trade policy courses (RTPCs).  He explained that the intention was for these courses to be of an intermediate nature, while the Geneva‑based courses would be more specialized.  This approach would be conducive to achieving a higher level of learning through progressivity, while leading to stronger coherence in WTO training activities.  A training path with three levels had been identified.  The initial level would be covered by an e-training introductory course.  This would be followed by the RTPC as an intermediate-level activity, and by an advanced trade policy course at a higher level of learning.  Four RTPCs were expected to be held in 2009, for English-speaking Africa, French-speaking Africa, Asia and the Pacific and Latin America.  In addition, a Consolidation Course would be organized for the Caribbean countries and two, four-week preparatory courses for an RTPC would be organized for the Arab and Middle East countries, and for the Central and Eastern European and Central Asian Countries (CEECACs).  
&& The Committee took note of the intervention by the ITTC Director.  
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT 2008 (WT/COMTD/W/167)
&& The Chairman said that the CTD's draft annual report for 2008 was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/167.  The document contained the annual reports of the CTD in Regular Session, the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on Regional Trade Agreements and Small Economies, the Sub-Committee on LDCs, as well as the CTD's report of its work on Aid for Trade.  He observed that there were a number of square brackets in the draft report relating to items under consideration at the present meeting, as well as at the 18th Dedicated Session on Small Economies.  As part of the process of adopting the report, the square brackets would be removed, and the discussion that took place at the present meeting would be appropriately reflected in the report.  He informed the Committee that the report, when adopted, would be forwarded to the General Council for its meeting of 18 December 2008.  He opened the floor for any comments on the draft report.
&& The Representative of the European Communities referred to footnote 6 in the section concerning notifications of market access for developing countries and LDCs.  He proposed that this footnote be placed as a paragraph in the main text of the section.
&& The Representative of Tanzania observed that paragraph 10, which concerned commodities, was rather brief.  He inquired whether this paragraph could include more information on the CTD's consideration of commodity issues in 2008. 
&& The Chairman said that the suggested amendments to the draft report would be incorporated in the CTD's final report.  He proposed that the Committee adopt the report with these amendments.
&& The Committee adopted its annual report for 2008. 
OTHER BUSINESS 
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that the Committee would revert to the matter concerning the change in the notification status of the GCC Customs Union from Article XXIV of GATT 1994 to the Enabling Clause.  Further to the earlier communication on this matter by the GCC countries, he informed Members that, after the last CTD meeting, the US and the EC had circulated communications in documents WT/COMTD/66/Add.1 and Add.2, respectively.  He understood that the GCC countries also had a further communication, which was available at the back of the meeting room.
&& The Representative of the United States said that her delegation continued to have concerns about the change in the notification of the GCC Customs Union to be exclusively under the Enabling Clause.  The US did not support moving forward with the process of reviewing the agreement under the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs until clarification had been obtained from the GCC countries.  She noted that this matter was also under active discussion in the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), and indicated her delegation's willingness to continue discussions in that body.
&& The Representative of Canada said that his delegation shared the concerns that had been raised by the US.  For the Enabling Clause to apply to an agreement covering non-tariff measures, Members needed to establish the criteria and conditions applicable to the elimination of these measures.  Such criteria and conditions had not been established, thus precluding the use of the Enabling Clause for an agreement going beyond tariff reduction or elimination.  Canada also supported the argument that, in order for the GCC countries to apply their common external tariff above their WTO bindings, their agreement needed to be consistent with GATT Article XXIV, and would therefore need to be notified under that Article.  Canada encouraged the GCC countries to reconsider their proposed change in notification status, and to submit their notification under GATT Article XXIV.  
&& The Representative of the European Communities drew Members' attention to the written comments that had been circulated by his delegation on the change in the notification status of the GCC Customs Union.  He also referred to the comments made by his delegation at the last meeting of the CRTA, where the EC had pointed to the limitations of the Enabling Clause and to the need to continue discussion on this matter in the CRTA.  His delegation looked forward to further discussion at the next CRTA meeting.
&& The Representative of Australia associated her delegation with the interventions by the US, Canada and the EC.  Australia looked forward to further discussion on this matter in the CRTA.  On a procedural note, she said that she wished to reiterate her delegation's view that, as a general rule, Members should not seek to change the forum for reviewing a notification.  When Members found it necessary to change the forum, compelling reasons needed to be provided.
&& The Representative of Japan supported the interventions by the US, Canada, the EC and Australia.  His delegation was keen to continue discussion on this matter in order to find a solution which all Members could feel comfortable with.
&& The Representative of Brazil reaffirmed his delegation's interest in continuing discussion on this matter, in whatever form was considered appropriate.  He noted that the discussion was of interest to his delegation not only in the specific context of the GCC Customs Union, but also in a broader systemic sense.  On a procedural note, he urged delegations interested in promoting substantive debate on this matter to do so by means of introducing an agenda item in accordance with rules 3 and 25 of the rules of procedure of the General Council.   
&& The Representative of Kuwait, on behalf of the GCC countries, said that the new communication from the GCC responded to the earlier communications circulated by the US and the EC in documents WT/COMTD/66/Add.1 and Add.2, respectively.  While the written responses were self-explanatory, he said that he wished to highlight a few points.  He noted firstly that the GCC Customs Union had now been notified under the Enabling Clause, and that it should be examined by the CTD.  The GCC countries remained concerned by the continued insistence of some Members that the agreement should be examined by the CRTA under GATT Article XXIV.  There was no legal foundation for such a request.  As noted in the GCC communication, WTO Members had agreed that agreements entered into under Article 2(c) of the Enabling Clause should be notified to the CTD, and not to the CRTA.  He drew Members' attention to the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on a Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs) – contained in document WT/L/671 – which  stated clearly that the CRTA would examine RTAs falling under GATT Article XXIV, while the CTD would do so for RTAs falling under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.  The Transparency Mechanism defined RTAs as "trade agreements of a mutually preferential nature", which clearly encompassed the GCC Customs Union.  Thus, as a matter of principle, agreements entered into under Article 2(c) of the Enabling Clause should be examined by the CTD.  
He recalled that Article 2(c) of the Enabling Clause referred to regional or global arrangements entered into by developing countries for the mutual reduction or elimination of tariffs and, in accordance with criteria or conditions which may be prescribed by WTO Members, for the mutual reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures, on products imported from one another.  In other words, in order to qualify under Article 2(c), a customs union or other agreement needed to provide for the mutual reduction or elimination of tariffs and, in accordance with criteria or conditions prescribed by WTO Members, for the mutual reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures.  He remarked that the GCC Customs Union did both, given in particular that Article 1 of the agreement provided for the elimination of all tariffs and non-tariff barriers.  Since neither the GATT Contracting Parties nor WTO Members had ever prescribed criteria or conditions for the reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures, this element of paragraph 2(c) was simply inapplicable.  The GCC Customs Union thus fell squarely under the Enabling Clause.
He said that the GCC had responded to the EC's assertion that the Enabling Clause could not be invoked to justify the reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures on a preferential basis.  He noted in particular that neither of the two authorities cited by the EC supported this position.  The GATT Panel Report in US – Non-Rubber Footwear from Brazil dealt with developed country preferences under paragraph 2(a) of the Enabling Clause, and was thus irrelevant in the present context.  Furthermore, the WTO Secretariat's Legal Note on RTAs under the Enabling Clause – contained in document WT/COMTD/W/114 – stated expressly that it was an open question as to whether RTAs under the Enabling Clause could introduce discrimination on non-tariff measures.  The GCC had also responded to the US' arguments about the scope of the Enabling Clause.  As had been observed in the GCC's communication, the Legal Note by the WTO Secretariat stated that the Enabling Clause could be viewed as lex specialis within WTO law.  Therefore, compliance with the provisions of the Enabling Clause would suffice to authorize RTAs among developing countries – otherwise inconsistent with GATT Article I – even if the requirements of Article XXIV were not totally satisfied.  As for the Article II issue raised by the US, he said that it was simply irrelevant to the question of where a customs union among developing countries should be notified.  The Transparency Mechanism was determinative in this regard. In conclusion, he said that the GCC countries considered that continued debate on such narrow procedural issues was unproductive.  It was hoped that Members would not need to return to this matter at future CTD meetings.  He also expressed support for the intervention by Brazil.
&& The Chairman noted that discussions on the GCC Customs Union notification were also taking place in the CRTA.  In the light of the interventions at the present meeting, he said that the CTD would need to revert to this matter at its next meeting.  While the matter could be raised once again under "Other Business", he remarked that there were limits to the substance of the discussion that could take place under "Other Business".  In this connection, he drew the attention of Members to the intervention by Brazil.  
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
 The report was issued as document WT/COMTD/69.
 The communication from the GCC countries was subsequently circulated as document WT/COMTD/66/Add.3.

WT/COMTD/M/72 Page  PAGE 14



	WT/COMTD/M/72 	Page  PAGE 13



 

 

 

 



