WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/50
10 January 2005


(05-0106)


Committee on Trade and Development
Fiftieth Session


NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 28 AND 29 SEPTEMBER 2004

Chairperson:  H. E. Mr. Trevor Clarke (Barbados)


Subjects discussed:

 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC91480633" A.	Adoption of the Agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC91480633 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC91480634" B.	Observers	 PAGEREF _TOC91480634 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480635" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc91480635 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480636" (ii)	Request for Observer Status by the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States	 PAGEREF _Toc91480636 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480637" (iii)	Further Consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities.	 PAGEREF _Toc91480637 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC91480638" C.	Notifications under the Enabling Clause - Letter from the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs to the CTD Chairman	 PAGEREF _TOC91480638 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480639" (i)	Notification from Japan (WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.13)	 PAGEREF _Toc91480639 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480640" (ii)	Notification from Switzerland (WT/COMTD/N/7/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _Toc91480640 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480641" (iii)	Notification from China (WT/COMTD/N/19)	 PAGEREF _Toc91480641 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC91480642" D.	Technical Cooperation and Training	 PAGEREF _TOC91480642 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480643" Request from the International Development Law 0rganization (IDLO)	 PAGEREF _Toc91480643 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480644" Letter from the Chairman of the Committee on Market Access	 PAGEREF _Toc91480644 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480645" (i)	Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/133)	 PAGEREF _Toc91480645 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480646" (ii)	Implementation Report – Second Quarter 2004 (WT/COMTD/W/132)	 PAGEREF _Toc91480646 \h 22
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480647" (iii)	Mid-Term Review of the WTO Technical Assistance Plan 2004 (WT/COMTD/W/134)	 PAGEREF _Toc91480647 \h 23
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC91480648" E.	Declining Terms of Trade for Primary Commodities, and its Implication to Trade and Development of Primary Commodity Exporting Countries	 PAGEREF _TOC91480648 \H 24
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480649" -	Communication from Switzerland (WT/COMTD/W/129)	 PAGEREF _Toc91480649 \h 24
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc91480650" -	Communication from Kenya Tanzania and Uganda (WT/COMTD/W/130)	 PAGEREF _Toc91480650 \h 24
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC91480651" F.	Paragraph 51 of the Doha Declaration on Identifying and Debating Developmental Aspects of the Negotiations, in Order to Help Achieve the Objective of Having Sustainable Development Appropriately Reflected	 PAGEREF _TOC91480651 \H 31
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC91480652" G.	Electronic Commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC91480652 \H 35
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC91480653" H.	Graduation of the Maldives from Ldc Status (WT/COMTD/W/128)	 PAGEREF _TOC91480653 \H 36
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC91480654" I.	Other Business	 PAGEREF _TOC91480654 \H 36

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman recalled that the draft agenda for the meeting was contained in document WTO/AIR/2368 circulated on 31 August 2004, a revision of which had been issued on 23 September 2004. 
The Committee adopted the agenda.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman noted that agenda Item B (I) related to requests for ad hoc observer status.  He recalled that at previous sessions of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD), Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis:  the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU);  the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  the Economic Cooperation Organisation (ECO);  the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation;  the Islamic Development Bank (IDB);  the African Union (AU);  the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC);  the South Centre;  the Pacific Islands Forum;  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP);  the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).  He said that following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, those organisations had been invited to the meeting.  He then proposed that these organisations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so decided.
Request for Observer Status by the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
&& The Chairman informed the Committee that a request from the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) to be granted observer status to the CTD was made to the WTO's Director‑General on 9 June 2004.  In this letter, the OECS and the missions to the European Communities explained their wish to open a permanent OECS delegation office in Geneva once the Swiss authorities agreed.  He added that the OECS had also requested observer status in the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on Trade and Environment. 
&& The representative of St. Kitts & Nevis said that the OECS was seeking the support of Members for permanent observer status in the CTD.  He said the OECS was a sub-regional, integration organization which was established by inter-governmental treaty on 18 June 1981 when the six smaller Eastern Caribbean countries signed the treaty.  The objectives of the OECS include the promotion of cooperation and economic integration among the member States, both at regional and international levels and assisting member States with the realization of their obligations and responsibilities to the international community.  He explained that other areas concerned the establishment and maintenance wherever possible of arrangements for joint overseas representation and common services.  He said that over the past 23 years, the OECS has emerged as a major, sub‑regional integration organization in the Caribbean, contributing to the sustainable development of its Members by assisting them to maximize the benefits of their collective economic space and by facilitating their intelligent integration into the global economy.  He said the Members of the OECS were an integral part of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and negotiated with CARICOM as a single group at both regional and international forums such as with the European Union, the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), with Canada and at the WTO.
He said the Members of the OECS were all members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific group of states and were all signatories of the Economic Partnership Agreements with the European Union.  OECS members had been able to develop an impressive array of successful joint institutions and areas of functional cooperation.  The member States had decided to further advance the gains achieved through regional integration by moving towards an economic union of the sub-region and, in this regard, the OECS had adopted a common development charter and a common development strategy.  He explained that some of the joint institutions which had been successful over the past years included:  the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank with its common currency and central bank, the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court; a common directorate of civil aviation, a common telecommunications regulatory authority, a common securities exchange and joint overseas diplomatic representation in Ottawa, Canada as well as in Brussels, Belgium and hopefully soon, an OECS Permanent Observer Delegation to the WTO in Geneva.
He said that as poor, highly vulnerable micro-states, the OECS often found it necessary to articulate and ensure that their particular and peculiar concerns and vulnerabilities were taken on board, both within CARICOM, as well as in other international fora.  He explained that the OECS Secretariat had its own General Secretariat and staff headed by a Director General with its headquarters located in St. Lucia.  Its highest decision-making body was the Authority of OECS Heads of Government, i.e. the Prime Ministers of the six member States who met twice a year to give policy, political, and economic direction to the Secretariat.
He added that the OECS comprises some of the smallest, poorest and most vulnerable island states in the world and that the OECS member States had pooled their individual sovereignty to improve the economic and social well-being of their citizens.  He read out the following statistics concerning individual members:  Antigua & Barbuda has a landmass of 443 square kilometres and a population of 80,000;  the Commonwealth of Dominica has 750.6 square kilometres and also has a  population of 80,000.  Grenada has 344 square kilometres of land and 102,000 population;  St. Kitts & Nevis is the smallest with 269 square kilometres and a population of 45,000;  St. Lucia has 616 square kilometres of land and a population of 155,000.  Finally, St. Vincent & the Grenadines has 388 square kilometres and 115,000 population.  Under 600,000 people comprise the OECS members.  Two OECS members were having extreme economic and financial difficulties.  He explained that Dominica is undergoing a structural adjustment programme with the IMF and that Grenada, with the recent passage of hurricane Ivan, had demonstrated just how vulnerable these small island states were.  In just six hours, Ivan devastated the island of Grenada, destroying up to 90 per cent of its agriculture, housing stock, hotel plants, schools, government buildings and public utilities.  It had been estimated that the damage done to Grenada's economy was the equivalent of two years' of that country's Gross Domestic Product.  It would take up to 10 years before that island could again register economic growth.
He explained that the OECS countries were originally dependent on agriculture for their main export earnings - bananas for some and sugar for others – but that they had in recent years increasingly diversified into tourism, the main economic activity in all member States, as well as into financial services.
The six OECS member States currently had also pooled their individual sovereignty and had established joint overseas diplomatic representation in Ottawa and Brussels.  Individually, they were also members of the WTO, but participation in this important body was very "ad hoc" due to both financial and human resources constraints.  To remedy this situation and to ensure their effective participation at the WTO, the OECS Secretariat had sought and was now receiving financial assistance from the European Union to establish a Permanent Observer Mission to the WTO.
However, in order to enable the OECS mission to function, it needed diplomatic privileges and immunities and this would only be granted by the Swiss authorities if the OECS was granted permanent observer status in the WTO.  If the OECS was not able to utilize the resources made available by the European Union, it was possible that such resources would be lost.  He wished to remind the Committee that this was a request by six of the smallest and most vulnerable states in the world. The OECS Governments had a responsibility to their entire population and not to any particular interest group(s).  Granting observer status to the OECS would also ensure that the WTO becomes the inclusive club that it claims to be and give a voice to some of the very smallest and most vulnerable members of the international community.  It would also contribute to the work being done by the WTO itself, which was spending a lot of financial and technical assistance resources to ensure greater participation by small, poor vulnerable countries, in the work of the organization.
&& The representative of Barbados said her delegation strongly supported the application for observer status by the representative of St. Kitts and Nevis on behalf of the OECS.  She said the OECS member States were all accredited to the WTO on a non-resident basis and that these countries were all small vulnerable economies and small island developing states.  It was widely recognized by the WTO and its Membership that small economic size and non-resident status constitute distinct challenges to a WTO Members' ability to participate in the work of the organization.  OECS member States suffered from constraints which negatively affect their ability to participate in the regular work of the WTO as well as the Doha Round of negotiations and which impeded their integration into the multilateral trading system.  She noted that it was crucial to grant observer status to the OECS at the meeting and not to link it to any other issue nor delay its approval.
&& The representative of Jamaica said his delegation supported the application from the OECS for observer status in the Committee.  Jamaica was aware of the situation that had prevented the Committee and the General Council from advancing on the issue of observer status and that this situation was deeply regrettable and hoped that it would find an expedient solution.  He said it was important for the Committee to show the utmost flexibility and continue to provide expedient solutions to particular cases.  This was the spirit in which the Committee had granted ad hoc observer status to other entities.  Given the fact that OECS members were small island developing states with small populations, it was important to grant this request. 
&& The representative of Trinidad and Tobago supported the request by the OECS particularly because it would allow these small developing nations to be better able to follow and participate in the current negotiations.  
&& The representative of Canada said her delegation fully supported the request and that this would allow some Members who did not have individual representation to follow what was being done in the Committee.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation fully supported the request and this was a pragmatic approach to the problems of non-resident Members. 
&& The representative of the European Communities was also supportive of the request and recognized the arguments that had been made regarding the difficulties faced by non-resident Members.  It was for this reason that the European Communities had contributed to the costs to set up a joint office for these countries.
&& The representative of Egypt, on behalf of the Arab Members of the WTO, said he was not prepared to grant the request made by the OECS until the General Council completed its work on the guidelines for observer status.  As a matter of principle, Members should operate under a rules based system with clear guidelines.  He urged the General Council to complete its work to allow the WTO to become the inclusive organization it claimed to be.
&& The representative of China said his delegation wished to support the request by the OECS and hoped that consultations would be held so that their observership would be resolved as soon as possible.
&& The representative of Cuba expressed support for the request by the OECS, given the vulnerability of their small economies.
&& The representative of the Pacific Islands Forum said her delegation wished to join others in expressing support for the application by the OECS for observer status.  The Pacific Islands Forum represented non-resident Members and acceding countries and understood the benefits of gaining access to the deliberations of the CTD.  Moreover, the participation of the OECS would allow the Committee to better understand the vulnerabilities of small island states. 
The representative of the African, Caribbean and Pacific group (ACP) fully supported the request by the OECS for permanent observer status as this would help the OECS countries, which were all members of the ACP, to better participate in the negotiations.
&& The representative of Djibouti said the Committee would have to wait to make a decision until the General Council took the necessary measures.  
&& The Chairman proposed that consultations be held to see if Members could give this particular request special consideration. He said the Committee would  revert to this matter at its next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
Further Consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, and the Common Fund for Commodities
&& The Chairman noted that the third sub-item in this item of the agenda related to outstanding requests for observers status.  At previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of such requests.  Those requests came from the League of Arab States, OPEC, the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting and the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie and from the Common Fund for Commodities.  He recalled that the positions of delegations were well known and were on the record.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would revert to those requests at the next meting.  
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE - LETTER FROM THE CHAIRMAN OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LDCS TO THE CTD CHAIRMAN 
&& Notification from Japan (WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.13)
&& Notification from Switzerland (WT/COMTD/N/7/Add.2)
&& Notification from China (WT/COMTD/N/19)
&& The Chairman recalled that the Committee had referred two notifications to the Sub‑Committee on Least-Developed Countries for substantive consideration and reporting back, namely the notifications by the Governments of Australia - contained in document WT/COMTD/N/18 - and the addendum to the notification by the Government of Canada contained in document WT/COMTD/N/15/Add.2.  He said the Chairman of the Sub-Committee had written back to him and welcomed the initiatives taken by the Governments of Australia and Canada.
The three new notifications before the Committee were from the Government of Japan contained in document WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.13, from the Government of Switzerland contained in document WT/COMTD/N/7/Add.2 and from the Government of China contained in document WT/COMTD/N/19.
&& The Chairman offered the floor to Japan to introduce its notification. 
&& The representative of Japan said that while his Government's notification was self‑explanatory, he offered to answer any questions Members had with respect to the notification.
&& The Chairman recalled that at the previous meting of the Committee, he had said that it was important that work within the WTO is carried out in the most efficient way possible.  He therefore reminded Members that the CTD, at its 32nd Session, decided that any market access measures taken specifically in favour of the least-developed countries under the Enabling Clause, and therefore notified to the CTD, be transmitted to the Sub‑Committee on LDCs for substantive consideration, and that the Sub-Committee would report back to the CTD on its discussions.  Since the notification by the Government of Switzerland referred to the second stage of tariff reduction applicable to LDCs in the agricultural sector, he suggested that the CTD refer this notification, without discussion, to the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries for substantive consideration and report back, following the reporting procedures agreed to.  Should Members wish to add to the discussions held in the Sub-Committee, they would have a possibility of doing so at the time when the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries reported back to the Committee. 
&& The representative of Switzerland said that he agreed with the Chairman's proposal and would be ready to answer any additional questions from Members.
&& The Chairman proposed that the same procedures be followed for China's notification.  
&& The representative of the United States asked China whether there was any further information available on the scope and nature of the specific concessions that were referred to in the notification and inquired about the implications of China's accession to the Bangkok Agreement. 
&& The representative of China said that Chinese concessions were contained in the schedule submitted to the Secretariat, as well as the text of the agreement.  If more information was necessary, the United States could request the schedule or the text of the agreement from the Secretariat.
&& The representative of the United States asked whether these were new schedules for China's concessions or whether they were the same Bangkok Declaration schedules.
&& The representative of China said that both were available with the Secretariat.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made and referred the notification from the Government of Australia to the Sub-Committee for substantive consideration and reporting back, following the reporting procedures agreed to at its 32nd Session.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Request from the International Development Law 0rganization (IDLO)
&& The Chairman said that before beginning the consideration of the 2005 TA Plan, there were two issues that he wished to bring to Members' attention.  The first related to a request from the International Development Law Organization (IDLO) to make a statement on IDLO's various technical assistance activities at the next meeting of the CTD, which was scheduled for 16 November 2004.  The IDLO was an inter-governmental organization based in Rome which together with the WTO had collaborated in the delivery of a large number of technical assistance programmes.  The IDLO was proposing to present its activities to help acquaint Members with the aim and activities of the IDLO.  
It was so agreed.
&& Letter from the Chairman of the Committee on Market Access
&& The Chairman noted that the next issue related to a letter that had been received from the Chairman of the Committee on Market Access relating to a proposal for the Secretariat to conduct a workshop on the technical issues involved with the HS 2002 (Harmonized System) transposition of the Consolidated Tariff Schedules Database.  The Chairman of the Market Access Committee wrote that some delegations were of the view that the workshop would be particularly useful for capital-based representatives and agreed that the CTD be asked to see whether the Global Trust Fund could be used to fund the one-day workshop.  The funding being requested would finance the attendance of a representative from each developing country.  A copy of that letter had been made available to Members.  He asked whether Members could agree to including this in the 2005 TA Plan.
&& The representative of Canada said that it was her understanding that the request was originally made in 2004 and that it would be useful to know if there were sufficient funds available to cover these costs.
&& The Chairman said that the request had been made for inclusion in the 2005 TA Plan and said it was perhaps best to deal with it after discussion of the 2005 TA Plan had taken place.  
Technical Assistance and Training Plan 2005 (WT/COMTD/W/133)
&& The Chairman said that agenda item D related to Technical Cooperation and Training.  There were three papers under that item:  the Technical Assistance and Training Plan for 2005, the Implementation Report and the Mid-term Review.  He suggested that Members address the plan before discussing the implementation report and the mid-term review.  He asked the Secretariat to introduce the Plan.
&& The Secretariat noted that Members had before them document WT/COMTD/W/133, which contained the proposal for the Technical Assistance and Training Programme for 2005.  The Secretariat recalled that a fairly radical and new approach had been introduced to Technical Assistance for the 2004 Programme, and this was showing to have been an appropriate approach.  So the Secretariat had tried to avoid another major change in concept for 2005.  Rather, what had been done was to build on the Plan concept that was introduced for 2004, and to maintain that basic approach.  Nevertheless, the Secretariat highlighted the points where the Plan for 2005 was different from the Plan for 2004, and how it built on the Secretariat's experience and lessons learnt.  These changes along with the basic approach were the basis for the budget which was proposed for implementing this Plan and which was presented also at the meeting.  
The first point made was that the proposals took account of the state-of-play in the negotiations and in particular integrated the results coming out of the July Package.  The Plan also integrated the results of the process of informal consultations which was initiated at the beginning of 2004 and which resulted from decisions taken in this Committee last year to deal with some policy‑oriented issues.  So, in that sense the issues such as needs assessment, the emphasis on the needs of least-developed countries and so on, had been reflected.  The Plan also incorporated the results of the mid-term in 2004 and which was before the Committee in document WT/COMTD/W/134.  The programme for 2005 would pursue the Secretariat's efforts towards sustainable capacity building.  It was proposed to introduce a Fifth Regional Trade Policy Course. Efforts in the area of training of trainers through links with academic institutions would also be continued.  As a result of this emphasis on value added training activities, the number of short regional topic‑specific activities was scaled back.  Those that remained were focused more clearly on priority issues of the Membership, in particular the July Package.  This approach had an impact also on the budget.  
The Plan laid the groundwork for some form of process for selecting participants for the activities that went beyond what was done at the time.  That process existed essentially for the three‑month trade policy courses whether in Geneva or in the regions and for a number of specialized courses in Geneva.  This was part of a building block approach where there was an attempt to move away from continually repeating training at the basic level and moving on to offer Members training both at the basic level but also at a more advanced level for those who had already undergone the basic training.  
&& The Secretariat mentioned that an e-training programme had been re-launched successfully, and that success had prompted its inclusion in the Plan for 2005.  The e-training platform was interactive, internet-based and involved testing the results of participants.  It had essentially the same objectives as the Trade Policy Courses and under this platform participants in the TPC could move to more advanced levels of training in more specific topics.  The Secretariat reported that 54 candidates went through the e-training programme and completed it successfully.  The Secretariat continued to press for partnerships with other international organizations and academic institutions.  This was a form of outsourcing and partnership along with the more traditional forms of outsourcing.  The focus was on partnerships with partners who would act in a co-equal fashion with the Secretariat in terms of substance and in terms of financial support.  
&& The Secretariat noted that the 2005 Plan had been re-designed to enhance accessibility, coherence and comprehension.  The annex which listed all the activities, followed the structure of the text of the document.
Regarding the technical assistance budget, the Secretariat noted that the figures provided together with the Plan and its presentation would provide Members with the basic information they needed to prepare their authorities' position.  The results of the discussions in the Committee would be taken into consideration by the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration later this year when it made a recommendation to the General Council on the WTO revised budget for 2005 and on the target months for the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund in 2005.  The cost estimates presented would be revised to reflect the discussions and would be reported to the Budget Committee accordingly.  The Secretariat referred to document numbered 6326 dated 24 September which contained the proposed budget.  This document followed the structure of the TA Plan for 2005 as presented in Annex II to document WT/COMTD/W/133.  The Secretariat noted that the General WTO‑related Training and Technical Assistance in Chapter A, and Specialized and Advanced Training and Technical Assistance in Chapter B combined Geneva‑based activities traditionally financed out of the WTO regular budget, and activities in the field financed by the Global Trust Fund.  Members had accepted that Geneva-based activities like the four three‑month Trade Policy Courses constituted the core of the training provided by the WTO to developing country officials and hence had incorporated them in the regular budget of the institution.  This part of the budget should remain at the same level as in 2004 since the Plan for 2005 contained exactly the same activities as in 2004.  Activities in the field financed through the Global Trust Fund had on the contrary been significantly reconsidered in the light of the most recent developments in the WTO negotiations.  Compared to the Plan for 2004 this led to a certain evolution.  The amount intended to be dedicated to regional seminars should be 20 per cent lower in 2005, national activities should remain at the same level and expenses for regional short trade policy courses would more than double, and the cost of the regional three-month trade policy courses would increase by 20 per cent compared to last year.  The three-month regional trade policy courses would represent more than a quarter of the total expenses financed through the Global Trust Fund in 2005.  
&& The Secretariat anticipated a budget increase of 5 per cent compared to 2004 for the activities in Chapters A and B, which was a result of the addition of one three‑month regional trade policy course to the Plan.  This relative stability of the budget hid a profound re-balancing of spending, in favour of activities of longer duration, from several weeks up to three months, which now represented 44 per cent of the budget estimate compared to only 27 per cent in 2004.  Conversely shorter activities of a week or less would see a relative important fall from 73 per cent in 2004, down to 56 per cent in 2005.  This was the clearest indication of the efforts made by the Secretariat to re‑enforce the activities that had the most impact for beneficiaries.  In Chapter C, the cost estimates of partnerships for training and capacity building had been increased by more than 20 per cent compared to 2004.  In Chapter D, the budget for Geneva-based topic specific symposia had been reduced by 10 per cent compared to 2004.  This chapter had been completed to show the cost of trainees and interns who were financed out of the Global Trust Fund or other dedicated Trust Funds.  This had not presented as part of the cost estimates in the past.  It was anticipated that the cost of WTO input into international conferences and workshops in Chapter E would double, compared to 2004.  For costing purposes, compared to Annex II to document WT/COMTD/W/133, four new chapters after Chapter E had been added to deal with: the cost of L-posts;  the WTO contribution to the STDF, the standard and trade development facility; the overheads charged on all direct costs financed by extraordinary budgetary resources; and the sharing of costs with certain partners.  
Globally, the costing for activities in 2005 came to approximately Sw F 32.1 million, which was the result of a total cost of Sw F 38.6 million minus Sw F 6.5 million of cost sharing.  In arriving at these figures the Secretariat applied the same standard costs methodology as in previous years.  The methodology was assigning different standard costs for one day of activity for one person, depending on whether the event had been classified as a national activity - an activity in which WTO financed only the participation of staff members, a regional activity - i.e. an activity in which the participation of delegates was financed by WTO, a training course - same as a regional activity but of longer duration which permitted an amortization of the travel costs over a longer period, or an activity in Geneva Headquarters.  With the exception of regional activities for which the standard cost had increased by 10 per cent, the standard cost for all three of the categories of activities was identical as previous years.  When applying the standard, a level of non-participation among invited countries of ten persons had been anticipated – this rate was double last year's level and was applied for all activities organized at regional level.  
The cost estimate for the five three-month regional trade policy courses had been based on real cost for such events in previous years.  In 2005, it was proposed to finance in full 12 L‑posts out of the Global Trust Fund.  The Secretariat recalled that 19 such L-posts were created in 2002 after the Doha Conference in order to give the Secretariat the additional human resources needed to implement the Doha Development Agenda.  The posts financed out of the Global Trust Fund were those directly associated with the delivery of technical assistance and training to beneficiary countries.  The remaining 7 L-posts played more of an internal support role in the implementation of the Plan and would continue to be financed out of the program support funding 2005.  The cost‑sharing hypothesis on which estimates had been based was ambitious at Sw F 6.5 million.  It was hoped that further displays of outsourcing and partnership with other institutions would help in reaching that level.  However, this amount should be considered as a maximum.  
As far as the bottom-line was concerned, it was hoped that Members, when revising the regular budget for 2005 would maintain an envelope for Technical Assistance and Training fairly similar in size to what had already been approved at the end of last year, i.e. Sw F 5.5 million.  The Secretariat's estimation was that all of the projects in the Plan taken together would involve a cost to the WTO over and above the regular budget money available for Technical Cooperation and Training of about Sw F 25 million.  This amount would have to be financed out of the Global Trust Fund.  It represented a 4 per cent increase on what had been asked of donors in 2004, and corresponded in fact to the addition of one more three-month Regional Trade Policy course to the Plan.  This meant that the Secretariat had been very careful to make sure that the continuous re-engineering of the other parts of the Plan presented today, did not lead to any increase in cost compared to 2004.  In conclusion, any adjustment to the Plan that could result out of the discussions in the Committee, would have an impact on the cost estimate which was presented.
&& The Chairman asked whether it would be possible to accommodate the workshop on the HS 2002, and what would be its cost.
&& The Secretariat replied that if one more Geneva‑based symposium was added to the list it would add further costs and increase the budget.  It was estimated that this event would cost between Sw F 400,000 and Sw F 500,000, assuming that the rate of participation in such an event would be similar to events in 2004.
&& The representative of the United States asked why was the cost for international conferences and workshops doubled in the budget. 
&& The Secretariat replied that in fact, the doubling of the cost in this part of the Plan was simply the result of much more emphasis placed on that in the Plan itself.  It was not the cost of any particular activity which had been increased, but the number of activities which had been doubled.
&& The representative of Venezuela noted that the documents presented were extremely useful to help Members improve management of effective technical cooperation which satisfied Members' expectations of both donors and beneficiaries.  The Venezuelan delegation also expressed its opinions with regard to the inclusion in the first outline of the TA Plan for 2005, of activities on the Singapore Issues which were not subject of the General Council's August decision, i.e. transparency in government procurement, competition and investment.  Venezuela was of the view that including activities in thematic areas which did not involve current WTO commitments, or which were not part of the negotiations, implied an inefficient use of resources which could be used in areas which were of a greater interest for developing countries, and especially for Venezuela.  He cited as examples, firstly, the initiative which came out of the last meeting of the Market Access Committee, to hold in Geneva at the beginning of next year, a workshop with experts from the capitals on how to manage tariffs with the focus on the HS2002 transposition to the consolidated tariff schedules.  Secondly, the request from a number of developing countries in informal consultations which took place in mid-September, to broaden the number and change the format of activities for capacity building within the negotiations on services.  He made it clear that his comments did not imply any disinterest on the part of Venezuela's delegation in these issues, nor was it meant as a criticism on the technical expertise which existed in the Secretariat.  What Venezuela believed was that cooperation activities on the Singapore Issues which had been mentioned earlier, would be better addressed within the framework of organizations such as UNCTAD, because they had a mandate for these specific issues.  He suggested to eliminate these issues in the work plan on the technical cooperation, until the necessary resources were found to carry out all of the desired activities for 2005.  
&& The representative of India noted that there were a lot of things he liked about the Plan.  However, just like Venezuela he was intrigued at the very substantial complement of activities on competition policy, on trade and investment and government procurement, these being the three issues that had been specifically excluded from the scope of the Doha Development Agenda.  Particularly, since the Secretariat had mentioned  that the Plan took into account the state of negotiations and the General Council's decision of 31 July 2004.  He did not see the activities planned as being in conformity with the mandate of the General Council.  He thought that at the least, there was an imbalance even if there was room for some activities on this issues.  He was of the view that the scope and extent of some of the activities on the Singapore Issues needed reconsideration.  
&& The delegate of Canada asked a question concerning the participating rates used in projecting the costs for the Plan.  She understood from previous informal consultations that the participation rates had been much lower than the 10 per cent discount for participation rates used in the costing of the Plan.  She wanted to get more information on the actual participation rates in previous years.
&& The delegate of Cuba noted that under Section II of the Plan, in the seventh bullet point it said that the Plan should  guarantee coverage of all the WTO agreements as well as all negotiating issues of the Doha Development Agenda, with an appropriate degree of detail.  She believed that there were other elements in the Work Programme which were not included in the Plan, but were part of  the General Council August decision.  Therefore, she proposed to add all other relevant elements, especially those which were of interest to developing countries.  On paragraph 68 of the Plan regarding workshops at regional levels, Cuba noted that given the limitations with regard to the resources available and the funds which are available to the Secretariat in 2005, efforts should be concentrated on chapters such as the development chapter, specialized and differentiated treatment for small economies, including issues such as transfer of technology which is covered under paragraph H of the July decision of the General Council and the work programme.  This would replace the currently planned regional workshops on the Singapore Issues. She said if training in those issues was needed, then it should be provided on a national rather than regional level.
&& The representative of Malaysia joined Venezuela, India and Cuba in seeking clarification on the fact that the three Singapore Issues, investment, competition and government procurement, had been included in the programme for 2005 when these issues had been excluded from the DDA negotiations.  Malaysia was concerned that to achieve cost effectiveness the scarce resources available should be channelled to areas of importance to developing countries involving increased market access such as agriculture, NAMA, services, and now with trade facilitation.  Malaysia agreed with Cuba that if there if there was need to have activities on the three areas of Singapore Issues, then they should be at the national level where each Member would decide whether these were their priorities.  But at regional level, priority should be given to the areas that were being negotiated.
&& The representative of Colombia was of the view that the Plan had substantial improvement and reflected the positive experiences coming out of previous plans.  For Colombia it was interesting to see that this Plan was based on trying to build capacity in a sustainable way through training for public civil servants as well as academics.  Colombia also thought that it was appropriate that there was a categorization of products in the Plan, and that it covered activities with specific objectives;  this would help Members in prioritizing their national activities.  Colombia asked the Secretariat how it envisioned carrying out the Plan with regard to specific interests which may be expressed by developing countries and least-developed countries, as well as those countries who did not have permanent representation in Geneva. 
&& The representative of Peru believed that the focus of this Plan had improved;  and supported its concentration on specific products and providing specific guidance for development.  He asked the Secretariat whether delegations had been consulted in planning national or regional seminars and workshops.  He was of the view that informing Members' delegations beforehand on the different activities to be carried out in their country would contribute to improve efficiency and effectiveness.  Regarding page four of the document, referring to how the Plan was put together, he suggested to make it clearer that the Secretariat took into account the priorities of developing countries to whom the programme was oriented.  With regard to the Singapore Issues, Peru agreed that priority should be given to subjects in the negotiations tied to market access such as, technical barriers to trade, sanitary and phyto-sanitary issues because these were important to developing countries. 
&& The delegate of Kenya noted that the Plan gave a special emphasis to the development dimension of the DDA.  He thought that this was an important aspect that should feature in all future TA Plans.  On regional trade courses, he noted that the transition from phase 1 to phase 2 of the projects would be dependent upon some circumstances and these included capacity and the expertise of the regional partners concerned.  However, his delegation was of the view that in order to ensure the continuity and sustainability of the project, the Secretariat should develop some tools or some parameters to gauge the readiness and the capability of the regional partners concerned to assume a growing responsibility for delivering follow-up training courses in the region.  His delegation believed it to be very important to ensure that the capacity building that had been developed was sustained, even when the WTO withdrew from the region.  Regarding the national technical assistance activities, he noted that the Secretariat had indicated that it would continue to give developing countries the flexibility to identify and request their own national assistance activities, this approach was fully supported by his delegation.  However, his delegation wanted the Secretariat to report on how effective this approach had been so far, and whether all developing countries including LDCs, had been able to put in their requests for national technical assistance activities, and also how effective the Secretariat had been in responding to these requests.  On the Singapore Issues, his delegation agreed that the Secretariat needed to provide technical assistance on trade facilitation since there was a clear and specific mandate on this issue in the July framework.  However, he did not view the other three issues as immediate technical assistance requirements, and thought that this should not be included in the technical assistance for 2005.  He believed that the Secretariat should focus the technical assistance in the area of market access and in this regard the proposed framework should not only give specific attention to trade facilitation and NAMA as mentioned in the Plan, but also to agriculture and services.
&& The representative of the European Communities was of the view that compared to last year progress had been made;  account had been taken of the observations that were made then, and he also appreciated the informal consultation process that had taken place over the last year.  He suggested, however, that notice on the consultations should be more than a couple of days before the meeting because this allowed delegations to prepare more thoroughly for the informal consultations.  He also had a question about the participation rate in the technical assistance activities.  This subject had been extensively discussed at the informal consultations.  He understood that the participation rate was estimated at an average of 70 per cent with quite a large volatility.  Even a participation rate of 17 per cent had been mentioned at a certain point.  He believed that the reasons for low participation in particular activities should be analyzed, and consideration be given to including in the budget calculations a participation rate lower than 85 per cent.  That would allow the same level of funding as last year, and he did not really see a justification for an increase of the budget of 4 per cent.  He thought it was important to base the Plan more and more on needs, as identified in many existing documents, such as the Integrated Framework, JITAP, and Trade Policy Reviews, that are already taken into account.  As far as the seminar on the HS2002 was concerned he doubted whether it was useful to bring capital-based officials over for one day at a cost of Sw F 400,000 or Sw F 500,000.  He encouraged the Secretariat to consider other options, including perhaps regional seminars, which might lower the cost.  As far as the Singapore Issues was concerned,  he recognized that they had been dropped from the single undertaking, but had not been dropped from the WTO.  So, his delegation was in favour of maintaining a certain level of activity on the three Singapore Issues that had been dropped from the single undertaking, in a cost-efficient manner. 
&& The representative of Bolivia noted that the objective of the TA Plan for the next year should above all be focussed on the results of the package adopted on 1 August 2004 by the General Council.  Bolivia was also one of the countries interested in a seminar on the HS2002, so as to support negotiations on market access and believed that national activities must be appropriately coordinated by the Secretariat of WTO.
&& The delegate of China noted that in paragraph 58 of the Plan, the Secretariat referred to one of the guiding principles of the Plan as being contact between the Secretariat and Governments in requesting specific national projects.  China supported this idea and had already established contacts with the Secretariat.  So all the requests for technical assistance would be put forward to the Secretariat by one focal point in the Ministry of Commerce of China in order to coordinate the technical assistance and seek out the priorities from the different requests coming from different governmental parties at the central level, and at the local level.  With regard to the priorities for the work programme, taking Agriculture and Services for example, China believed that the Secretariat strengthened technical assistance to developing countries and the LDCs in those two areas.  Agriculture was the core of the Doha Development Agenda, so more assistance should be provided to developing countries and LDCs in that area.  Regarding services, already in the informal consultations process, a few delegations had pointed out that many developing countries, particularly least‑developed countries, did not have the capability of putting up offers and requests.  So he believed that there was a need to enhance the technical cooperation activities from the Secretariat to the relevant Members.  Regarding trade facilitation, this was a new area for the negotiations, therefore, developing countries, particularly least-developed countries, needed more technical assistance from the Secretariat.  He would also welcome if developed countries offered assistance to developing countries either bilaterally or through the WTO Secretariat on this subject.   Regarding the other Singapore Issues, according to China's reading of the Work Programme, which was adopted on 1 August, these three issues were no longer within the Doha Work Programme.  In case there was a different understanding on the scope of the decision he suggested to wait until a consensus had been reached on the scope of the mandate before committing resources into the assistance on the Singapore Issues.  In closing, he emphasized the relevance of the technical assistance activities that were offered by the WTO Secretariat to developing countries, and particularly to China as a new developing Member.
&& The delegate of Egypt supported the positive elements in the Plan with respect to the regional trade policy courses and the geographical expansion to areas not yet covered and hoped that regional trade policy courses in those regions could be allocated in the final draft of the Plan.  He believed this was important to guarantee parallelism in activities provided for the various groupings.  This would as well complement the regional partnership mentioned in paragraph 132, bullet point 2.  Regarding the outreach activities for parliamentarians, he requested the Secretariat presenting the Mid-Term Review of 2004 Plan to clarify whether there had been any outreach activities held in 2004 so that members would get to know more about this product or programme.  Regarding the Singapore Issues, he supported those delegates who made the point that it was not a priority, as priorities had to reflect the July Package.  However, he did not disagree with the European Communities about the need for technical assistance activities in these fields.  Nevertheless, technical assistance should reflect the July Package.  Consequently, he believed that taking out the activities on the Singapore Issues would render it financially possible to hold the HS 2002 seminar or workshop.
&& The delegate of Djibouti expressed support for the training of trainers programme as all technical assistance on training supplied by the Secretariat was important in the case of the least‑developed countries.  Djibouti found it difficult to reply to requests from Members on Services as it faced difficulties in understanding and replying as a least-developed country.  High level courses were very useful and should be strengthened as well as the training of trainers in the field.  Regarding the Singapore Issues, he believed that, except for the decision taken under trade facilitation, these subjects should be dealt with elsewhere separately and were not priorities.
&& The delegate of Barbados welcomed the basis and principles on which the 2005 Plan had been formulated including but not limited to the development priorities as laid down in the Doha Ministerial Declaration, the recognition of specific needs of Members including LDCs, non-residents and small economies, as well as the principle of flexibility and transparency which had been emphasized.  She also welcomed that emphasis was being placed on in-country capacity building and empowerment and on the building of partnerships and relationships with regional and national academic institutions as well as other types of institutions and agencies.  Barbados strongly encouraged the continuation of the regional and trade policy courses and welcomed organization in the Caribbean of a course in 2005.  Barbados felt that it was very important that Members were seeking to build upon mechanism through specific follow-up activities which had been articulated and identified in the Plan.  Similarly, she welcomed the continuation of Geneva Week and other programmes for non-residents.  With regard to other products which had been identified in the 2005 Plan she was glad to learn of the success of the training for trainers programme and plans to continue it.  She felt that other innovative activities were very useful, like those outlined in paragraphs 111, 112, 113 of the document.  Lastly she touched upon internships.  This was a very important training tool and it was a useful vehicle for capacity building in the countries.  Barbados had benefited from one programme in the past and hoped to be included in other programmes in the future.  However, it was in this part of the Plan that her delegation found a source of concern, specifically in the paragraph where there was a sentence which dealt with the selection process for the programme.  Barbados had always rejected the use of income-related criteria;  the focus of the WTO was trade, increasing ability of countries to trade and trade rulemaking.  She understood, appreciated and agreed that a selection process was necessary for every training activity.  However, Barbados could not accept the income based criteria applied to this or any other aspect of the WTO training programme and wanted this reference to be removed.
&& The delegate of Nicaragua endorsed the need mentioned by various Members to focus the TA Plan on negotiation matters which were currently important for developing countries, including the issue of trade facilitation.  The issue of transposition to the HS2002 would in Nicaragua's view justify regional seminars in areas where such transposition help was required.  Regarding areas not subject to negotiation capacity building could be undertaken in coordination with other relevant bodies or agencies.  
&& The delegate of Japan noted that the TA Plan for 2005 reflected the outcome of the informal consultations since January.  Moreover, in paragraph 69 of the document the Plan explicitly mentioned that the July Package was appropriately addressed.  He strongly supported the idea that assistance in the area of trade facilitation should be emphasized.  Other than the activities on trade facilitation, he was of the opinion that technical assistance on services should be emphasized and added explicitly to the description in paragraph 69.  With regard to the three other Singapore Issues, he supported the view of the European Communities that WTO should keep a minimum level of the programmes as provided in the TA Plan presented by the Secretariat, taking into account cost effectiveness.  Regarding the total amount estimated for the Global Trust Fund next year, he appreciated the efforts made by the Secretariat to prioritize the activities and limit the total amount to Sw F 25 million, but as some other delegations mentioned this was still Sw F 1.6 million more compared with that of previous years.  Although he understood the explanations of the Secretariat on why this was necessary, he believed that there should be a way to streamline the estimated budget, taking into account the discussions on participation rate, to keep the level of funding similar to the 2004 level.  
&& The delegate of Switzerland touched upon five points.  First, on needs assessment he believed this was probably one of the most fundamental points which had been discussed over the last two years and a lot of progress had been made.  However, improvements were still necessary.  Switzerland liked the national guidelines which had been established and believed that the basic process should be the process of self-evaluation.  This concerned mainly national activities and to some extent regional activities – it did not concern the basic course like the trade policy courses.  At the same time, Switzerland believed that it had to be clear for the Secretariat how much it should give support to some countries in the self-evaluation process and what the means should be to do this, since it was probably the countries which had the most important training needs which also would have more difficulties than others to have a good self-evaluation process.  Switzerland also believed that WTO should itself have progressively a very clear view on how it looks at the training needs of each country.  For instance, by having a specific country sheet or a country analysis inspired by all the different sources that were available including DTIS, TPRs, trade clinics and even the training workshops which always allowed for good contacts with national authorities.  This should be a process which should be revised constantly and this would also then provide an instrument for dialogue on the country needs.  Switzerland thought that comments on needs assessment should be very specific and set benchmarks.  The benchmarks for the 2005 programme would be, how many different countries does the Secretariat expect to have needs assessments for, and in how many countries the Secretariat could have clearly analysed the needs.  Second, for the selection process, it was clear that only if homogeneous groups were trained could the training be efficient.  This was not a problem for some of the established courses, but it still represented a problem particularly in national activities and some of the regional activities.  Switzerland believed that it was absolutely essential for the Secretariat to be progressively more involved in the selection process, to provide, as suggested in its report, as a first step, the profiles which were expected for the trainees for specific workshops.  These profiles should relate the composition of the group to the needs assessment in the countries, to the state of the institutions and to the role of the trainees in these institutions.  Over time the needs assessment should be made a condition for getting involved in a workshop and other training activities in the countries.  Switzerland believed training was terribly important and essential.  At the same time Switzerland noted that it cost a lot and, therefore, Members should strive for cost efficiency and quality.  Needs assessment and selection processes should become more binding to create conditions for efficient training.  Third, regarding the budget, Switzerland believed that some adjustment could be made by having a more realistic discount in terms of participation.  Switzerland also had the impression that, with respect to the specific request on a market access seminar on tariff schedules, there could be alternatives to a very costly way of handling this issue, but clearly this was a minor point and should not detract from the major thrust of the planning exercise.  Fourth, C and D activities – Switzerland agreed that these activities be maintained in the budget.  Switzerland would have liked to have a stronger emphasis on these activities compared to others, but maybe this was for the next planning cycle.  Switzerland believed that this was the future for WTO's role in training and capacity building.  Switzerland would like to see stronger emphasis on training of trainers and on outsourcing to qualified training institutions in the academic world.  It saw in the future the role of WTO as being kind of a supervisor, an agency which ensured the quality of training provided by others, maybe with some technical inputs, and saw much less a long-term role as the main training provider.  Finally, on the Singapore Issues, Switzerland believed some Members were trying to play a political game which did not have much to do with the function of training.  Three of the Singapore Issues were not any longer part of the Doha negotiations, but it was clear that investment issues had a lot to do with the WTO's work.  The WTO had major investment activities in the GATT, in TRIMS, in TRIPs and so these aspects did not depend on whether there were negotiations on a new international agreement.  Similar considerations were relevant for competition policy.  Competition rules were in fact a tool for national governments to have a competitive environment to avoid private monopolies which can very often be also externally financed.  This was one of the reasons why in Switzerland's bilateral training programme competition issues would remain on the agenda.  When talking about training, Switzerland was not talking about negotiations over the next two years – it was talking about a longer term trade agenda where there were very clear priorities.  In that sense it was clear that maybe there should be less priority on the Singapore Issues in the programme for 2005 and this had already been reflected.
&& The representative of Australia supported the general thrust of the Plan and considered it a solid design.  Australia was encouraged in particular by the programmes for Asia and the Pacific.  Technical assistance was important for all recipient Members but Australia liked to see the particular constraints of its Pacific partners adequately recognized and dealt with.  Australia continued to be interested in selection for programmes, particularly in national programmes, and thought that Switzerland made some interesting comments in that regard.  On participation, the views thus far expressed were largely shared by Australia.  Australia thought it would be useful for Members to continue to have information on participation.  This was not to micro-manage activities but Australia was interested in having a broad sense of the trends in participation across the activities in the Plan.  Australia emphasized the issue of monitoring and evaluation.  Australia's concern was that plans continued not to mention indicators which might be used to eventually judge performance but noted the discussion of that issue on page 30 of the Plan.  Australia encouraged further work to identify specific performance indicators and targets in the design.
&& The delegate of Canada congratulated the Secretariat for organizing the informal consultative process with the Members, and reflecting the findings of the internal audit and evaluation in the Plan.  As regards the costing of the Plan, Canada supported what others had said about a possible consideration of a more realistic costing estimate for participation levels.  Also, Canada thought that there should be attention given to the high cost of the Geneva-based symposia as related to the overall costs.  Some of the suggestions which have been made for the HS2002 seminar would be relevant in that respect, there could be other options, there could be linkages with other technical assistance that could be offered and other institutions could support some of the costs of the attendance at these events.  Canada was of the view that more creativity was desirable.  In that regard, the informal consultation process should continue and when this topic was discussed in the mid-term review, Canada would have a series of recommendations to make for on-going topics for discussion.  As regards the point raised by other delegations on the emphasis in the Plan, Canada supported putting more emphasis upon the core negotiating topics such as Agriculture, Services, NAMA and Trade Facilitation.  However, Canada agreed with comments by Japan, Switzerland and the European Communities regarding the need to keep Singapore Issues on the agenda as required.
&& The delegate of the United States said that this year's Plan showed that the dialogue over the last two or three years, conducted in an effort to improve the Plan and the delivery of services in this institution that had involved both donors and recipients, as well as very active participation by all in the Secretariat, had borne fruit.  She agreed with other delegations that as Members intensified work in the July Package, this posed a challenge to all involved in providing skills necessary to complete the task ahead.  She noted that there were short, medium and long-term needs in this institution in terms of technical assistance.  The longer term needs were a very important part of what was to be achieved and the Plan emphasized the need to build sustainable capacity in WTO Member economies.  Medium-term needs were set by on-going regional training courses and topical events.  Nevertheless, she doubted the WTO had the means to meet some of the requirements that arose from the different negotiating groups.  Satisfying these needs would depend on establishing a dialogue and communication with all the different negotiating groups on where the needs were and providing a flexible response based on the evolution of the work in the different negotiating groups.  It would be important to maintain flexibility in the implementation of the Plan.  Certainly already it was apparent a lot more work needed to be done on trade facilitation.  Also the Rules group might have needs that perhaps were not reflected in the Plan.  In the areas of Agriculture, NAMA and Services there were urgent calls for assistance that had arisen from the July Package.  It was a reality that in order to complete the negotiations, there were some basic skills that were required of all countries involved.  With regard to the specific proposal on the HS2002 seminar, the United States wanted to continue discussing how this need could be met.  She wondered whether a one-day symposium was really worth it and whether it achieved the kind of engagement needed.  However, she noted that there were a number of advanced market access training programmes and perhaps the HS2002 issue could be treated in those events.  She was also pleased to see that the work on innovative approaches, like the e-training project, was continuing as this could add to the depth of the training programme.  This could be a way around some of the specialized training courses needed to ensure that negotiators could move up the skills level.  She supported on-going work on needs assessment and thought that the guidelines that the Secretariat had put together – a sort of template – was a very useful start.  She urged Members to use this tool as it was not difficult to use.  She joined Switzerland in their suggestion that with regard to the LDCs and others it would be helpful to be more pro-active in the Secretariat side.  The United States was still interested in exploring ways in which some of the basic course work might be outsourced and then use the expertise of the Secretariat's staff on more advanced elements of negotiations.  This should be set as a longer term goal.  She also sought more information on the participation levels, because she was surprised at the volatility in the participation and it would be useful to have a better sense of what might be behind some of that volatility.  Maybe it was that the right programmes were not offered, maybe they were offered at the wrong times, maybe these were one-off problems;  the volatility problem ought to be monitored a little bit more closely.  
With regard to the regional seminars or workshops on the Singapore Issues in the areas of trade and investment, government procurement and competition policy, && The delegate of Indonesia supported the views expressed by previous speakers that these should be put aside for the time being and priority be given only to the area of trade facilitation.  This idea would be consistent with the programme of work mandated in the July Package to concentrate on the core negotiating issues.  His delegation would be happy if the budget and resources for the three Singapore Issues could be allocated to increase the number of national activities.
&& The representative of Senegal noted that the 2005 Plan reflected the concerns which had been raised in the consultations and he supported it.  He noted with a great deal of satisfaction the clear principles which had been outlined and which had been used in order to draw up the Plan.  This Plan was characterized by diversification with regard to the products which were being offered;  this continued on with the dynamic begun at Doha and improved the WTO's technical assistance.  It better responded also to the needs of developing countries on technical assistance which was a fundamental element of the Doha Development Agenda.  Senegal had noted the usefulness of documents for informal work and identifying a country's needs.  These documents would contribute, at least for LDCs, in helping to assess the needs for national activities.  This had been one of Senegal's on-going concerns and he believed it was important for Senegal to be able to have access to technical assistance which truly responded to its needs.  In the document, Senegal had specifically noted a number of passages which were important to it, and some of these paragraphs had also given rise to questions.  First, regarding the partnership with university institutions or academic institutions,  he expressed Senegal's gratitude for having this partnership develop more fully.  He considered that it was a very effective tool for outreach in developing countries and it also enabled these countries to adapt WTO issues to their own realities in their own regions.  He then turned to paragraph 34, regarding regional trade policies and the different phases which were going to be set up in order to let developing countries' Universities take on their responsibilities.  He noted that there was a rotational system as well in the English languages courses – and believed that in 2005 there would be a course in Southern Africa – the question which was raised was whether or not there was compatibility between this transfer and the objectives which had been set out providing universities with regional courses.  He noted that there were also regional courses scheduled for the Arabic and Middle East countries and wondered whether a similar course could be scheduled for Africa.  He also asked whether the Arab countries in Africa were part of the African group or the Arab group.  With regard to trade facilitation he noted that it was important to see how there could be more activities related to this issue, because the negotiations were moving forward very quickly and modalities were already being discussed.  Nevertheless, he would not want to take away from the other activities.  Concerning Rules, although there were activities scheduled, unfortunately, there were none on fisheries subsidies.  This was an issue that was of concern to Senegal.  He noted that there were other African countries interested in this issue, where fisheries represented a sector of importance.  Therefore, he proposed to have activities at a regional level on this issue as it was also an issue under negotiation.  This would enable Senegal to better understand the issues being discussed.  With regard to the harmonized system HS2002, the transposition to HS2002 was work that Senegal was going to undertake and he welcomed a workshop on this issue, but did not think that a one-day workshop would enable Senegal to overcome all of the obstacles which it faced.  Senegal asked if for LDCs this assistance would come out of a special fund and what were the other activities which would be carried out for transposition to the HS2002 system.  
&& The representative of Guinea said that she was pleased to see that the Plan reflected the consultations held earlier and took into account the concerns of developing countries.  She thought that technical assistance should continue on those issues that were of interest to developing countries and particularly the LDCs.  She expressed concern about the number of activities on the Singapore Issues which were not part of the Doha mandate.  Effort to be made on these issues could better be used in other activities, like training of trainers in universities and increasing the number of participants in the trade policy courses and courses on negotiation techniques.
&& The representative of Nepal said he was happy to see that LDCs would be given continued priority in technical assistance activities.  He believed that LDCs were in need of even more assistance especially on the new issues for negotiation in the WTO, so more tailor made programmes were necessary as well as evaluation and follow up of those programmes.  He would also like to see sufficient resources made available for the Secretariat to effectively implement the programmes and activities.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that with respect to the Singapore Issues he believed that it was important to keep them in the agenda, and this was not an issue of capacity as the staff in the Secretariat dealing with these issues did not necessarily have expertise in other issues.  He agreed that the number of activities could be reduced or modified according to the level of interest shown in the first activities held.  Regarding services he asked the Secretariat how it planned to deal with the need for countries to come up with revised offers by May as was specified in the 1 August framework agreement.  It would be a pity if for lack of technical assistance Members would not be able to keep to that deadline.  The budget line on the Secretariat's input into other conferences and workshops had been increased two-fold in the Global Trust Fund and there was no input from the regular budget.  However, he recalled that earlier discussions seemed to suggest that the participation in other conferences and workshops was more the realm of the regular budget.  Therefore, he requested some clarification from the Secretariat on this issue.
&& The delegate of Korea believed that the Plan was going in the right direction with focus being placed in improving the selection of the participants and increasing the duration of some courses.  He believed that quality of the programmes depended on assuring an homogeneous level of knowledge among participants and other elements required for technical assistance activities.  This was clearly mentioned in paragraphs 13 and 14 of the Plan.  With regard to the sources of information for elaborating the Plan he asked whether the Secretariat was conducting any surveys of participants upon completion of a TA activity.  He believed this would be very helpful in designing future plans.  On the Singapore Issues, he was not sure whether the WTO technical assistance activities should be confined to only issues under negotiations as one of the goals of technical assistance was to ensure capacity building on sustainable basis by discussing diverse issues.  So, technical assistance activities in the Plan did not need to be linked to the DDA negotiations.  He supported the proposals by the European Communities on this matter.
&& The delegate of Malaysia emphasized the fact that technical assistance was needed on the transposition to the HS2002 as it was the fundamental tool in the current NAMA negotiations.  She suggested that the topic could be included in the NAMA regional seminars and to extend the duration of these courses.  On the Singapore Issues she believed the priority of work should be the areas under negotiation. 
&& The delegate of Madagascar noted that the training Plan was prepared in a very detailed fashion, meeting the comments made by Members and in accordance with the development project both in terms of the diversity of the products used and as regards what had actually been achieved.  He agreed with most of the comments that had been raised by other delegations and would like to ensure that these comments would be duly taken into account so as to improve the quality of the Plan for 2005.  
&& The delegate of Tanzania noted with appreciation the statement contained in paragraph 69 of document WT/COMTD/W/133.  However, he did not see the rationale for holding regional seminars for competition, investment, and government procurement as indicated in paragraph 68 of the same document, when these issues were not part of the DDA as agreed in the July Package.  He urged that regional seminars focus on trade facilitation, which was new territory, and also on market access.
&& The representative from the Pacific Islands Forum referred to page 22, paragraph 101 of the TA Plan, where reference was made to the Pacific Islands Group he requested the reference to be amended to the Pacific Islands Forum.  He looked forward to the Geneva‑based programmes, the regional programmes and the national programmes.  In addition to that, he was also looking forward to utilizing the WTO regional coordinator internship programme in 2005.  He also supported the delegation of Senegal in its request for training programmes relating to fishery subsidies.
&& The Secretariat said that it had taken good note of the point that the Plan needed to focus even more on the issues that had emerged from the July Package, and it had already identified several places in the text of the Plan to make this more clear and more focused.  On the question of the three Singapore Issues that did not form part of the negotiating package, working on the premise that it was probably easier to remove items than to add them if they were not there, the Secretariat had taken the view that the TA Plan should include a minimum programme even on the Singapore Issues that had not been retained in the July Package.  This referred essentially to competition policy and to trade and investment as the activities that were listed under government procurement related to the Government Procurement Agreement.  It could be that in the course of activities on the agreement itself reference would be made to the issue of transparency, but that was not the main focus of those activities.  The Secretariat sensed from what had been said at the meeting that the concept of a minimum programme on the Singapore Issues was even too much, and that Members did not consider it an effective use of resources to concentrate on those two issues.  && && The Secretariat reminded Members that the focus was on the regional activities that were listed for these subjects, but these subjects were also dealt with in the trade policy courses in Geneva, the trade policy courses in the regions, and on demand if any country asked for an activity in those areas.  The Secretariat proposed to consider these issues in a minimum context by retaining them in the trade policy course framework and as national activities, deleting them as specific regional activities, unless there were for example a number of national requests for activities in this area which could be combined in a pragmatic way into a sub-regional or regional activity, again on demand.  
Regarding attendance at conferences and workshops, this section of the Plan was probably misnamed.  Attendance at conferences per se was, as Members had decided, financed from the regular budget.  The attendance that was covered by the Global Trust Fund was attendance at technical assistance activities that were organized by other organizations.  These were genuine technical assistance activities, and therefore in the Secretariat's view attendance at such activities should be financed from the Global Trust Fund.  Some corrections in the labelling and description of this section would be made so as to make that clearer.  
Several questions were asked about how the Secretariat determined what activities to hold, how was flexibility for national activities applied, how priority to least‑developed countries was given as required by the Doha Development Agenda, how effective had national activities been and what had been the response rate to Members seeking to avail themselves of these activities.  The flexibility worked in the sense that the Secretariat offered the opportunity to beneficiary countries to make their requests at any time and on any issue that was of priority to them.  And this could be done either at the beginning of the year, which was the preferred situation, or at any time in the course of the year if a country was faced with a particular capacity problem.  The Secretariat had put in the Plan, language expressing that in general, developing countries would have an entitlement to two national activities, while LDCs would have an entitlement to three such activities.  The priority to the LDCs was discussed in the informal consultations and the Secretariat had tried ways of engaging LDCs in the process.  This was done by personal contact with representatives of the LDCs, not just the ones in Geneva, but also the non‑residents.  This was bearing fruit.  Of the 49 LDC countries, the Secretariat had received requests for technical assistance from about 40 of them.  This was a situation where the Secretariat could only draw attention to the availability of the product;  the Secretariat could not oblige any particular country to avail it of this possibility.  This led to the question of how effective the technical assistance activities were.  The Secretariat received feedback from the participants in all of the activities.  The Institute responded to requests first by seeking the help of the operational divisions, and then if that was not workable because of other commitments, outsourcing possibilities were considered.  The ITTC coordinated carefully with operational divisions to ensure that that Members who had made a request got an opportunity to have that request addressed.  
A number of comments had been made about participation rates.  The Secretariat understood the desire to keep the overall funding envelope at the same level as in previous years, i.e. Sw F 24 million for the GTF rather than the Sw F 25 million proposed.  However, the Secretariat expressed concern that the primary way of achieving a reduction to Sw F 24 million would be to adjust the participation rate.  There might be other ways of reducing the overall cost of the programme, one of which was eliminating activities on the two Singapore Issues which would allow the Secretariat not to be too drastic on the participation rates.  The Secretariat did not want a situation where participation rates were at an average of 85 or 90 per cent and only an 80 per cent or 75 per cent participation had been budgeted.  
&& On needs assessment, the Secretariat had taken on board the discussion and the requirements that had emerged from the informal consultations.  The Secretariat had provided a template for countries to use in order to do their own prioritization of their needs and was now urged to take this further.  One way this could be done was, when a request was made, to check whether the request for an activity was the result of needs assessment.  It was noted that some of the suggestions made by Members on being even more proactive would begin to have resource implications for the Secretariat.  The Secretariat had systematically said, and that was why the template had been prepared, needs assessment was to be done by the countries themselves rather than having the Secretariat get involved directly in an analysis of priorities for the countries.  
On the workshop on the HS2002, the Secretariat would consult with the operational division in charge of the issue to see whether they had any ideas on how that might be done and for the moment that workshop would not be in the list of those taking place in Geneva.  
On internships, there was a point made about how these should not be income‑related.  The Mission Internship Programme was financed from dedicated trust funds that was provided by two or three donors.  There were very limited resources and that was why it was indicated that priority would be given to Missions that were in greatest need of such help.  In addition, some donors had provided a lists of countries which were entitled to the internship programme.  This also limited the Secretariat's ability to make it more widely available.  To the extent that resources were available, and after the most needy missions were taken care of, these resources would be made available on a first‑come first‑serve basis.  
On the selection of participants, the Secretariat would be naturally more involved because the Secretariat would be making the selections for many of the activities.  However, the Secretariat was mindful that in a Member driven organization it was sometimes delicate to insist that certain participants proposed might not be entirely suited to a particular activity.  This was particularly so for national activities where the Secretariat had no say in who attended such activities and where countries in fact used these activities as a means of involving larger numbers of their officials to expose them to WTO matters, something which would not be possible in regional activities or trade policy courses.  The Secretariat did not see any real possibility of getting involved in selecting participants for national activities.  The Secretariat would be more proactive in the selection of participants for regional activities, as it did already for trade policy courses and specialized courses in Geneva.  
In connection with the comments about focusing the activities more on the negotiating issues, and services in particular, the Secretariat noted that the regional activities that were foreseen in the services area were relatively limited.  This was because it had become apparent that in order to help countries meet the obligations that had emerged from the July Package, in particular the presentation of requests and offers by the appointed deadline, much more had to be done on a national basis rather than on a regional basis.  This explained why there was a switch in balance between regional and national activities for the services sector.  
&& The representative of the United States requested some clarification on the issue of participation rates, as this might have been understood by the Secretariat as a suggestion to lower participation rates.  The question was rather the opposite, or why participation rates had been lower for some past events and what this implied for the budget. She also requested information on the number of LDCs and developing countries which had availed themselves fully of the three or two national programme allotment and whether there were some countries that were not getting any programmes and any reasons for this situation.  These she considered important questions in light of the shifting of the balance in the services area to more national programmes. 
&& The representative of Switzerland expressed satisfaction with the responses given on the question of needs assessment and participant selection, but he was of the view that more should be done in order to seek efficiencies in the provision of technical assistance.  He suggested that the Secretariat use the limited resources available to try to have at least a partial country assessment and establish a dialogue with the recipient countries.  He also suggested in terms of the selection process, to find ways to seek communication with the recipient country and tell that country when the selection process had not led to a training format which could be efficient.  These inefficiencies could very easily happen when there were very divergent levels of knowledge in a group. 
On the issue of services, the representative of the European Communities noted that as he understood it, the support for services would have to come out of national envelopes.  Since he believed that many countries would need support on this particular issue which might crowd out other issues and use some of the limited numbers of national seminars allowed per country.  He suggested to consider some kind of additional support in the field of services so that the deadline of May 2005 could be met.  He also welcomed the Secretariat's commitment to further discuss the Singapore Issues.  He believed Korea made a good point in saying that the TA Plan was not only for supporting the July Package or the DDA, and hoped to find an acceptable solution on the Singapore Issues.
&& The Secretariat noted that there was no disagreement on what was meant by the participation rates.  He understood that the issue was how to discount for the participation rates in the budget calculations.  He did not understand anyone to suggest the number of people that were invited to an activity should be reduced.  On the contrary, for example for the trade facilitation issue, there was a very strong view that in carrying out such activities participation should not be limited to just one participant for country, but two.  This was so as to include both the trade policy people and the customs people who were actually going to have to deliver on whatever comes out of the negotiations.  This would increase the cost, and the Secretariat would try to put this into the revised version of the budget.  On the question of why there was such volatility in terms of participation, the Secretariat noted that most activities attracted a very good turnout in terms of participation.  There were only one or two activities, where for one reason or another, that was not the case.  For regional activities, the Secretariat explained that every country in that region got an invitation to participate in the activity and very often there were one or two that simply did not respond to the invitation.  This could be explained by a number of reasons;  either the country did not have someone who was specialized in the field, or they did not have someone who could be released at that time, or there was some other reason.  These were all practical reasons and sometimes, even if an official did set out to participate in the activity, for one reason or another the person might not actually make it;  this was a pity because the expense had been engaged and there was no benefit from the activity.  So there were many reasons why countries did not participate.  The Secretariat would try to analyze some of the material available, and report to Members on this issue.  This could also be an issue to consider further in the informal consultation process since it had an important impact.  
On the utilization levels for national activities the Secretariat offered to share some data with the Members.  The Secretariat noted that utilization varied very much by region.  The African region was pretty good in making requests for national activities.  Regarding utilization levels by the LDCs, he noted that in most cases LDCs had requested far more than what their quota allowed, and then some prioritisation was necessary.  Other regions were not so forthcoming with their request, and the Secretariat made a commitment to work harder in reminding those countries of their entitlements under the technical assistance programme.  
&& On the services question, the Secretariat agreed with the European Communities that there was a balance that needed to be achieved between keeping to the limitations set on national activities, and insisting that countries use the quotas that they were allocated for services‑related activities.  However, he doubted whether the Secretariat was in the best position to insist on that.  The most that could be done was to remind Members that there was a deadline looming next year and that perhaps if they were having difficulties with the offer process, that they may wish to include a request on that subject in their priorities.  This was an area where bilateral donors or others might be able to help stir interest in these activities.   
&& The Committee took note of the statements made and decided to revert to this item at its next meeting.
Implementation Report – Second Quarter 2004 (WT/COMTD/W/132)
&& The Chairman recalled that the Implementation Report on technical assistance activities for the second quarter of 2004 had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/132.  He opened the floor for questions and comments on this report.
&& The delegate of Canada requested, for the next quarterly implementation report, to include a table which summarized the total amounts of money spent on technical assistance by subject, region, category and number of participants.  She also suggested to include a chart that would show the number of events by the same line items: subject, region, category and number of participants.  She thought that providing this kind of an overview analysis would enable Members to start to work on some of the recurring questions on technical assistance.  Also on an annual basis, she requested that there be a comparison of planned, versus delivered activities.  Again, she thought this comparison would be very helpful to Members in their deliberations
&& The delegate of the European Communities requested some clarification relating to participation of WTO officials in certain colloquia and meetings which the European Communities considered should be funded from the regular budget rather than from the Global Trust Fund.  As an example of these type of events he mentioned the NEPAD Africa partnership forum, the board meeting of the Joint Vienna Institute, the 20th Committee for Economic and Commercial Corporation of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the 11th Session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and the meeting of the African Union Second Ordinary Session of the Ministers of Trade.  It seemed to him that these expenditures were made to fund participation of WTO as such in those events rather than WTO participating in technical assistance activities.
&& The Secretariat replied that regarding the question on statistics, from January to September, the Secretariat had carried out 320 distinct activities out of the 450 that were foreseen in the 2004 Plan. One hundred and thirty-eight of these activities were national activities and 112 were regional activities including activities organized by others. In terms of the geographical spread of these activities, perhaps of the 138 national activities, 54 were in Africa, 45 in Asia-Pacific and of the 112 regional activities, 42 were in Africa and 26 in Asia-Pacific.  The Secretariat recalled it had introduced a new way of counting activities so as not to count a three-months course in the same way as a two-day seminar, this was the concept of participant days.  The Secretariat reported that by the end of September 2004, there had been 24,000 participant days of implementation, which compared to 33,000 that had been foreseen at the outset of the 2004 Plan.  
&& The Secretariat confirmed that attendance by staff to Conferences, was funded from the regular budget.  What was funded by the Global Trust Fund was attendance by Secretariat staff at workshops and training activities of other organizations.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made.
Mid-Term Review of the WTO Technical Assistance Plan 2004 (WT/COMTD/W/134)
&& The Chairman recalled that the Mid-Term Review of the 2004 TA Plan had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/134.  He then opened the floor for questions and comments on this report.
&& The delegate of Canada noted that the informal consultations held during the year had been very useful for many delegations.  She proposed that these consultations continue in the next year with another list of topics for discussion.  She offered some examples of the topics  that could be developed in the next year.  She thought improving the participation rate was a subject that must be addressed collectively.  Identification, refinement of indicators of measurement of results for technical assistance needed to be discussed and refined.  Linkages between technical assistance and country development plans and needs assessments.  Exploring further creative ways of leveraging technical assistance including further discussion of partnerships for outsourcing.  Discussing activities and missions that could be financed through the Global Trust Fund versus the regular budget.  Lastly, at the end of the year, after the evaluation of the TA Plan for 2005, a cost benefit analysis of the different components of technical assistance should be performed.  
&& The representative of Madagascar informed Members that in 2004 the ITTC had carried out several national activities in important areas which were priorities for Madagascar.  These activities had been geared toward WTO Agreements.  They had provided useful information and several Ministers participated in these activities.  These activities had tried to raise awareness and keep officials informed on WTO issues.  Another activity was to take place in December, on textiles with the participation of government officials and professionals.  Madagascar also hosted a regional activity on SPS measures as well as a regional seminar on non-agricultural products which was being prepared.  Madagascar also informed Members that several civil servants had been able to participate in seminars which had been organised in Africa.
&& The delegate of the European Communities acknowledged the efforts that had gone into the informal consultations expressed appreciation for the mid-term review that was undertaken.  He thought this was a very useful exercise and definitely benefited the design of the 2005 Plan.  He criticised that the date of the report was the end of August, as he considered it would have been useful to have the report in June or perhaps early July.  He also supported the Canadian delegation proposal to continue the consultations and identify certain number of issues for discussions.
&& The Committee took note of the statements made.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
&& -	Communication from Switzerland (WT/COMTD/W/129)
&& 	-	Communication from Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda (WT/COMTD/W/130)
&& The Chairman said that under this item Members would discuss two submissions, one from the delegation of Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, and the other from the delegation of Switzerland.  He said that even though he had held consultations with several Members in July to see what the CTD might do to address the specific concerns raised by some Members, he did not sense that there was a common approach on how to move forward on this item.  He said that commodities appeared in the July Package under the heading of "Other Development Issues" and that the 1 August decision stated that "commodities and net food imports should be taken into consideration, as appropriate, in the course of the Agricultural and NAMA negotiations".  That was something that he said the proponents had wished to see.  He then said the newly elected Managing Director of the Common Fund for Commodities, Ambassador Ali Mchumo, would make a presentation to the Committee. 
&& The representative of the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC) read the following statement:
"At the outset, allow me to express my thanks to you, Mr. Chairman, for the kind invitation extended to the Common Fund for Commodities to attend this very important Committee meeting as an observer and for the opportunity given to me to make a brief statement on this important topic under discussion.
The Common Fund for Commodities is an Intergovernmental Financial Institution established in the framework of the United Nations with a specific mandate to support developing commodity dependent countries in their efforts to improve and diversify their commodity production and trade thereby increasing their export earnings as well as sustain their real incomes.  Thus, this topic under discussion on declining terms of trade for primary commodities and its implications to the economies of commodity exporting countries strikes at the very core of the mandate and operations of the Common Fund.
It is common knowledge that many countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, Asia and, particularly, in Africa are dependent on commodities for more than half of their merchandise export earnings. Approximately half of the countries in Africa derive over 80 per cent of their merchandise export income from commodities and 46 developing countries depend on three or fewer commodities for more than half of their total export earnings. 
Over the last few decades, adverse trends in commodity prices and high price volatility have exacerbated the vulnerability of the commodity dependent developing countries.  Commodity prices declined significantly from 1980 to 2002.  In this period, the World Bank’s index for commodity prices decreased by 47 per cent, with prices of coffee, cocoa, sugar and palm oil falling by nearly 70 per cent.  The 2002 real price of coffee was just 14.2 per cent of its price in 1980.  UNCTAD statistics show that prices declined for 41 out of 46 leading commodities.
Taking into account 10 major tropical agricultural commodities (copper, coconut oil, palm oil, sugar, cocoa, coffee, tea, pepper, groundnuts, jute, cotton and rubber), in 2002 alone developing countries would have earned USD 243 billion if real prices of these commodities had remained the same as their 1980 price level.  This is almost five times the world’s aid budget.
In a recent study the IMF reported that a characteristic common to the commodity dependent developing countries in Sub-Saharan Africa is that movement in their terms of trade is a key determinant of macroeconomic performance and has an important impact on real national incomes.  For example, coffee is the predominant export of Ethiopia.  The slump in world coffee price produced a 40 per cent fall in Ethiopia’s terms of trade resulting in a decline of about 6 per cent in the country’s real income.
The issue of the declining terms of trade for primary commodities and related aspects of the commodity problematique must be brought to the centre of the agenda in international discourses on global economic issues since we believe a solution to the problems facing commodities will contribute to the fulfilment of the Millennium Development Goals.  It is for this reason that we commend Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda for bringing this matter for your consideration.
You will recall that one of the original functions of the Common Fund was the financing of international buffer stocks, but for well known reasons this arrangement has not been operationalised.  We still need to find a workable solution to the persistent problems of price decline and volatility.  In the short-term, market-based price risk management schemes help farmers manage the risk of falling prices on global commodities markets through the use of derivatives (futures and options).  However, farmers in developing countries have very poor access to these instruments.  In this regard, the Common Fund for Commodities and the World Bank have initiated activities to combine efforts on price risk management in East Africa to explore new, market-based, approaches to assist these developing countries better manage their vulnerability to the volatility of commodity prices of coffee and cotton, to begin with.  This, however, would not address the issue of persistent decline in prices effectively and permanently.
Another solution to the problem would be making compensatory financing schemes that are user-friendly and workable.  Compensatory finance has an important potential role in insulating developing countries from the worst effects of international commodity price volatility, and indeed in reducing volatility.  The international community has the experience of existing and erstwhile mechanisms and we could use this experience to improve on delivery and effectiveness.  Compensatory financing should operate on the basis of ex-ante rather than ex-post mechanisms, in other words, clearly linking automatic payouts to specific occurrences.
While the above are short-term measures, horizontal and vertical diversification could contribute to the long-term solution.  You will recall that the Meeting of Eminent Persons on Commodity Issues empanelled by UNCTAD in October 2003 recommended the establishment of an International Diversification Fund to supplement other relevant existing institutions.  We find that this proposal worthwhile as it would enable developing countries utilise opportunities to diversify their productive capacity within the commodity sector, including through value addition.
Market access and tariffs remain a major issue of importance to commodity dependent developing countries.  Average agricultural tariffs in industrial countries are still two to four times higher than tariffs for manufactured goods.  In addition, tariff peaks and various degrees of tariff escalations act as barriers to imports of value-added commodity products from developing countries.  Although it is worth noting the positive developments in this area in terms of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and the Everything But Arms Initiatives, more needs to be done such as further simplification of the rules of origin to enable the targeted countries make more effective use of these market access facilities.
Public support, mainly in the form of subsidies, is another factor which distorts commodity markets and which needs to be tackled.  Domestic and export subsidies provided by developed countries have led to price decline for certain commodities through subsidy-induced production.  According to a World Bank study, the elimination of border barriers and subsidies in agriculture would result in an increase in commodity prices, especially for cotton, groundnuts, rice, and sugar.  However, we are pleased to note that the issue of subsidies is receiving due attention in the negotiations taking place within the WTO.
We believe that WTO has sufficient scope as a guarantor of a rules-based trading system, to discuss and even solve trade-related commodity problems faced by commodity dependent developing countries.  We at the Common Fund are ready to co-operate with the WTO in this noble endeavour.  It is for this reason that we are happy to be here with you and we are looking forward for the fruitful deliberations of this Committee and of other relevant WTO bodies that will address the commodity problematique.  We shall be too glad to play the part that will be assigned to us in this common endeavour."
&& The representative of Kenya said the Common Fund's presentation echoed the issues that have been put forward by Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda in their two papers WT/COMTD/W133 and WT/COMTD/W/130. The three delegations had given an indication of how work on the commodity issue should proceed in the CTD.  She said the CTD should continue serving as a think tank on the commodity issue while the other issues are tackled in the negotiations.  She said it was time that discussions on commodities took place.  She said her delegation wished to re-emphasize the importance of finding a positive solution to the crisis that is being created by the persistent decline in prices to the trade and development commodity dependent exporting countries in a rules based system.  She said her delegation believed that the commodity issue needed a more multifaceted approach and that there were some issues which needed to be taken to the negotiations.  She said that in regard to the July Package, there was now a mandate to take the commodity issue to both the negotiating groups on Agriculture and NAMA.  She said her delegation was consulting on how these issues could be addressed in the two negotiating bodies.  She added that this, however, should not hold back the discussions of the commodity issue within the CTD.  She said that the Common Fund's  presentation also showed that three delegations had a point in raising it in the CTD.
&& The representative of Switzerland said he agreed with Kenya's statement and that the Common Fund's presentation gave the CTD at least five areas to discuss where solutions could be found.  He said his delegation was interested in finding out what had worked, where there were interesting models for policy and how this related to different areas being negotiated in the WTO such as the areas of rules, market access and subsidy provisions.  He said the area of tariff escalation in the area of the negotiations on agriculture was also important.  He said the CTD should take time and assess what can be done in general internationally but also what could be done in the negotiations.
&& The representative of the United States said her delegation was open to ideas on how to proceed in the CTD and how to enrich the Committee's discussion on commodities without duplicating the work that was being undertaken in the WTO or other institutions.  She said her delegation was pleased that the July General Council Decision provided some focus for work particularly in the Agriculture and NAMA groups.  She added that her delegation had always assumed that those bodies would serve as the key focal points in the WTO especially as regards liberalization, tariff peaks and tariff escalation and subsidies.  These were all issues that would be addressed in the negotiations.  She noted that there were a number of other ideas as well as in the Kenyan proposal. For example, formula-based approaches and negotiations which follow a request and offer approach in the NAMA negotiations.  She asked what the CTD could do.  She said her delegation had considered some ideas and that while it was not intended for the CTD to duplicate work, there were some issues that the CTD could look at including trends and prices and governance issues.  A next step could be to invite the World Bank and the Food and Agricultural Organization to provide updates.  She added that those two institutions had just held a conference on commodities in Rome.  She thought the CTD could also benefit from experiences of the private sector such as Cargill or Nymex (New York Mercantile Exchange) and those of international institutions.  Exposure to all these different entities could help make sure the Committee obtains a full view of the range of issues.  She said it would also be useful to re-examine the Secretariat's inventory and pick out some topics for future presentations.  She suggested that the Committee could consider some case studies of commodity dependent countries which have in the past had some significant problems but which had managed to be quite successful in diversifying their exports.  She said some success stories of diversification include Brazil, Chile, India and South Africa.  She said that the CTD could first start to look at what others were doing in the area of commodities. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said the proposals from Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda as well as the Swiss proposal date before the 1 August Decision and that the CTD had not received any particular mandate from that Decision to address commodity issues.  He said NAMA and the agricultural Committees, however, definitely had.  He said the European Communities was not against discussing commodities in the CTD but asked what the added value would be for the CTD to examine commodities, especially since the subject was being discussed in many other fora including UNCTAD.  He asked what the Committee's complimentary input could be in a discussion that would be held in the Committees on Agriculture and NAMA.  He said it was important to clearly define the objectives for the involvement of the CTD and that it might be useful to identify what the WTO's influence could be on the discussion or what the WTO should take into account in the subject area of commodities.  He added that it might be useful to focus discussions on those countries that were vulnerable or the commodity dependent developing countries rather than all developing countries.
&& The Chairman said the European Communities' representative identified the mandate of the CTD to discuss and debate these issues, particularly their relevance to developing countries.  He added that a lot of the previous discussion in the CTD focused on the fact that while the CTD itself could not come to a conclusion on these discussions, that Members could individually draw from the discussions and use what they learn from them in their negotiations.  He said this is really a learning and debating exercise.  He added that the CTD had to agree on what it was it wants to discuss, with what objective and with an identification of the issues.  The CTD also had to decide whether to revisit some of the issues as suggested by some Members or whether it should invite other organizations to give presentations. 
&& The representative of Australia said it was useful to receive a briefing from the Common Fund which underscored the importance of the commodities issue.  He said Australia saw this as an area which merited further focus in these negotiations.  The question for Australia, he said, was how to maximize the prospect for making progress in dealing with the issue of commodity prices.  He said Australia was heartened by the July outcome which identified some key areas where progress could be made, i.e. the cross referencing of commodities with work in NAMA and Agriculture.  There was some work in the CTD which could complement work in other areas:  He added that having the other negotiating bodies make presentations was an idea that Australia welcomed in so far as more information would help structure the work of the CTD.  He said that although Australia had some reservations about the proposals on commodities, they did contain some ideas.  He said he was interested in seeing where the CTD could add value and complement the work of the negotiations in Agriculture and NAMA.
&& The Chairman said there were two trends of thought. Australia mentioned the need to stay in step behind the work of the negotiations and the United States mentioned the need to avoid duplicating the work of other bodies.  He wondered if it was possible to avoid duplication and asked where the line was between duplication that should be avoided and duplication that cannot be avoided because it relates to the same subject.  He said that if the CTD was to carve a niche in this area of commodities, a distinction should be made between the duplication that should be avoided – in other words there are no negotiations on commodities taking place in the CTD – but there are issues taking place in the negotiating bodies which should be discussed in the CTD.  He drew a comparison to paragraph 51 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration. 
&& The representative of Kenya said the mandate for the CTD is clearly indicated in paragraph 51 of the DDA.  She said the proposal Kenya and others presented looked for a solution in a rules-based system.  That solution has to be in the WTO because the discussions going on in UNCTAD are not going to set international rules or multilateral rules that can address the problems faced by commodity dependent, exporting countries.  She said she was looking for a solution within the rules-based system and that that should be done in the WTO.  She said her delegation agreed with the proposals to invite some of the organizations to make presentations on the commodity issue but wanted to remind the Committee about the reservations Kenya had about the Swiss proposal to have a workshop on the commodity issue because her delegation did not see the added value of such a workshop.
&& The representative of Switzerland said he thought the Swiss proposal complemented Kenya's and that that was the purpose of the Swiss proposal.  He never realized that there was opposition to the idea of a workshop and said Switzerland was open to all types of formats.  He said he did not fully understand Australia's reservations either.  In regard to what Kenya mentioned on paragraph 51, he thought it was exactly in that spirit that Members should consider the issue of commodities.  He said it was necessary to put the commodities issue in its development context in so far as looking at what was essential for commodity dependent countries to be able to profit from international trade, to be able to diversify out of commodities.  He said he wanted to remind the Committee that the legal framework of the GATT and the WTO was whenever that framework spoke of differentiation or tried to define developing countries, it always defined commodity dependent countries, as countries which have a very hard time diversifying. The diversification of the economy is seen as a factor of development.  He said in regard to the relationship to the negotiating Committees, the simple truth was that the Committees did not have the time to reflect on this development context and in that sense he agreed with the Chairman that the CTD could enrich and supplement the discussion in the negotiating Committees.  He cited an example in the Agriculture Committee where there were requests to examine tariff escalation.  Switzerland had done some studies with several sector groups on how the price structure actually works in the elementary and processing stages in the agricultural sector.  He said it was a difficult subject matter and he hoped that Members in the Agriculture Committee would not have to agree on how to define and how to establish what effective protection rates were and what the exact system was in each country.  Something which was well established as a negotiating priority was that the CTD did not have the technical elements or enough knowledge.  He suggested that at the next session, the CTD could have some presentations by other agencies – perhaps the ones mentioned by the United States.  Based on the results of the discussion, the CTD could decide on which issues to discuss in further detail. 
&& The representative of Canada said her country's proposal would be to invite these international organizations to attend. Papers could be prepared in advance for the CTD as proposed under point 10 of the Swiss proposal.  She said she also wished to suggest that some best practices be taken from the work being done by the Common Fund for Commodities.  She said she believed the World Bank and the IMF were working on such practices for risk management in Africa.  She suggested obtaining the results from this work to allow for a broad discussion as had been suggested.  She said the CTD could then isolate issues for further discussion. 
&& The representative of the European Communities said a sensible and pragmatic way forward was to worry less about the form in which the CTD conducted its work but more about the content of how CTD Members were informing themselves about what was happening in the field of commodities outside the WTO.  He said the presentation by the Common Fund for Commodities was useful and that others had suggested similar presentations by the World Bank or the FAO or others in the field.  He said the idea had also been raised of quarrying some of the research which had been identified by the Secretariat in their inventory document on commodities.  He said this would help to identify which areas the Committee should focus vis a vis the other WTO bodies which were negotiating groups. The 1 August Decision had given a boost to specific references to commodity relevant aspects.  He said his delegation sympathized with the delegation of Kenya in so far as the frustration felt because the CTD had been discussing this for some months.  He said there may be a way to address the issues in a pragmatic way – either at a workshop or an informal session.  He said this was not to delay a discussion of the problem, but more a question of having a common and clear view on the outstanding issues and the range of questions which could be addressed by the WTO and also those which the CTD could not really address except in a very general way.  He asked the Chairman and others to approach this in a pragmatic way.  He said he was happy to continue with the consultation process which had been organized since the last meeting in order to determine the best way forward.  Finally, he referred to Kenya's earlier intervention in regard to solutions being found in a rules based system, that directs attention immediately towards the negotiating groups.  It was in those fora where changes could be made to existing rules.  He said on paragraph 51 of the DDA, Members could have a useful, informative general discussion.  He said it is for other bodies in this house where the hard work will be done to address those issues in the course of the current negotiations.  He said that does not mean that there is no role for the CTD, but that the CTD needed to be clear on what that role should be.
&& The representative of the United States said she agreed with the need to be pragmatic.  She thought the CTD should broadly look at the issues and relationships but that it should not be dictating to the negotiating groups about what they should be doing.  The CTD could provide guidance and information that could inform those discussions.  She said she did not expect the details of how the agriculture group deals with tariff escalation to be determined by the CTD.  She said Members just had to be careful and pragmatic.  She added that if there was support for having other institutions come to the WTO and inform the CTD about their activities, then it would be useful for the CTD to ask them where they see the gaps – and where those gaps were trade-related gaps.  She asked what the WTO could usefully do that it is not already intending to do through the Agriculture and NAMA negotiations?  She said that might help Members define their focus. 
&& The representative of Nicaragua said his delegation agreed with the United States about the need for a pragmatic discussion of the commodities issue in the CTD.  He said he believed the CTD could serve as a think tank.  The CTD should not produce mandates or recommendations but should focus on the prospects or approaches from a developmental standpoint and receive comments from such organizations such as the Common Fund for Commodities. 
&& The representative of UNCTAD said his organization had been working on commodity issues for more than 40 years and was encouraged that this issue was now being discussed in the WTO.  He said UNCTAD had been dealing with commodities even when other organizations thought that commodities issues could be solved just by taking care of macro-economic concerns.  He wished to inform the CTD of paragraph 100 of the "Sao Paulo Consensus" which was the outcome of UNCTAD XI where Ministers agreed to give UNCTAD a certain mandate on commodities. The mandate covers a lot of the same areas mentioned by the proposals from Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania.  These were areas where UNCTAD too believed a lot of work needed to be done.
&& The representative of Canada said she supported the approach outlined by the United States.  She suggested that organizations could provide the CTD with a very short paper on what they were doing. She said the question had been posed as to whether or not organizations should be asked to identify trade-related gaps which were not being addressed directly through the negotiations.  The United States had suggested Agriculture and NAMA and she suggested services and trade facilitation.  Basically, she said it was to provide a focus for what the CTD was going to ask these organizations to do or to say so that it was not all outside the WTO's scope of discussions. 
&& The Chairman said there seemed to be two or three ideas for presentations:  the first is a look at the case studies of countries which have solved the problem.  In addition to such a case study, he said the CTD could invite some of the international bodies working in the area of commodities to come and provide an overview of what they are doing. He said the hard part was to identify which organizations to invite.  Organizations proposed so far included the World Bank, the Food and Agriculture Organization, UNCTAD and the Common Fund for Commodities.  He said Members needed to identify the organization and to agree on what it was they wanted them to do.  He said he would hold consultations on how the CTD could move forward.
&& The representative of Switzerland said there seemed to be a consensus emerging in that the CTD agreed to having presentations at the next meeting and that the Chair would provide an outline of the mandate for the institutions to be invited.  
&& The Chairman said the note to Members will contain the name of the country the CTD would like to invite to make a presentation and which international organization to invite.
&& The representative of the United States suggested choosing two or three organizations which are actively engaged in the work on commodities and having presentations so that CTD Members could inform themselves.  The Common Fund for Commodities or UNCTAD could assist with this effort which she saw as an on-going process of inviting institutions to make presentations. 
&& The Chairman asked if Members could accept that the presentations start at the next meeting of the CTD of 16 November or have an informal meeting before then. 
&& The representative of Canada said the proponents of the original proposal in paragraph 19 outlined a list of most of the organizations that would be involved.  She said the CTD should let the proponents make the choice as to which ones to start with.
&& The representative of Kenya said he supported the Chairman's proposal and said his country was keen to hear the case studies from those successful countries – especially as concerns how they stabilized prices and overcame the problems faced by other commodity dependent countries.  He said he hoped it would not be a case of export diversification only, but an issue focusing on how these countries were able to address the decline in prices and also add value to those commodities.  He suggested that the CTD Members could start with UNCTAD, especially since it had 40 years of experience in the commodities area already, before hearing the presentations from other organizations.
&& The representative of the United States suggested that Members also consider inviting the World Bank and the Food and Agriculture Organization since these two institutions had recently collaborated on commodities.  As concerned the selection of a country for an appropriate case study, she said she had cited some examples of where commodity dependent developing countries had had some successes with export diversification in certain areas. She suggested Brazil, Chile, India and South Africa as possible countries.  
&& The representative of Australia said he agreed that the World Bank, the FAO and UNCTAD are the kinds of organizations the CTD should consider inviting for its discussion on commodities.  
&& The Chairman said it was important that the CTD be clear in what it wants these organizations to present.  He said he would consult with Members to work on an appropriate terms of reference.
&& The representative of Switzerland said drawing up a terms of reference may be going a bit far.  He said it should be sufficient to have the institutions present the way they see the most important priorities and action on commodities.  He said a second question concerned asking the institutions to look at commodity dependent countries and also at poor developing countries.  In terms of countries already mentioned, he said it would be better to focus on tropical countries rather than temperate zone countries since they would be more relevant for Kenya and other African countries.  He suggested that the CTD could also look at Asian countries like Malaysia or other new commodity producers which have in some cases taken the place of some African commodity exporters.
&& The representative of the Common Fund for Commodities said the WTO was a member driven organization and it was really for Members to decide which organizations they would like to learn from.  He explained that the Common Fund was actually "the brainchild" of UNCTAD.  He suggested that perhaps Kenya's proposal could be followed and that the Committee begin with UNCTAD.  He said that if Members felt that the CFC should also be there, his organization would be ready.  He said  it might be important to focus on the trade-related gaps and that the activities of the CFC had not contributed to any rule making.  He said the CFC thinks it important to have some rules related to commodities and that that could be the role of the WTO to deal with the commodity problem because the WTO is where the rules are made regarding trade.  He also said Malaysia could provide a good country case study.
&& The Chairman said he would hold informal consultations to determine the best way to move forward on the agenda item concerning commodities.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED
&& The Chairman recalled that at the last meeting of the Committee discussions were held on how best to move forward on the paragraph 51 mandate.  A number of Members shared the concern that perhaps the Committee was not making the best use of that mandate and indeed it was clear that all Members did not have a common view as to how paragraph 51 might be used.  He also recalled that a few proposals had been put forward as possible ways of moving forward on that issue.  Among those was an idea proposed by the delegation of Canada to look at the relation between sustainable development objectives and the issues of preference erosion, as well as the loss of revenue available to governments because of tariff reductions.  He said the delegation of the European Communities had provided some suggestions concerning the possibility of holding a discussion on rules and technical barriers to trade, items which were described as being very technical but interesting in so far as they could expand the Committee's understanding of the issues.  The Chairman also sought the Members' views on whether the July Package presented any stimulus for debate on other issues. 
&& The representative of Canada informed the Committee that there would be a seminar on  preference erosion, and loss of revenue to be held in conjunction with Geneva Week in the Spring.  The Government of Canada and other donors were providing some funding for this event which would be coordinated with the WTO and the World Bank.  The delegate of Canada invited Members of the Committee to attend this seminar.  
&& The representative of Egypt suggested trade facilitation and its developmental aspects as one of the topics that might be included in the discussion.
&& The Chairman welcomed the suggestion and requested the views of the Secretariat on how this subject could be addressed in the CTD.
&& The Secretariat said it could organize a presentation on how trade facilitation was going to be dealt with in the negotiations.
&& The representative of Venezuela said his delegation attached great importance to paragraph 51 as the issue of sustainable development was covered in Venezuela's Magna Carta.  He recalled that three years had passed since Doha and that both the Committee on Trade and Environment and the CTD had come up against some difficulties in identifying how best to tackle the issue.  These difficulties stemmed mostly from the Members.  He was of the view that among the Members there were different approaches on how best to tackle paragraph 51 and suggested concentrating the debate in the CTD and the Committee on Trade and Environment on three points: the first, on the development and environmental aspects in the negotiations.  Second, having a debate on these elements and third, ensuing that sustainable development was appropriately reflected in the negotiations.  He said the discussions should be structured in both Committees. Otherwise,  it would be very difficult to follow the general outline that had been imposed on Members to ensure that the negotiations appropriately reflected sustainable development. 
&& The Chairman said that Venezuela's position had been well noted by the Committee, discouraged further discussion on the question of process and suggested to moving on to identifying the substantive issues to be discussed as had been done by Egypt.  
&& The representative of Cuba agreed that the Committee should move on to discuss the more substantive issues and was of the view that Venezuela's proposal could help to structure the work of the Committee and help to link the results in the Committee with negotiations in other WTO bodies. 
&& The representative of Venezuela proposed directing the focus of debate to issues concerning the relation between development and environment.  He suggested that the Secretariat should coordinate and exchange information with the Committee on Trade and Environment and referred to a recent seminar held under the auspices of the Committee on Trade and Environment where the issue of sustainable development was extensively discussed.  In his view, it was important before opening discussions on any new issues to know what progress had been made on previously discussed subjects.  He also requested Egypt to clarify what it believed was the relation between trade facilitation and paragraph 51.  
&& The Chairman informed the delegate of Venezuela of his recent consultations with the Chairperson of the Committee on Trade and Environment and noted that both Committees were at a similar stage in their work on paragraph 51.  However, he disagreed with Venezuela's view that trade facilitation was not an appropriate issue to be discussed under paragraph 51.
&& The representative of Kenya said her delegation did not have a problem with discussing trade facilitation. However, given the fact that the negotiating group on trade facilitation had just been established, she said she was not sure what there was to be discussed.  Paragraph 51 was supposed to mandate the Committee to monitor the development dimension of the DDA but there should also be some results after the debates in the Committee.  Some guidance on the issue of process was required  to ensure that the negotiations appropriately reflected the objective of sustainable development.  She suggested discussing issues such as market access, agriculture and services and delivering the results of the discussions in the Committee to the respective negotiating group. 
&& The Chairman noted that the issue of process had been debated at length and urged Members to move on to a substantive discussion.  He also recognized that Kenya had a valid point regarding discussion on trade facilitation.
&& The representative of Egypt said that putting a new topic on the table may help the Committee to identify an innovative way to structure the debate under paragraph 51.  He considered that any topic that was discussed in the WTO had an impact on development and as such an impact on sustainable development.
&& The representative of Venezuela read out the mandate in paragraph 51 and expressed concern that the debate in the Committee would be diverted to issues that were not related with paragraph 51.   
&& The delegate of Canada supported Egypt's proposal and noted that the issue of trade facilitation should be handled in a manner similar to all other issues that had been discussed in the past.
&& The representative of Trinidad and Tobago was of the view that both the issues of trade facilitation and trade and environment merited discussions in the Committee as well as the other issues mentioned by the representative of Kenya.  The representative said such discussion should be results oriented and focus on the developmental aspect of each of the topics discussed.
&& The representative of the European Communities supported the idea of having a presentation on the issue of trade facilitation, and returning to some of the issues that had been already discussed.  He noted that the issue of trade facilitation had been discussed in the WTO for some time already, although not in a negotiating format, and was certain that the Secretariat would be able to summarize some of the points that had been made in those discussions until now and provide insight on the relevant aspects of the upcoming negotiations.  He also agreed with Venezuela that there should be frequent contacts between this Committee and the Committee on Trade and Environment so that each was aware of the progress made in discharging the mandate given by paragraph 51.
&& The representative of Zimbabwe noted that her concerns had been well articulated by Venezuela and that process was an important issue.  Otherwise, she said future discussions might run into problems. She was also pleased to hear that consultations with the Committee on Trade and Environment were continuing. 
&& The representative of Venezuela explained that his delegation sought to ensure that the Committee on Trade and Environment and the CTD worked together step by step to fulfil the mandate provided in paragraph 51.  He also informed the Committee that recent consultations had been held in Geneva in the Committee on Trade and Environment.  The issue discussed in the consultations was the implementation of paragraph 51.  He noted that the consultations had proved to be very useful and said it was agreed to propose to the Committee on Trade and Environment to hold a second seminar to identify the development aspects linked to environment.  Venezuela opposed the discussion of trade facilitation under paragraph 51 until such time that some justification was provided in support of the suggestion.  The Venezuelan delegate also made reference to the Millennium Summit and the Johannesburg Summit where Heads of State identified in a very precise manner the relationship between trade and environment and sustainable development.  He suggested that any seminars or discussions held in the Committee should fall in line with what was said by the Heads of State at the above mentioned Summits.  He also proposed to have a joint meeting between the Committee on Trade and Environment and the CTD to unify criteria and to narrow down an approach in the different perceptions on the issue of paragraph 51.
&& The representative of Cuba was of the view that all WTO issues and subjects were linked to development.  The Committee should act as an umbrella to guarantee that the development dimension was present in each of the negotiations.  Although sustainable development was linked to the issue of the relation between trade and environment and development, she saw no obstacle in also discussing other issues that were currently being negotiated in the WTO.
&& The representative of Venezuela clarified that he was not opposing that the Committee discuss the issue of development.  However, the mandate under paragraph 51 directed the Committee to focus its discussions on issues contained in paragraph 51 and not other issues also related to development.  In his view, paragraph 51 was about paying special attention to the negotiations on trade and environment and trade and development so as to address sustainable development in both negotiations.  
&& The Chairman offered to consult privately with the delegation of Venezuela on this issue to better understand its concerns.
&& The Secretariat suggested to hold consultations among interested delegation on how to continue the process under paragraph 51. 
&& The representative of the United States said consultations would be helpful to identify the next project that the Committee should undertake to advance work under paragraph 51, including Venezuela's proposal, but that work should not focus only on environmental issues.  Rather, the Committee should continue to look at how the development dimension is being taken into account in each of the different negotiating groups.  This could include trade facilitation as suggested by Egypt and encourage Venezuela and other delegations to come up with positive ways to continue to examine the link between trade and environment and sustainable development without duplicating the work that was being done in the Committee on Trade and Environment.
&& The representative of the European Communities informed the Committee that in the context of the Committee on Trade and Environment's work on paragraph 51, the European Communities had proposed holding a seminar to discuss the environmental aspects of sustainable development.  This would be a way of enriching and bringing to the table ideas and information relevant to that Committee's work under paragraph 51.  This proposal was still under discussion at this time and it was hoped that Members would be able to agree.  He said it may be a good idea to widen the scope of the seminar to include also the developmental side of sustainable development, but any possible request on this matter would have to be considered in due course.  He also noted that although the Committee and the Committee on Trade and Environment had elected different paths to discharge their mandate under paragraph 51, the lines of communication should remain open and coordination was necessary between the two bodies with the possibility of maybe holding a joint event on this issue in the future.
&& The representative of Mauritius commended the Secretariat for its neutral and practical approach on this issue.  He also noted that this issue may have been included in the agenda of the work of the Committee but it would seem that different Members had different understandings of what was involved and that this may be the source of the current problems.  These problems should be ironed out in the consultations.  There seemed to be a consensus that the Committee could do work on the links between development and the environment but said there was no consensus on what other issues could be looked at under paragraph 51.  He understood the Committee to serve as a forum for exchanging information and ideas on sustainable development in all areas of the negotiations which would later be taken up to the bodies where the different negotiations were taking place.  In his view, the Committee was not a negotiating forum, but it could discuss all of the issues that were in the negotiations in the context of development.
&& The representative of Venezuela supported the idea for informal consultations and requested to include in the agenda of those consultations an item on the scope of the mandate under paragraph 51. 
&& The Chairman noted that there seemed to be consensus to hold the proposed informal consultations as soon as possible.  He also mentioned that it was not his intention to hold up the work of the Committee and therefore requested Venezuela to clarify its position on whether trade facilitation could be discussed in a future meeting of the Committee.
&& The representative of Venezuela replied that it was not Venezuela's position that only environment and no other subjects could be discussed in the context of paragraph 51.  However, he believed that it was better to wait until after the consultation before agreeing to any new issues being discussed. 
&& The delegate of Kenya supported having informal consultations and noted that she read the mandate in paragraph 51 to mean that the Committee should look at the developmental aspects of the whole of the negotiations and not just environment.
&& The representative of Cuba also supported the holding of negotiations on this issue and agreed with Kenya on its interpretation of the mandate in paragraph 51. 
&& The Chairman proposed for a decision by the Committee that informal consultations on the Committee's work under paragraph 51 be held as soon as possible and requested those Members interested in participating in the consultations to make this interest known to the Secretariat.
It was so decided. 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman recalled that this was a standing item on the agenda of the Committee and  a suggestion had been made to remove it from the agenda because of lack of discussion at previous meetings. However, this suggestion was not accepted.  He then asked if any delegation was prepared to take the floor and to suggest ideas on how to proceed with work under this agenda item.
&& The delegate of Tunisia suggested inviting the Secretariat of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) to brief the Committee on the latest developments in the preparation of the second phase of the World Summit of the Information Society that will take place in Tunisia in 2005.
&& The representative of the United States welcomed the proposal and noted that the invitation to speak should be narrowed to developments related to the role of electronic commerce in development.  In other words, elements of the work of the World Summit of the Information Society related to development and trade.
&& The Chairman proposed that the Committee decide to invite the Secretariat of the ITU to brief the Committee on the latest developments in the preparation of the second phase of the World Summit of the Information Society that will take place in Tunisia in 2005.
It was so decided.
GRADUATION OF THE MALDIVES FROM LDC STATUS (WT/COMTD/W/128)
&& The Chairman recalled that this item was on the agenda of the previous meeting of the Committee.  It was agreed that the Chairman was to hold informal consultations on how to proceed with this issue.  Such consultations were held in July.  In those consultations, several delegations stressed the importance of ensuring a smooth transition to developing country status for the Maldives.  Some delegations also had questions concerning the decision-making process at ECOSOC and about the timing for an eventual approval by the General Assembly of the United Nations.  Others were concerned about which special and differential treatment provisions applied to the Maldives and other LDCs and how graduated countries would be affected by the loss of entitlement to such provisions.  The Chairman had requested the Secretariat to prepare a non-paper of all special and differential treatment provisions now in force for LDCs including provisions in the WTO Agreements, decisions taken either at the General Council or Committee level since the entry into force of the WTO on 1 January 1995 and all decisions concerning LDCs taken at past Ministerial Conferences.  The Secretariat was also asked to come up with an explanatory note on how ECOSOC arrives at its decision to graduate an LDC to developing country status.  
&& The Chairman noted that it had been foreseen that a representative from the Maldives would be present at the meeting, but unfortunately it had not been possible for the representative to make the trip to Geneva.  Therefore, he proposed to have the discussion under this item at a future meeting of the Committee. 
&& The representative of Canada agreed with the Chairman's proposal.
&& The representative of the United States said she was happy to go along with the proposal to postpone this discussion.  In general, she also thought it would be useful to obtain more information on the trade policies of the affected countries to asses the benefits that would be lost and probably come up with an action plan for transition.   
&& The representative of Paraguay suggested that the information papers prepared by the Secretariat be circulated as official documents of the Committee.
&& The Chairman proposed to circulate the paper on special and differential treatment provisions for LDCs and the background note on ECOSOC's graduation process and to revert back to this item at the next meeting of the Committee.
It was so decided. 
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman noted that no items had been raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.

__________


WT/COMTD/M/50 Page  PAGE 34



	WT/COMTD/M/50 	Page  PAGE 35













