WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/85
10 September 2012


(12-4821)


Committee on Trade and Development
Eighty-Fifth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 16 JULY 2012

Chairman: H.E. Dr. Anthony Mothae Maruping (Lesotho)


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037364" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC335037364 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037365" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC335037365 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc335037366" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc335037366 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc335037367" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc335037367 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037368" C.	report of the 46th session of the joint advisory group on the international trade centre unctad/wto (itc/ag(xlvi)/248)	 PAGEREF _TOC335037368 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037369" D.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC335037369 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc335037370" (i)	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training (1 January to 31 December 2011) (WT/COMTD/W/186)	 PAGEREF _Toc335037370 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc335037371" (ii)	Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2011 (WT/COMTD/W/187)	 PAGEREF _Toc335037371 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037372" E.	trade and development - work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (WT/MIN(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC335037372 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037373" -	work under the mc8 mandate: proposal to update s&d paper - communication from cuba and ecuador (wt/comtd/w/188 and wt/comtd/w/188/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC335037373 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037374" F.	electronic commerce - decision of 17 december 2011 (WT/L/843)	 PAGEREF _TOC335037374 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037375" -	terms of reference for "workshop on e-commerce, development and smes" - communication from cuba and ecuador (wt/comtd/w/189)	 PAGEREF _TOC335037375 \H 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037376" G.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC335037376 \H 16
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037377" -	gulf cooperation council (gcc) notification of customs union – communication from china, egypt and india (wt/comtd/w/175)	 PAGEREF _TOC335037377 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037378" -	notification of the agreement on trade in goods between the association of southeast asian nations (asean) and korea	 PAGEREF _TOC335037378 \H 18
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037379" -	notification of the comprehensive economic partnership agreement between india and korea (goods)	 PAGEREF _TOC335037379 \H 18
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037380" -	generalized system of preferences - notification by the united states (wt/comtd/n/1/add.8)	 PAGEREF _TOC335037380 \H 19
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037381" H.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC335037381 \H 21
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037382" I.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC335037382 \H 21
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC335037383" J.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC335037383 \H 22

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 85th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3977 circulated on 6 July 2012.  He said that he wanted to add a matter under "Other Business" concerning the reduction of documentation costs in the CTD. 
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations (IGOs) on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that these organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed. 
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record.  He informed the Committee that, further to OAPEC's initial request in 2005, the organization had submitted another request, dated 5 July 2012, for observer status in the CTD. 
He went on to say that he was aware that the Chair of the General Council had been holding informal consultations on issues relating to requests for observer status in the WTO.  That being the case, some Members were of the view that the CTD should undertake work to resolve issues relating to requests for observer status in the Committee.  Therefore, at the last formal CTD meeting, the Committee had been informed that he would hold informal consultations in this regard.  On 27 June 2012, he had convened an informal open-ended CTD meeting, at which one of the issues for discussion concerned requests for observer status in the CTD.  He noted, however, that no dialogue had taken place on this matter between Members at the informal open-ended meeting.  Only Egypt had taken the floor to indicate that the position of the Arab Group remained unchanged.  He expressed his hope that it would soon be possible for Members to find convergence on a way forward for the CTD.  He encouraged Members to consult amongst themselves in this regard.  In opening the floor, he inquired whether there were any developments on this matter that Members wished to share, or whether there were any changes in Members' positions with regard to the requests for observer status from the organizations in question.  
&& The representative of Egypt said that the CTD's rules of procedure allowed it to take decisions concerning requests for permanent observer status by IGOs.  This was the Arab Group's position.  He requested the Chairman to continue holding informal consultations on this matter.
&& The Chairman invited the Committee to take note of the intervention by Egypt.  He also proposed that the Committee revert to this matter at its next meeting. 
It was so agreed.    
REPORT OF THE 46TH SESSION OF THE JOINT ADVISORY GROUP ON THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE CENTRE UNCTAD/WTO (ITC/AG(XLVI)/248)
&& The Chairman said that the report of the 46th Session of the Joint Advisory Group (JAG) on the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC) was contained in ITC document ITC/AG(XLVI)/248.  He welcomed Ambassador Francisco Pírez Gordillo of Uruguay, the Chairman of the 46th Session of the JAG, and Ms. Patricia Francis, the Executive Director of the ITC.  He invited Ambassador Pírez Gordillo to introduce the report.
&& The Chairman of the JAG said that the Group had held its 46th Session on 21 and 22 May 2012.  The meeting was convened to discuss the ITC's Annual Report for 2011 and the Strategic Plan for 2012-2015.  Government representatives had also announced their voluntary contributions to the ITC's trust fund, and had participated in the general discussion on the ITC's activities and the future of the organization.   
He went on to say that the Director-General of WTO and the Secretary General of UNCTAD had in their opening statements reiterated the importance of the ITC's work in supporting the private sector in least-developed countries (LDCs).  They had confirmed their endorsement of the ITC's new Strategic Plan and Corporate Logframe.  The Director-General of the WTO had identified four priorities for the ITC, which were trade facilitation, Aid for Trade and global and regional value chains, issues concerning LDCs, and regional integration.  The Director-General had commended the ITC for its efforts to embed results-based management (RBM) and had encouraged the organization to continue to deliver value for money.  The Secretary General of UNCTAD had urged donors to provide support to ensure that the ITC could continue to develop projects that were significant in scale and contributed to achieving sustained inclusive growth to develop the real economy. 
In her update of the ITC's activities, the Executive Director of the ITC had informed the JAG that mainstreaming inclusiveness and sustainability had remained a key focus area for the ITC in 2011.  The ITC's Women and Trade programme was acting as a catalyst to generate opportunities for businesswomen in developing countries.  With the help of six pilot countries, the ITC had developed a benchmarking scheme to strengthen trade promotion organizations.  In 2011, the ITC had exceeded its delivery target of US$44 million.  The final delivery was US$47.8 million, as the large programmes launched in 2008 and 2009 reached their peak.  The ITC would require additional support of at least US$14 million in 2012 and 2013 to replenish funding for large projects.  The Executive Director had also noted that the allocation to LDCs, landlocked developing countries (LLDCs), small island developing states (SIDS) and sub-Saharan Africa in the last biennium had grown faster than overall delivery, making up 55 per cent of project allocation and 78 per cent of country-specific or region‑specific project allocation.  The Deputy Executive Director of the ITC had then given an overview of the roadmap for the progressive implementation of the ITC's new corporate strategy.  The Deputy Executive Director had stressed that the Strategic Plan for 2012-2015, which included the ITC's new Corporate Logframe, engaged the organization in a significant leap forward to meet the highest standards of stakeholder expectations for RBM.
The Group had broadly welcomed the Annual Report and the fact that 2011 had seen more technical assistance than ever before.  The ITC's role in Aid for Trade was recognized.  The Strategic Plan for 2012-2015 and the new Strategic Framework were endorsed, with particular support for the ITC's commitment to move towards socio-economic impact measurement.  Efforts with regard to transparency and communication were acknowledged as integral parts of the ITC's contribution to better governance of the organization.  Support was expressed for the ITC's initiatives to promote regional integration and intraregional trade.  The strong emphasis on non-tariff measures and on developing trade intelligence for LDCs, LLDCs and sub-Saharan African countries was appreciated.  Many beneficiary countries expressed their thanks to the donor community for their continuing support in difficult economic times.  Some delegates from other developing countries expressed the hope that donors would also consider their countries' needs for support from the ITC. 
Delegations expressed their wish to see the ITC further expand its activities in the field of the green economy - and more generally in the promotion of an inclusive and sustainable model of development, focusing on poverty reduction and the empowerment of women and youth.  Discussion confirmed the strategic importance of large programmes for the sustainability of the ITC's impact‑oriented strategy.  There was a wide call for renewed support from donors for the regeneration of the ITC's large-scale project pipeline.  Finally, on behalf of the Group, he thanked the Governments of Australia, Canada, China, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Norway and Switzerland for their expressions of financial support to the organization. 
&& The representative of the European Union said that the ITC was fundamentally a focal point within the UN system for trade-related technical assistance.  Its mission was to focus on small businesses and their capacity to trade.  The organization was also building bridges between the private sector and policy makers.  These fundamental objectives were of high importance to the EU as well, as set out in the EU's recent Communication on Trade, Growth and Development.  The priority areas in the ITC's Strategic Plan for 2012-2015 were areas that the EU supported and considered important, particularly in light of the changing global economic landscape and its impact on trade, investment and development policies.  He noted that the ITC had been asked to prioritize its work in the most vulnerable countries.  His delegation believed that this was the right strategy.  Development efforts needed to increasingly focus on the countries most in need and where efforts would yield the biggest impact, notably with a view to attaining the Millennium Development Goals.  The EU followed a similar approach in trade and development, as well as in its development policies. 
He said that the EU and its member States were important contributors to the ITC's project and programme budget.  The EU was the lead donor in the launch of the ITC's new Market Access Map, and was contributing to the ITC's Standards Map.  The EU was also in discussion with the ITC concerning contributions to other projects, for example projects targeted at small traders in developing countries.  Through its increasing cooperation with the ITC, the EU was demonstrating its support for the ITC's objectives and ambitions. 
The representative of Canada said that her delegation continued to support the ITC's efforts in assisting small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) from developing countries gain access to regional and global markets.  She noted that Canada was a major ITC donor, and pointed to the strong progress in Canadian-funded ITC programming in three African regional economic communities and in five Arab countries.  She congratulated the ITC and the beneficiaries for making these programmes a success.  She also welcomed the ITC's on-going efforts in RBM, through which the institution was positioning itself to demonstrate good practice in showing results in Aid for Trade.  
&& The Committee took note of the report of the 46th Session of the JAG and forwarded it to the General Council for adoption.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training (1 January to 31 December 2011) (WT/COMTD/W/186)
Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2011 (WT/COMTD/W/187)
&& The Chairman said that there were two reports for consideration under this agenda item, namely the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training (TA Report) for 2011 - circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/186 - and the Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2011 - circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/187.  He invited the representatives of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) to introduce the reports.
&& The Director of the ITTC said that she would introduce the TA Report and would also take the opportunity to repeat some of the points that she had made at the informal open-ended CTD meeting of 27 June 2012.  The Audit Report would subsequently be introduced by the Head of the ITTC's Monitoring and Evaluation. 
She observed that 2011 had been a year of challenges.  The incoming funds at the start of the year had been insufficient to cover all the expenses related to the full implementation of the Biennial Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan) for 2010 and 2011.  The overall number of activities implemented decreased by a quarter, as a large number of activities had to be cancelled or postponed.  Turning to an overview of the activities implemented in 2011, she said that the Progressive Learning Strategy (PLS) had been developed further.  The complementary introduction of the RBM concept had enabled the ITTC to be in a position to report on outputs.  The e-learning programme had been revamped, with the incorporation of the PLS.  The ITTC had worked closely with regional secretariats and other partners to deliver regional activities, and had continued to deliver outreach programmes for Parliamentarians and others, as laid out in the TA Plan.  There was a further consolidation and strengthening of the internship programmes.  Ten interns had participated in the Netherlands Trainee Programme (NTP), seven had participated in the WTO Regional Coordinator Internship Programme (RCIP) and twelve had participated in the Mission Intern Programme (MIP). 
The delivery of national activities had experienced a 25 per cent decrease, and regional events were reduced by 21 per cent.  Late disbursements of extra budgetary contributions and preparations for the Ministerial Conference at the end of 2011 contributed to these decreases, particularly in the last quarter of the year.  A total of 142 national activities and 71 regional activities were implemented in 2011. An additional 53 global activities, which included the Geneva-based activities, had been organized. A total of 266 activities had therefore been held. Secretariat staff had also participated in 74 conferences.  This led to a total of 340 activities funded from the regular budget and from the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (GTF).  
She went on to say that the insufficient funds at the end of 2011 had had an impact on the design of the 2012-2013 TA Plan.  In particular, based on the lessons learned in 2011, the ITTC had taken the decision to postpone the implementation of activities funded from the GTF to the second quarter of 2012, thereby allowing time for 2012 contributions to come in.  The first quarter of 2012 had therefore focused on national activities funded from the regular budget.  From January to June 2012, 19 regional workshops and 65 national activities were held.  A mid-term review of the Academic Programme was carried out, and the WTO Chairs annual meeting was held in June.  The WTO Chairs meeting had identified the need to strengthen follow-up processes and reporting, and to put more emphasis on assessing Chair outputs.  The Secretariat had been requested to enhance support and guidance to the Chairs.  The need for enhancing the links between policymakers and the universities receiving WTO support had been identified.  Discussion had also taken place on ensuring the sustainability of the WTO Chairs Programme. 
Turning to e-learning, she said that there were currently 3,512 participants registered, of which 769 had successfully completed their training.  With regard to the internship programmes, she informed the Committee that there were presently 46 interns, 17 of which were being funded by the NTP, five by the RCIP and 20 by the MIP.  There were an additional four interns funded by China's LDC accession programme.  She said that the numbers had increased relative to the previous year due to increased financial support for the internship programmes.  She also indicated that the Secretariat had participated in 36 conferences thus far in 2012.  A total of 51 regional activities and 79 national activities were planned for 2012.  The Secretariat was expected to participate in about 40 conferences by the end of the year, which was a significant reduction relative to the 74 conferences attended in 2011. 
She said that the GTF represented about 80 per cent of the total budget for the WTO's technical assistance activities.  The declines in contributions over a number of years were now beginning to show.  The Secretariat had used up its buffer and the lack of predictability over when to expect contributions made planning very difficult.  Presently, the Secretariat had about 77 per cent of the total funds required to implement all the planned GTF-funded activities for 2012.  This amount was in large part obtained from the resources carried forward from 2011.  As of the end of June 2012, about CHF4.6 million had been received from seven Members.  Pledges of a further CHF4 million had been made by two Members.  To mitigate the situation, the Secretariat was implementing a number of measures.  For example, there was an increasing focus on partnerships.  The intention was to leverage resources while building on synergies.  Cost saving measures that would not compromise on quality were being explored.  E-learning was being repositioned and further thought was being given to the sequencing and context of technical assistance.  She observed that there was additionally a need for rationalizing and reprioritizing technical assistance.  In this regard, the ITTC intended to hold consultative meetings with Members to review the activities planned for 2013.  She also invited emerging economies not already contributing to the GTF to consider doing so. 
Finally, she said that she wished to share information on the implementation of RBM.  She informed the Committee that the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit (TCAU) had been merged with the ITTC and was carrying out a monitoring and evaluation function.  The ITTC had defined its outputs, had reviewed the tools to capture data for monitoring and evaluation, and was working to develop a monitoring and evaluation system.  On the evaluation of possible outcomes, the ITTC had developed a pilot programme which was to be implemented in three or four countries.
&& The Head of the ITTC's Monitoring and Evaluation said that the Audit Report focused on the main components of the logical framework presented to Members as part of the TA Plan for 2012 and 2013.  It dealt with output before addressing the immediate and longer term outcome of the activities for beneficiary countries.  With regard to the WTO's technical assistance output, the statistics on the various training methods used in the activities showed marginal evolutions towards more interactivity in the activities relative to 2010.  In light of reduced resources available for technical assistance, efforts were being made to improve the coordination, coherence and management of resources.  He said that the immediate outcome of a technical assistance activity was traditionally measured through the self-evaluation presented by the trainers in a back-to-office report (BTOR).  Most such reports simply presented the views of the participants on the activity, even when objective indicators such as results of quizzes or exercises were available.  The Secretariat had undertaken to improve this as part of its move to RBM.  As in previous years, an initial analysis of the longer term outcome of technical assistance in a limited number of countries showed some very positive effects, in particular with regard to compliance with WTO obligations.  The introduction of RBM in 2012 would lead to more solid evidence in this area.
In 2011, the TCAU had reviewed the follow-up of the recommendations contained in BTORs and had performed an ex-post evaluation of the Geneva Weeks for non-resident Members and Observers.  The TCAU had recommended the implementation of a formal mechanism to follow up on BTOR recommendations.  With regard to Geneva Weeks, he said that these had been reasonably successful.  The evaluation of the most recent Geneva Week indicated that the modifications introduced had been very well received by participants.  	
&& The representative of the European Union emphasized the importance of the WTO's technical assistance activities for developing countries.  The introduction of RBM was a welcome development which would allow a thorough monitoring of each programme.  Noting the current financial situation, he said that the EU was a longstanding donor to the GTF.  His delegation was in discussion with the WTO about the launch of a new contribution agreement for the 2012-2013 period.  The EU's contributions were an indication of its satisfaction with the WTO's technical assistance activities and with the improvements in the TA Plan that had been introduced following consultations with stakeholders.
The representative of Australia expressed support for the WTO's technical assistance activities.  He welcomed the early signs of progress in the implementation of more effective RBM of the ITTC's activities and encouraged the ITTC to continue to brief Members on further progress.  He noted that financial constraints were presenting a challenge to the ITTC in the delivery of technical assistance.  In this light, Australia had recently committed AUD6 million over the coming three years to the GTF.  Noting that the prioritization of activities was one approach that the ITTC was taking in response to the financial situation, he underlined the importance of activities being driven by needs and beneficiary demand.  He encouraged the ITTC to continue its outreach to those Members - particularly non-resident Members - that faced challenges in this regard.
&& The representative of Ecuador expressed appreciation for the technical assistance that his country had received from the WTO.  He called on donors to continue to support the WTO's technical assistance activities.  
The representative of Bangladesh welcomed e-learning and the PLS.  He also noted the introduction of RBM and hoped that it would provide more value for money.  He said that LDCs had a serious dearth of capacity in multiple sectors.  While the internship programmes were proving useful for LDCs in building their capacity, he indicated that there was a need for a greater intake of interns.  In addition, the selection criteria were sometimes burdensome for candidates from LDCs.  He expressed appreciation for the regional approach and also highlighted the importance of facilitating the participation of LDCs in as many technical assistance activities as possible.
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation continued to support the GTF through an annual contribution of C$500,000.  He regretted that the full amount necessary to implement the TA Plan for 2012 and 2013 was not yet available and welcomed the ITTC's efforts at cost saving.  His delegation supported the initiative to incorporate the TCAU into the ITTC as an in-house monitoring and evaluation unit.  It was hoped that this would contribute to on-going improvements in the roll-out of robust RBM within the ITTC.  While much work remained to be done on RBM, early signs were encouraging.  He urged the ITTC Director to ensure that a focus on impacts remained a priority.
The representative of Nigeria said that technical assistance was a core element of the development dimension of the multilateral trading system.  Noting the decline in contributions to the GTF, he urged donors to continue to fund the WTO's technical assistance activities. 
&& The representative of Cuba said that her country had greatly benefitted from the WTO's technical assistance activities, including the e-learning courses, the national activities and the regional activities.  She encouraged the ITTC to continue its useful work. 
The representative of Iran expressed appreciation for the technical assistance that had been provided to his country.  He hoped that the collaboration with the ITTC would continue. 
&& The Director of the ITTC thanked Members for their support for the ITTC's work.     
&& The Committee took note of the two reports and of all interventions.
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the link between trade and development and called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work.  The CTD had been directed to report the results of its work under the MC8 mandate to Ministers at the Ninth Session. 
He went on to say that in the past few months he had been consulting informally with delegations in various formats in order to hear views and suggestions on what specifically could be done by the CTD under the MC8 mandate.  Most recently, the matter had been discussed at the 27 June 2012 informal open-ended CTD meeting.  At that meeting, he had informed the membership of two possible areas in which there had appeared to be some convergence among those delegations present in his earlier small-group consultations.  The first area of work was in relation to the CTD's terms of reference, contained in document WT/L/46.  In particular, the idea that had been suggested was to look at how the Committee could address aspects of trade and development in the different paragraphs of the terms of reference.  The second suggested area of work was in the sharing of country experiences on trade and development, potentially from both developed and developing country Members.  However, he recalled that he had also indicated at the informal open-ended meeting that it was important to concretize the nature of the work to be undertaken by the CTD in these two areas.  Furthermore, he had observed that the scope of the linkage between trade and development was much broader than just these two areas.   
In light of the need to move the discussion on the MC8 mandate decisively forward, he recalled that he had sent a fax to Members on 14 June 2012, inviting the submission of written proposals on concrete areas of work for the CTD.  He said that, in his view, written proposals would be more conducive to focused discussion, and would also ensure a Member-driven process.  One written proposal had since been circulated as a formal CTD document.  This was a proposal from Cuba and Ecuador, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/188 and WT/COMTD/W/188/Add.1.  His understanding was that the proposal was made in relation to paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference.  It called for an update to a Secretariat document on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions.  A preliminary discussion on the proposal, which was listed as a sub-item for discussion under the present agenda item, had taken place at the 27 June 2012 informal open-ended meeting.  He added that Egypt had requested the Secretariat to forward to Members the statement it had made on behalf of the African and Arab Groups in relation to the work that the CTD could undertake under the MC8 mandate.  This statement was faxed to Members on 18 June 2012.  In addition, he informed Members that a non-paper by the African Group had been placed in the meeting room at the request of Egypt. 
He said that he once again wished to invite Members to consider submitting written proposals on possible areas of work for the CTD under the MC8 mandate.  For his part, he intended to continue his informal consultations so that Members could identify and agree to some concrete areas of work that could be started in the CTD.  He emphasized that starting work in some areas under the MC8 mandate would not prevent the Committee from subsequently bringing in other areas of work, if Members so wished.  He encouraged Members to begin concrete work in the CTD as soon as possible, so that there would be enough time to make progress before the Committee reported to the Ninth Ministerial Conference.  He opened the floor for any interventions on the MC8 mandate, after which he indicated that the Committee would look specifically at the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador.
&& The representative of Egypt, in introducing the non-paper by the African Group, explained that the non-paper had its roots in previous communications and statements by the African and Arab Groups.  He emphasized that the non-paper was work in progress, and that it could be refined and modified to accommodate the views of Members.  Excerpts from the Elements for Political Guidance, which formed part of the concluding statement of the Chairman of MC8, were included in the non‑paper.  The proposals in the non-paper were presented in tabular form, so that each proposal could be related to elements of the CTD's mandate.  The table also allowed the African Group to elaborate on each of the proposals, which were grouped into six areas. 
He said that the first paragraph of the CTD's terms of reference required the Committee to serve as a focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO, and its relationship to development-related activities in other multilateral agencies.  The second paragraph of the terms of reference called on the CTD to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system and to consider measures and initiatives to assist developing country Members, and in particular the least-developed country Members, in the expansion of their trade and investment opportunities, including support for their measures of trade liberalization.  The first two areas of the non-paper were concerned with these elements of the CTD's terms of reference.  In particular, it was firstly proposed that analytical papers be prepared by the Secretariat in collaboration with UNCTAD and other development-oriented intergovernmental institutions on the participation of developing and least-developed countries in the multilateral trading system.  As part of the second area, the non-paper proposed that consolidated reports be prepared on all development-related issues and development work undertaken by other WTO bodies.
The third area of the non-paper contained a proposal relating to a development review of S&D provisions, including a report on the utilization of S&D provisions.  Proposals were also made concerning the preparation of follow-up reports on the implementation of Decisions in favour of LDCs, as well as the preparation of reports to the General Council for appropriate action.  He explained that these proposals were linked to the third paragraph of the CTD's terms of reference, which called on the CTD to review periodically, in consultation as appropriate with the relevant bodies of the WTO, the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and in particular least‑developed country Members, and report to the General Council for appropriate action.  Turning to the fourth area of the non-paper, he said that the proposal was for a consideration of the systemic and specific issues related to the application and use of the Enabling Clause.  This proposal was related to the fourth paragraph of the CTD's terms of reference, requiring the Committee to consider any questions which may arise with regard to either the application or the use of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and to report to the General Council for appropriate action. 
Turning to the fifth area of the non-paper, he focused his intervention on a proposal relating to regional trade agreements (RTAs).  The proposal, which had a link to the CTD's role in implementing the 2006 General Council Decision on the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for RTAs, was for a report to be prepared on cross-cutting elements, trends and practices in RTAs among developing and least developed Members.  Finally, he said that the sixth area of the non-paper was concerned with a proposal for the preparation of a special report on accessions.  It was envisaged that this report would be prepared on the basis of information already available in the reports proposed in relation to the second and third areas of the non-paper.  In closing, he indicated that the African Group was ready to engage constructively with Members on the proposals in the non-paper.
&& The representative of the European Union said that the key elements of the MC8 mandate were that the CTD must be the focal point on trade and development in the WTO, and that the Committee needed to carry out focused work in line with its mandate.  The EU believed that an important role of the CTD was to further explore the positive link between trade and development.  Since the CTD's terms of reference were very broad, and since a mandate had been given to the CTD to carry out focused work, the EU was of the view that the Committee should focus on a limited number of clearly identified items.  Such a realistic and pragmatic approach would be conducive to producing concrete results, thus strengthening the CTD's added value.  This approach would also be conducive to boosting trust and confidence among Members in the CTD.  His delegation wished to hear from Members on this proposed approach.  He added that his delegation had already made proposals on concrete areas of work in past meetings and stood ready to put these ideas in writing, as per the request by the Chairman.  He also indicated that his delegation would study the proposals that had been made by other Members, and would provide reactions.  
&& The representative of India said that his delegation's comments on the African Group's non‑paper would be preliminary, since the non-paper had just been circulated.  He observed that the non‑paper highlighted six useful elements that could guide the CTD's work on trade and development.  The proposals were comprehensive, and could address the issues relating to the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system.  
&& The representative of Nigeria said that the elements of the African Group's non-paper were on the whole self-explanatory.  He highlighted in particular the importance of the second, third and fifth areas.  He noted that there might be a need for further elaboration of some of the proposals, for example in the context of their relationship with the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador which was listed as a sub-item under the present agenda item.  He suggested that the non-paper could form the basis of discussions in the CTD on work with respect to the Committee's terms of reference.  
&& The representative of Kenya said that the non-paper by the African Group was complementary to the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador which was listed as a sub-item under the present agenda item.  He hoped that Members could build on the two submissions. 
&& The representative of Cuba said that the African Group's non-paper merited further analysis and was a good starting point for discussions on the future work of the CTD. 
&& The representative of China said that his delegation could only make preliminary comments on the African Group's non-paper at this stage, since the non-paper had just been circulated.  China's preliminary reaction was that the non-paper included many useful elements for the future work of the CTD.  China had touched upon some similar elements in previous CTD meetings, for example on the need to improve intra-consulting and reporting procedures.  He indicated that the African Group's non‑paper would be transmitted to his capital.
-	WORK UNDER THE MC8 MANDATE: PROPOSAL TO UPDATE S&D PAPER - COMMUNICATION FROM CUBA AND ECUADOR (WT/COMTD/W/188 AND WT/COMTD/W/188/ADD.1)
&& The representative of Ecuador recalled that his delegation had proposed at several informal consultations convened by the Chairman that the Committee resume its review of the implementation of S&D provisions.  The communication from Cuba and Ecuador, which took into account the MC8 mandate as well as the CTD's terms of reference, had been circulated in response to the Chairman's request for Members to submit written proposals on substantive work for the CTD.  His delegation believed that the proposal that had been submitted was concrete.  In particular, it called for an update to the Secretariat's 2001 paper on the implementation of S&D provisions, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/77/Rev.1.  The proposal was also pragmatic, to the extent that it had a factual basis in existing S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements.  Finally, the proposal was realistic. Consultations had demonstrated that it enjoyed the broad support of Members.  He indicated that the proposal was also in line with the CTD's role as the focal point for development-related work in the WTO.
&& The representative of Cuba said that her delegation had decided to co-sponsor the proposal under consideration, which had originally been made by Ecuador.  This was in light of the importance that her delegation attached to all questions relating to S&D.  She urged Members to consider the proposal favourably.  She believed that an update to the Secretariat paper would provide a complete and up-to-date picture of the situation with respect to S&D.  It would also provide direction for the future work of the CTD and contribute to the integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that the proposal under consideration was linked to the terms of reference of the CTD.  He noted that the proposal was similar to one of the proposals in the African Group non-paper, and that it would be desirable to avoid a duplication of efforts.  In this light, there was scope for the African Group to work with Cuba and Ecuador to see how the proposal could be fine-tuned.
&& The representative of Egypt, noting the intervention by Nigeria, said that the African Group had indeed seen the commonalities between the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador and one of the proposals in the non-paper.  The Group had, therefore, recognized the usefulness of coordinating with Cuba and Ecuador in order to refine the proposal.   
&& The representative of Australia said that the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador aimed to make a practical contribution to the CTD's work.  His delegation was ready to work with the proposal as circulated by these two delegations.  Australia hoped that Members could also agree to other practical proposals to follow through on the MC8 mandate.  
&& The representative of the United States welcomed the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador.  His delegation could support the proposal as circulated by these two delegations.  With regard to the African Group's non-paper, he said that a number of the proposals in the non-paper had already been discussed in the Chairman's informal consultations, and there had not been a consensus.  His delegation nevertheless looked forward to further constructive engagement with the African Group and with other Members on the MC8 mandate.    
&& The representative of Kenya said that the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador was pragmatic and realistic.  He noted the desirability of merging this proposal with the similar proposal by the African Group.  
&& The representative of India said that Ministers at MC8 had expressed the need to mainstream development issues into the architecture of the WTO.  They were aware that the WTO Agreements did not have the necessary flexibility to take into account the lack of human, institutional, resource and export capabilities of developing countries.  He believed that the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador was consistent with the mandate given to the CTD at MC8.  However, in view of the commonalities between this proposal and the African Group's proposal, he indicated that it would be desirable for these Members to work together on a single proposal.   
&& The representative of Argentina expressed support for the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador.  He said that he would transmit the non-paper by the African Group to his capital for further analysis.
&& The representative of Canada welcomed the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador and indicated that his delegation was prepared to work with the proposal as circulated by these two delegations.
&& The representative of Mexico expressed his delegation's support for the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador.
&& The representative of Brazil indicated that his delegation was supportive of the ideas contained in the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador.  He encouraged these delegations to work with the African Group in order to refine the proposal.  He also indicated that the non-paper by the African Group would be transmitted to his capital.        
&& The Chairman noted that Members had welcomed the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador, but had also pointed to the commonalities between this proposal and a proposal contained in the non-paper by the African Group.  He encouraged Cuba, Ecuador and the African Group to work together in this regard. He also noted that Members would need time to study the non-paper by the African Group.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE - DECISION OF 17 DECEMBER 2011 (WT/L/843)
&& The Chairman said that the CTD's discussion on electronic commerce (e-commerce) since the beginning of 2012 had been in relation to the 17 December 2011 Decision taken at MC8, which was contained in document WT/L/843.  He recalled that, at the informal open-ended CTD meeting that he had convened on 29 March 2012, Members had been provided the opportunity to discuss how the CTD could proceed on e-commerce on the basis of this Decision.  The discussion had continued at the 84th Session of the CTD on 11 April 2012.  At that meeting, it was noted that one suggestion that had been put forward was for a workshop on e-commerce to be held.  The delegations that had suggested holding a workshop were invited to come forward with a possible programme and structure.  
He went on to say that Cuba and Ecuador had subsequently submitted a written proposal for a workshop on e-commerce, development and SMEs, which was circulated in document JOB/DEV/16.  This proposal was considered at the informal open-ended CTD meeting held on 27 June 2012.  He recalled that, on the basis of the discussion that had taken place at that meeting, he had encouraged the proponents to fine-tune their proposal.  He wished to now inform Members that Cuba and Ecuador had circulated their proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/189.  This document was listed as a sub‑item for discussion under the present agenda item.  He also informed the Committee that he would be reporting to the General Council at its meeting on 25 July 2012 on what had transpired in the CTD in the area of e-commerce since the beginning of 2012.  His brief report would summarize the main elements of the discussions in the CTD meetings that had been held in 2012.  Having concluded his opening remarks, he opened the floor for any interventions on the 17 December 2011 Decision, after which he indicated that the Committee would look specifically at the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador.
&& The representative of the European Union said that his delegation remained a strong supporter of the reinvigoration of the Work Programme on E-Commerce.  The EU was ready to work on any proposal, especially proposals from those Members that were in favour of a strong agenda on e‑commerce at the WTO.  He welcomed the initiative from Cuba and Ecuador to hold a workshop on e-commerce, development and SMEs, and indicated that his delegation was ready to work with these delegations in order to make the workshop a successful event.  He added that, from the EU's perspective, it was important to discuss the necessary enabling policies for the development of e‑commerce in developing countries.
&& The representative of Switzerland expressed appreciation to Cuba and Ecuador for having addressed some of the concerns that his delegation had raised in earlier informal consultations on the proposal for a workshop on e-commerce, development and SMEs.  He said that discussions on e‑commerce could not be limited to the development aspects only.  Members needed to look at the broader picture.  A significant amount of work on e-commerce was being done in the WTO, notably in the Council for Trade in Services (CTS).  The Swiss contribution to the discussion, which related to SMEs, was contained in document S/C/W/345.  Switzerland was convinced that there could only be fruitful outcomes when the activities of the various bodies dealing with e-commerce were closely coordinated.  This was how his delegation understood the mandate from MC8.  In line with these comments, he proposed that a seminar on e-commerce be held jointly by the CTD, CTS and the Council for Trade in Goods (CTG).  He envisaged that the seminar could be coordinated by the Deputy Director-General responsible for e-commerce.  In conclusion, he said that Switzerland supported the idea of holding a seminar on e-commerce with special attention to SMEs as well as to the development dimension.  The details regarding the terms of reference for the seminar would need to be elaborated through further consultations.
&& The representative of Venezuela expressed support for the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador, which she believed was useful and relevant for analyzing the link between trade and development.  
&& The representative of Canada said that other WTO bodies besides the CTD were also working on e-commerce.  He mentioned in particular the CTS, which was looking at issues relating to SMEs.  In this light, he said that any formalized discussion in the context of the CTD had to focus on trade and development-related aspects.  His delegation felt that it would be useful to review what specific problems were being encountered by developing and least-developed countries, and where these countries had encountered difficulties in accessing funds to address the problems that they faced.  The mainstreaming aspect was important to keep in mind in that regard.  He also suggested that there could be merit in exploring how the Enhanced Integrated Framework and similar processes at the regional level might help affected Members to prioritize such issues in national and regional development strategies.  It was not fully clear how or whether the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador addressed these issues.
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation supported the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador.  He observed that Members needed to have an understanding of how e-commerce could help developing countries achieve growth and development.  The proposed workshop would be the opportunity to have such a discussion.
&& The representative of Nigeria acknowledged the relationship between e-commerce and development and welcomed the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador.  Noting that there were other WTO bodies besides the CTD that were working on e-commerce issues, he observed that it would be important to not duplicate work in fulfilling the terms of the 17 December 2011 Decision.     
-	terms of reference for "workshop on e-commerce, development and smes" - communication from cuba and ecuador (wt/comtd/w/189)
&& The representative of Cuba said that she had taken note of the interventions that had been made under the present agenda item.  She said that the proponents had circulated the proposal under consideration after consultations with several Members.  She believed that the proposal was well balanced, as it took into account Members' suggestions.  She indicated that the proponents would continue to work on the proposal and would welcome any further comments.
&& The representative of Ecuador said that Cuba and Ecuador had consulted with all interested Members on the proposal that was initially circulated in document JOB/DEV/16.  The proponents believed that the updated proposal circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/189 accurately reflected all the concerns and areas of interest that had been discussed with Members.  He said that he wished to provide a brief overview of some of the salient points relating to the proposal.
He began by noting that UNCTAD's 2010 Information Economy Report indicated that the scope for information and communication technologies (ICTs) to affect development and poverty had expanded in several respects.  There were many opportunities for these technologies to contribute positively to development.  The involvement of developing countries - and more particularly of poor people and communities - as consumers and producers of ICTs was also evolving.  In this environment, the report highlighted the importance of exploring all possibilities to boost the development impact of ICTs.  However, the report also mentioned that the opportunities provided by e-commerce had not yet had a major impact on small producers in low‑income countries.  Furthermore, it was highlighted that there was little evidence to show that producers in developing countries traded significant quantities of goods and services online.  In general, both business‑to‑business and business-to-consumer e-commerce had largely failed to deliver the considerable potential benefits that had earlier been predicted.  The overall picture was one of slow progress for e-commerce in terms of its benefits for small producers and micro-entrepreneurs.
He said that the 17 December 2011 Decision specified that the Work Programme on E‑Commerce would examine access to e-commerce by micro, small and medium sized enterprises (MSMEs), including small producers and suppliers.  Another objective was to facilitate access to e‑commerce by MSMEs, including small producers and suppliers, of developing countries and particularly of LDC Members.  Furthermore, the Decision called on Members to address the relationship between e-commerce and development in a focused and comprehensive manner and to monitor development-related issues including technical assistance and capacity building.  These and other aims of the Decision were highlighted in the first footnote of the proposal under consideration. 
With regard to the subject matter for the proposed workshop on e-commerce, development and SMEs, he said that two issues had been identified.  The first issue, which was of general interest, concerned access - and the facilitation of access - to e-commerce by SMEs.  The second issue, which was of a systemic nature, concerned e-commerce and development.  With regard to the first issue, it was proposed that three specific areas be addressed.  The three areas concerned the lack of awareness of opportunities generated by ICTs and e-commerce, the lack of information and knowledge on conducting e-commerce operations, and basic institutional and infrastructural requirements.  For the second issue, it was also suggested that three specific areas be addressed.  The three areas concerned the inadequate capacity of SMEs in developing countries to benefit from e-commerce, their lack of awareness of e-commerce applications that could improve their performance, and ensuring the free flow of the relevant technologies.  He noted that the second footnote in the proposal under consideration provided an example of how the issue of the free flow of technologies could be addressed, namely through a process of identification.
On the ways and means to address the issues, it was proposed that there could be a sharing of experiences and best practices, addressing both successful and unsuccessful policies and practices.  An analysis could similarly be undertaken of public support practices.  The creation of public goods - through the identification of common facilities such as an information database - was another way to address the issues, as was the provision of technical assistance.  With regard to the format of the workshop, three sectoral sessions were proposed, dealing respectively with international organizations, the private and research sectors, and the public sector.  He added that the session dealing with the private and research sectors distinguished between the industrial, agricultural and services sectors.  This had been done on the basis of comments received by Members.  He noted that it was important to learn about the experiences of SMEs in developing countries and LDCs engaging in these areas of trade.  He also indicated that the sessions aimed to maintain a balance in Members' participation in the workshop.  Specific dates for the workshop were also proposed.
He went on to say that the CTD's terms of reference specified, inter alia, that the Committee served as the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO.  The terms of reference also specified that the CTD was to consider measures and initiatives to assist developing country Members in the expansion of their trade and investment opportunities.  In this light, the CTD had the mandate to address the issue of e-commerce and its benefits.  Furthermore, the Work Programme on E-Commerce instructed the CTD to examine and report on the development implications of e-commerce, taking into account the economic, financial and development needs of developing countries.  He also referred once again to the Decision of 17 December 2011, and pointed out that the Decision specifically mentioned the role of the CTD.
In closing, he said that his intervention underscored the relevance and rationale of the proposal under consideration.  Without prejudging the merits of the e-commerce proposals made by Members in other WTO bodies, Cuba and Ecuador were of the view that these proposals contained technical elements that related solely to the work done within these bodies.  Furthermore, these proposals likely did not reflect all the facets of the financial, economic and development situations of developing country Members.  Cuba and Ecuador did not object in principle to a specific treatment of these proposals in the bodies to which they had been submitted.  However, the two delegations did not understand the reasons and arguments put forward by a few Members that sought to group together the needs of both developed countries and developing countries.  He stressed the importance of not undermining the mandate and authority of the CTD to address the development-related needs of developing countries.  Finally, he noted that the proposal under consideration was structured in such a way as to allow a considerable degree of flexibility in accommodating Members' interests and concerns regarding e-commerce.
&& The representative of the United States welcomed the proponents' work and the thinking that had gone into crafting the proposal.  He also expressed appreciation for the proponents' efforts to consult with Members in the lead-up to the present meeting.  The US was open to hearing ideas about ways to structure the workshop, including the possibility of a joint workshop as suggested by Switzerland.  His delegation was mindful of the mandate from MC8 for Members to identify areas of focused work, and wanted to see efforts come to fruition in the CTD.  However, the US had also continuously maintained that e-commerce was a cross-cutting issue with many dimensions, including services.  To that end, coordination and consultation with other bodies working on e-commerce had always been encouraged.
&& The representative of Brazil said that there were benefits to discussing e-commerce from a development perspective.  His delegation believed that the proposed workshop should be held under the auspices of the CTD.  It was well known that SMEs in developing countries - and particularly in LDCs - faced a vast array of constraints in gaining access to e-commerce.  Members needed to explore ways to assist SMEs to take advantage of the full potential of the internet to do business.
&& The representative of Nicaragua said that her delegation supported the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador.  She believed that the proposed workshop would be of benefit to SMEs in developing countries, particularly those with small and vulnerable economies.
&& The representative of Nigeria inquired whether the proponents would consider the possibility of having the proposed workshop organized jointly with the other WTO bodies dealing with e‑commerce.  He noted in particular the relevance of the work of the CTS. 
&& The representative of Argentina expressed appreciation to the proponents for having taken into account the suggestions of Members.  His delegation supported the proposed workshop, which had the potential to contribute to the growth and development of developing countries.
&& The representative of Australia said that the proposed workshop highlighted interesting issues and could make a positive contribution to the implementation of the Work Programme on E‑Commerce.  He went on to say that, in Australia's view, it was important to consider the discussions that had taken place in other WTO bodies, including the discussion in the CTS on SMEs and e‑commerce.  He recognized that the proposal under consideration was only a draft outline and would need to be refined further, including through the preparation of a more detailed annotated agenda.  He encouraged the proponents to continue to reflect on which aspects of the Work Programme on E‑Commerce related specifically to the CTD, and which related to other WTO bodies.  His delegation welcomed further engagement with Cuba and Ecuador in this regard.
&& The representative of China expressed support for the proposal under consideration.  He also expressed his delegation's hope that the proposed workshop would help SMEs in developing countries overcome their difficulties and challenges in e-commerce.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that her delegation supported the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador. Pakistan wanted the emphasis of the workshop to be on the development dimension and on the constraints and challenges faced by SMEs.
&& The representative of Kenya expressed support for the proposal by Cuba and Ecuador.  His delegation was particularly supportive of the focus on institutions and infrastructure in the context of SMEs, as well as the inclusion of the private sector and academia in the proposed programme for the workshop. 
&& The Chairman encouraged Cuba and Ecuador to continue their consultations in order to further fine-tune their proposal, including examining the availability of resources needed for funding the event.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs.  He firstly informed the Committee that for a number of RTAs – namely, RTAs between India and Malaysia, India and MERCOSUR, India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, and India and Bhutan – the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties.  Of these Agreements, only data relating to India-MERCOSUR and India-Malaysia had been provided to date.  With regard to India-MERCOSUR, the Secretariat had received all the necessary data from MERCOSUR, but was still waiting to receive some data from India.  In the case of India‑Malaysia, the delegation of Malaysia had provided the required data.  For India-Nepal, India‑Afghanistan and India-Bhutan, the Secretariat had not received any data.  He urged all the parties to these Agreements to provide the data as soon as possible.
He additionally drew Members' attention to a notification concerning the ASEAN-India Agreement, which had been circulated on 31 May 2012 in document WT/COMTD/N/35/Add.1.  This notification concerned the entry into force of the ASEAN-India Agreement for Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR and the Philippines.  Now that the Agreement had entered into force for all the parties, the CTD could consider it in a Dedicated Session.  For this purpose, the Secretariat had requested the parties to the Agreement to provide the required data by 18 October 2012.  He went on to say that there remained two RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties.  Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), an RTA falling in this category would only be considered by the CTD after it had been ratified by all the parties.  The two RTAs in question were the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement and the South Asian Free Trade Agreement.  The parties to these two agreements were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
He also recalled that Members were informed at the last CTD meeting that, in order to begin the operationalization of paragraph 15 of the TM for RTAs in the context of the CTD, the Secretariat would circulate an informal list of RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause, along with the date of the end of the implementation period of each RTA.  This list had been circulated to Members on 13 April 2012.  The parties to the RTAs had been requested to check the dates of the end of the implementation periods in the list, and to inform the Secretariat of any discrepancies.  He said that he wished to inform Members in this regard that the parties to the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement had indicated that the end of the implementation period for their Agreement needed to be changed from 2012 to 2021, in light of revised implementation timetables.  No other comments had been received on the list.
With regard to the way forward on the implementation reports, it was his understanding that the CRTA, at its 65th Session on 19 June 2012, had had a preliminary discussion on how to proceed with implementation reports for RTAs notified under GATT Article XXIV and Article V of the GATS.  Discussion would continue at the 66th Session of the CRTA.  He said that he wished to emphasize once again what had been indicated at the last CTD meeting, namely that it would be important for the CTD to monitor the outcome of the CRTA's discussion.  The CTD could then hold its own discussion on implementation reports for RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  From a practical point of view, he believed that it was in Members' interests to continue to maintain similar procedures between the two Committees when it came to implementing the TM for RTAs.   
-	GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL (GCC) NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMS UNION – COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA, EGYPT AND INDIA (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification.  The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The representative of Egypt recalled that his delegation, along with China and India, had made a joint submission in September 2010 on the systemic and specific issues relating to the GCC notification.  In addition, at the last CTD meeting, his delegation had identified in detail a number of these issues.  He indicated his delegation's willingness to engage in constructive discussions on these issues, under the present sub-item.  He added that the present sub-item needed to remain on the CTD's agenda until the matter was resolved.  
&& The representative of India expressed support for the intervention by Egypt.  He said that the first three sub-items under the present agenda item continued to remain on the CTD's agenda because discussions had not been exhausted.  He hoped that the matter could be resolved soon.
&& The representative of the European Union said that his delegation wished to once again insist that the present agenda item served the purpose of informing Members about the notifications of RTAs and preferential schemes under the Enabling Clause.  Members had already had the opportunity to take note of relevant notifications, to make their comments on these notifications, and to even reiterate them on several occasions.  He noted, however, that the problematic arising from an Agreement being notified by each party on a different legal basis needed to be further clarified.  It was in this spirit that related discussions had taken place in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR) in the context of the review of the RTAs TM.  While the most appropriate forum to discuss this matter was the NGR, the EU was also ready to continue discussions in the informal consultations convened by the CTD Chairman.  He recalled that, during the Chairman's informal consultations in the early part of 2012, his delegation had proposed that the Chairs of the CRTA and the NGR henceforth also be invited, together with the Secretariat's RTAs Section.  This would ensure that all relevant actors were present.  The EU was ready to engage in a constructive discussion in order to find a common understanding on the process ahead and to eventually find a solution.   
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND KOREA
&& The Chairman said that the second sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement.
&& The representative of Viet Nam, on behalf of ASEAN, said that ASEAN had not requested that this sub-item be retained on the CTD's agenda for the present meeting.  The sub-item had originally served to inform Members of the notification of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement.  As this had now been done, from ASEAN's perspective there was no further need to maintain this sub-item on the CTD's agenda.
&& The Committee took note of the intervention by Viet Nam. 
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT BETWEEN INDIA AND KOREA (GOODS)
&& The Chairman said that the third sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the India-Korea Agreement.
&& The representative of the United States expressed support for Viet Nam's intervention under the previous sub-item.  It was apparent that discussions under the previous sub-item, as well as under the present sub-item, had been exhausted.  He requested that these two sub-items be removed from the CTD's agenda.  He added that the sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification had also fulfilled its purpose.
&& The representative of Canada indicated her delegation's support for the requests by Viet Nam and the US to remove the sub-items concerning the ASEAN-Korea notification and the India-Korea notification from the CTD's agenda.  With respect to the GCC notification, Canada remained of the view that informal consultations were the most appropriate forum for discussions.  Until such a time as further rapprochement on substance could be reached, her delegation strongly urged that the matter be addressed at the informal level in order to allow the CTD to make progress in other areas.
&& The representative of India said that he wanted to clarify that his delegation was requesting that the three sub-items concerning the GCC Customs Union notification, the ASEAN-Korea notification and the India-Korea notification be retained on the CTD's agenda.  The view of his delegation was that discussions had not been exhausted on these sub-items. 
&& The representative of China expressed support for the interventions by Egypt and India under the present agenda item.  His delegation wanted the three sub-items to remain on the agenda until the matter was resolved.
&& The representative of Australia said that Viet Nam's intervention under the previous sub-item clearly indicated that ASEAN wanted that sub-item removed from the CTD's agenda.  Since ASEAN was a party to the Agreement listed in that sub-item, he believed that the Committee should act upon ASEAN's request rather than upon the request by Members not party to the Agreement.
&& The representative of Egypt said that there was a problem that Members needed to discuss.  Even if discussions took place in an informal setting, his delegation wanted the three sub-items to remain on the CTD's agenda until the matter was resolved.
&& The representative of the United States said that it was unclear why some Members were requesting that the sub-items concerning the ASEAN-Korea notification and the India-Korea notification be retained on the CTD's agenda.  These sub-items had fulfilled their transparency purposes and discussions had been exhausted. 
&& The representative of Australia observed that a party to the ASEAN-Korea Agreement had requested that the sub-item concerning the notification of the Agreement be removed from the CTD's agenda.  In line with the TM for RTAs, he did not see why an RTA should remain on the CTD's agenda when discussions had been exhausted.  He sought clarification on the appropriate practice in this regard.
&& The representative of India urged Members to engage in a constructive discussion on the issues that had been raised by China, Egypt and India so that the questions concerning RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV could be resolved as soon as possible.      
&& The Chairman noted that Members had expressed different views on the retention of the sub-item concerning the ASEAN-Korea notification on the CTD's agenda.  He explained that the CTD had been following the practice of retaining an item on the agenda if any Member so requested.  Once a notification was made, Members could discuss the notification and could raise any issue or seek any clarification that they wished.  He indicated that he was open to continuing his informal consultations.
&& The representative of Korea said that his delegation shared the view that discussions under the sub-item concerning the ASEAN-Korea Agreement had been exhausted.  He observed that the ASEAN-Korea Agreement had also been notified to the CRTA, but an agenda item relating to the Agreement was not continually appearing on the CRTA's agenda.  If the intention of some Members was to raise in the CTD the issues concerning RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV, he believed that an appropriately titled item needed be inscribed on the CTD's agenda.
&& The representative of the United States said that he had noted from the Chairman's intervention that the practice in the CTD was to retain an item on the agenda if any Member so requested.  In this regard, he indicated that it was also important for transparency purposes for Members to know which delegation or delegations had made the request.  He also supported the intervention by Korea, in particular since no questions had been raised on the ASEAN-Korea notification at the present meeting or at previous CTD meetings.  He encouraged those Members that had requested the retention of the item concerning the ASEAN-Korea notification on the CTD's agenda to consider raising their concerns in a more appropriate forum.    
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES - NOTIFICATION BY THE UNITED STATES (WT/COMTD/N/1/ADD.8)
&& The Chairman said that a notification had been received by the US concerning its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme.  The notification was contained in document WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.8.  He invited the US to introduce the notification.
&& The representative of the United States said that he wished to specify for transparency purposes that it was his delegation that had requested the present sub-item.  Turning to the notification under consideration, he said that fostering the further integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system was a vital part of US trade policy.  The US' efforts to advance this objective spanned a number of fronts, including the promotion of broad-based multilateral trade reforms conducive to further integration, supporting the integration of trade strategies into the development plans of national authorities, and providing significant amounts of capacity-building assistance.  A longstanding element in US efforts to increase developing country participation in the global trading system was the provision of duty-free access for products entering the US market from beneficiary developing countries.  The US GSP programme, in operation since 1976, was one of the main mechanisms for providing such duty-free access.  The US GSP programme currently provided preferential, duty-free treatment to nearly 5,000 products from 128 designated beneficiary countries and territories.  Duty-free benefits were the only preferential tariff treatment provided under the GSP programme, as the statute did not allow less-than-full tariff reductions.  A single, transparent, rules‑of‑origin regime governed all US imports under the GSP. 
In the 2009 Annual Review of the GSP programme, the US had designated two additional products as eligible for duty-free treatment, as outlined in Annex I of the notification under consideration.  This had been done in response to petitions from interested stakeholders.  The US had also granted de minimis waivers to the statutory competitive need limitations (CNLs) for 108 products from certain countries in order to ensure continued GSP duty-free benefits to these products.  These were noted in Annex III of the notification.  Annexes IV and V identified products from specific beneficiary countries for which GSP eligibility was terminated based on a determination that imports from those beneficiary countries could compete effectively in the US market.  
The notification also provided information on the October 2011 reauthorization of the GSP programme.  Although the ten-month lapse in GSP authorization in 2011 had led to a temporary disruption of the programme, the reauthorization legislation authorized the programme through 31 July 2013 and also made GSP benefits retroactive to 1 January 2011.  The retroactive reauthorization enabled importers to seek refunds of duties paid during the lapse.  In light of the lapse in statutory authorization for the programme, the 2010 Annual Review had been truncated.  As a result, no actions were taken as part of the 2010 Annual Review with respect to CNLs or CNL waivers.  Annex VI listed one product that was removed from GSP eligibility as a result of the 2010 Annual Review.  He said that the notification under consideration also provided information on changes to the lists of GSP beneficiaries over the past few years.  He highlighted in particular the designation of the Maldives and South Sudan as eligible for GSP benefits.
He went on to say that the US had recently concluded the 2011 Annual Review of its GSP programme.  The results of this review would be provided at a later date, since they were not available in time to include in the notification under consideration.  He wished to nevertheless draw attention to one outcome of the 2011 Annual Review.  In particular, he informed Members that it had been determined that seven cotton fibre products would be added to the list of GSP-eligible products for LDC beneficiaries of the programme.  This action implemented one element of the US' LDC trade initiatives that had been announced at MC8.  Consultations were presently taking place with the US Congress on the next steps to allow quota-free treatment to these imports for LDCs. 
In closing, he said that while the US recognized the successes of the US GSP programme – which covered over US$18.5 billion in imports in 2011 – it was also committed to continue working to improve the effectiveness of efforts to integrate developing countries more fully into the global trading system.  Towards that end, the US continued to work with GSP beneficiary countries in order to identify ways in which they could enhance their use of the programme to increase their exports and bolster economic development.  As part of that effort, GSP programme information had been translated into several languages, including French, Spanish, and Arabic. Meetings were regularly held with beneficiary government officials in Washington, and work was undertaken with non‑governmental organizations and Chambers of Commerce.  Videoconferences and teleconferences were organized, as were seminars in beneficiary countries for exporters, artisans, government officials and others.  All of these initiatives aimed to help beneficiary countries improve their utilization of the GSP programme.  An official of the Office of the US Trade Representative (USTR) was presently visiting several Balkan countries for this purpose.  The US planned to continue such outreach activities and was open to working with any beneficiary countries that wanted to increase their usage of the GSP programme.
&& The Committee took note of the notification by the United States. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on PTAs.  He recalled that Members had been informed at the last CTD meeting that three notifications of PTAs to be considered in Dedicated Sessions had been made to the CTD since the establishment of the TM for PTAs.  These concerned PTAs being implemented by India, China and Chinese Taipei.  All three PTAs were notified in 2011 under paragraph 1(b) of the Transparency Mechanism.  This paragraph concerned PTAs taking the form of preferential treatment accorded by any Member to products of LDCs.  && The Secretariat had been in contact with the notifying Members regarding the provision of data for the preparation of the factual presentations of the three PTAs.  At the present time, the full set of data required for the preparation of the factual presentations of the three PTAs had not yet been provided to the Secretariat.  He urged the notifying Members to provide the required data as soon as possible.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  The CTD had to date undertaken six of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that at the last CTD meeting his delegation had highlighted the critical importance of S&D and DFQF market access in the WTO system.  It was well known that the LDCs relied on a limited export basket and few destination markets.  Members recognized the vulnerability of LDCs - particularly in times of global economic downturn - and the need for enhanced and meaningful market access for LDCs' products.  He called for the earliest and fullest implementation of the Hong Kong Decision by developed Members, and also emphasized the importance of targeted supply-side assistance for LDCs.  He expressed appreciation to the developed and developing Members that were already providing LDCs with a significant degree of DFQF market access and encouraged other Members to join this effort.  Finally, he recalled that his delegation had sought information from a Member at the last CTD meeting on the outcome of an internal process relating to DFQF market access.  He indicated that Bangladesh would appreciate a constructive spirit of cooperation in this regard.
&& The Committee took note of the intervention by Bangladesh.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to raise a matter concerning the reduction of documentation costs in the CTD.  He recalled that discussions on cost savings in document production had taken place at the meeting of the Committee on Budget, Finance and Administration in October and November 2011.  The minutes of that meeting could be found in document WT/BFA/128.  Members had agreed to a number of cost-cutting measures in the production of documents.  All WTO bodies were to undertake efforts to reduce the overall volume of official documents.  Efforts were also to be made to substantially reduce the printing and distribution of documents.  Thus, for instance, as of January 2012, the distribution of official documents in meeting rooms had been discontinued.  
He said that it was important for the CTD to do its part in reducing the volume of documentation and to encourage the electronic distribution of documents.  He recalled in this regard that two measures had been proposed at the last CTD meeting.  The first measure related to the minutes of CTD meetings.  It had been proposed that, wherever possible, the Secretariat look into putting the discussions taking place at CTD meetings into summary form.  It had been indicated that the objective was for the main messages to get across, and that summaries would be more feasible in some types of discussions or interventions - for example a presentation using PowerPoint - than in others.  The second proposed measure was that the CTD document series no longer be distributed in paper form.  It had been indicated that documents in the series would be available on the WTO's publicly available "documents online" system, and that initially restricted documents would be placed on the Members' website until they were derestricted. 
He went on to say that the Committee had agreed at the last meeting to the proposal for the CTD document series to be distributed electronically only.  This measure had therefore already been put into place.  However, some concerns had been raised on the proposal for CTD minutes to appear in summary form, where possible.  Given the importance of reducing documentation costs, he said that he wanted to ask Members to once again consider this proposal.  
&& The representative of the United States expressed his hope that the CTD's decision to circulate Committee documents in electronic form only would help to reduce documentation costs.  However, his delegation had reservations about the proposed shift to summarized minutes of CTD meetings.  The US believed that it was important for Members' discussions to proceed on a shared understanding of what had occurred at prior meetings.  Detailed minutes would help to ensure that Members had a full record of previous discussions so as to help inform future discussions.  
&& The representatives of India, the European Union and Bangladesh expressed support for the intervention by the United States.
In closing the 85th Session, the Chairman requested Members to submit any documentation for a CTD meeting sufficiently in advance of the meeting.  He indicated that this would allow the Committee to function more efficiently. 
The meeting was adjourned.  

__________
 && The representative of Ecuador delivered only parts of this intervention at the 85th Session but requested that the points made in the prepared statement submitted to the Secretariat be reflected in the minutes of the meeting.









WT/COMTD/M/85 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/85 	Page  PAGE 21



 

 

 

 



