 
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 21 JUNE 2017
Chairman: H.E. Mr. Taonga Mushayavanhu (Zimbabwe)  TOC \o \h \z \u 
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC498067023" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC498067023 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC498067024" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC498067024 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc498067025" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc498067025 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc498067026" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc498067026 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC498067027" C.	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of The Chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC498067027 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc498067028" -	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO – proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)	 PAGEREF _Toc498067028 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc498067029" -	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate – proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc498067029 \h 4
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC498067030" D.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC498067030 \H 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc498067031" -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc498067031 \h 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc498067032" -	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc498067032 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc498067033" -	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc498067033 \h 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC498067034" E.	COMMUNICATION FROM URUGUAY ON BEHALF OF THE LATIN AMERICAN INTEGRATION ASSOCIATION (WT/COMTD/W/224)	 PAGEREF _TOC498067034 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC498067035" F.	work programme on electronic commerce	 PAGEREF _TOC498067035 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC498067036" G.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC498067036 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC498067037" H.	Review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC498067037 \H 17
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC498067038" I.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC498067038 \H 18

ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 103rd Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/11 circulated on 9 June 2017. 
&& The representative of Uruguay said that her delegation wished to make a brief presentation under "Other Business" of 16 individual notifications corresponding to Agreements signed by some member countries of the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo.
&& The representative of Canada sought clarification as to whether the representative of Uruguay would merely flag the issue at the present meeting, or whether the intention was to have a substantive discussion.
&& The representative of Uruguay replied that her delegation intended to briefly flag the issue at the present meeting, without any expectation of substantive comments from Members.   
The agenda was adopted as amended.
OBSERVERS 
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers


&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organization Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record. He indicated that, if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed.
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT – WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. On the agenda for the present meeting were two submissions containing proposals for work under the MC8 mandate. He observed that these proposals had been appearing on the CTD's agenda for quite some time now. He also recalled that previous CTD Chairs held informal consultations to try and make progress on these proposals, but the situation had not changed for many years. The previous Chair had encouraged continued engagement among Members, including through informal discussions between the proponents of these proposals and other delegations, so as to move the process forward. He hoped that some progress could be reported at the present meeting.
-	Committee on Trade and Development mandate: focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO – proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)
&& The Chairman said that the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 had the aim for the CTD to report on development-related work taking place in the WTO. 

&& The representative of Uganda, on behalf of the African Group, said that he wished to intervene on the two remaining proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/208 and WT/COMTD/W/192. He recalled the statement delivered by the Group at the 100th session of the CTD, and informed the Committee that the proponents of these two proposals were looking forward to undertaking further consultations on the proposals among themselves as well as with the most interested delegations. He invited the Chair to facilitate these consultations and hoped that convergence could be reached soon on these proposals. He went on to emphasize that the proponents did not have the objective of usurping the mandate of the General Council, as some delegations may have felt. Rather, the aim was to fulfil the instructions of Ministers at MC8 to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD. Recalling that the CTD had been established to serve as a focal point for the consideration and coordination of development-related work in the WTO, he noted that the current reporting structure between WTO bodies fell short of appropriately fulfilling the CTD's overarching mandate. He explained in this regard that relevant decisions taken by other WTO bodies were not being regularly reported to the CTD, nor had the CTD been consulted on a range of development-related issues that had been taken up by these bodies.
In order to operationalize the CTD's mandate, he suggested that other WTO bodies could submit a brief report on the development-related aspects of their work. He then provided some examples of the type of information that could be provided to the CTD, including with respect to special and differential treatment (S&D), the development impact of the elimination of trade‑related investment measures, the development impact of the operationalization of the least developed countries (LDCs) services waiver, information relating to the implementation of Articles 66.1 and 66.2 of the TRIPS Agreement and information relating to the work of negotiating bodies such as the Special Session of the Committee on Agriculture. The Secretariat could then put the various reports together into a single document, which would be discussed in the Committee. The CTD would also be able to provide guidance and appropriate recommendations to the General Council and other WTO bodies on any development-related work. This would better link development to trade in a manner that would contribute to the economic development of the WTO’s developing, least developed and small and vulnerable constituencies. The compilation document would additionally help to address the capacity constraints of many delegations that were not able to participate in all the meetings of WTO bodies. In closing, he emphasized once again the importance of improving intra-reporting procedures and operationalizing the CTD’s mandate by periodically reviewing the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies. This would not only further strengthen the centrality of the CTD as well as its role as the focal point for development-related work in the WTO, but it would also accentuate the CTD's purview in considering all development-related activities of other WTO bodies.  
&& The representative of India supported the intervention by Uganda. He recalled the mandate from MC8 and said that it was appropriate for the CTD to report regularly on the development- related work that had been taking place in other WTO bodies and to provide recommendations to the General Council on how to achieve better coordination within the WTO on development issues. He requested that the present sub-item remain on the CTD's agenda and expressed the readiness of his delegation to engage in informal consultations.  
&& The representative of Nigeria expressed support for the interventions by Uganda and India, and said that the CTD's mandate from MC8 was clear and straightforward. He emphasized the importance of improving the intra-reporting procedures and operationalizing this mandate and encouraged Members to be open-minded so as to facilitate progress on this matter. In that respect, he supported the need for consultations, which would aim at exploring ways to give effect to the CTD's mandate.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation had expressed concerns on the remaining proposals at previous CTD meetings. He noted that the Committee had been unable to reach consensus on items that had remained on the agenda for years. He added that the statement delivered by Uganda had shown that the substance of the proposal remained the same. In this light, he suggested that further informal consultations be held to eventually generate additional information that the proponents might use to modify their proposals. His delegation stood ready to work with the proponents if they revised the proposals. Otherwise, the US would not see the value of maintaining the items relating to these proposals on the agenda of future CTD meetings.   
&& The representative of the European Union said that her delegation had expressed its concerns on the remaining proposals on several occasions, but nevertheless remained opened to further constructive consultations. 
 && The representative of Canada supported the suggestion of having revised proposals from the proponents, as it would otherwise be difficult to make progress on this matter. She reiterated Canada's readiness to engage in informal consultations and discussions on this matter.     
&& The representative of Japan also expressed support for the suggestion that the proponents should table concrete revised proposals. He reaffirmed Japan's engagement to make progress on this matter.  
&&The Committee took note of all interventions.
&&	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate – proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
&& The Chairman said that, while there were three proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192, the first two proposals had already been addressed by the Committee. The first proposal, which was for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, had been agreed to by the Committee at its 87th Session. The updated Secretariat paper was circulated in June 2013 and had appeared on the CTD's agenda for a number of meetings. Since then, there had also been another update of the same paper, which had been circulated in September 2016, in document WT/COMTD/W/219. As for the second proposal, which was for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO, this idea was now being dealt with in the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208, which had been addressed under the previous sub-item. The remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to regional trade agreements (RTAs) to submit their notification and information requirements jointly.
&& The representative of India focused his intervention on the remaining proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. He observed that the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs provided for several notifications to be carried out by Members parties to RTAs. In order to avoid misunderstandings and to help ensure a timely consideration of RTAs, and hence the smooth operation of the Transparency Mechanism, it was important for the parties to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. He went on to express the readiness of the proponents to engage in informal consultations with interested Members so as to reach a consensus on this issue. He recalled that, during some previous informal consultations, some Members had suggested that, as two out of the three items contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192 had already been addressed, the proponents should submit a single separate proposal on the only remaining item. In light of this, the proponents were holding consultations in order to submit a revised document by the next CTD meeting. 
&& The representative of Uganda supported the intervention by India, and in particular the suggested way forward for the remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192.
&& The representative of the United States sought clarification as to whether the Committee would keep the same agenda item at the next CTD meeting, or whether a new proposal would be reflected.
&& The representative of India reiterated that, during informal consultations, some Members had suggested that, as two of the three issues contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192 had already been addressed, the proponents should submit a new document containing only the remaining proposal. He indicated that document WT/COMTD/W/192 should remain on the agenda as it stood, with the focus being on the proposal relating to RTAs. When the new document was submitted, an appropriate reference number would be determined.  
&&= The representative of the United States said that he did not understand India's reply. In his view, the Committee could make progress on its work by removing document WT/COMTD/W/192 from the agenda. The proponents could then table a new proposal on the remaining unaddressed item in document WT/COMTD/W/192, for consideration by Members at the next CTD meeting. Otherwise, it would mean that no progress was being made.     
&& The Chairman noted that the proponents intended to submit a new document. He suggested that informal consultations could take place so as to make progress on the matter.
&& The representative of the United States said that, in its current form, the proposal WT/COMTD/W/192 had become confusing and could not gain consensus among Members in the Committee. His delegation had repeatedly asked the proponents to clean up this proposal so as to correctly reflect therein the issue that Members were supposed to discuss. If India and the other proponents would come up with a revised proposal, then the agenda item concerning document WT/COMTD/W/192 should be dropped from the agenda and replaced by an item reflecting the new proposal. 
&& The representative of Nigeria observed that there was a common understanding that a revision of document WT/COMTD/W/192 would be made. This new document could be considered by the Committee at its next meeting, depending on whether or not it was circulated by that time.
&& The representative of India said that he was not suggesting that the proponents would be making a substantive revision of the remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192. He explained that, out of the three proposals in the document, only one remained unaddressed, and some Members had indicated that this situation was confusing. It was in this context that he had said that the proponents would submit the one remaining proposal in a new document. 
&& The representative of Japan indicated that his delegation was expecting, by the next CTD meeting, a new document containing only the remaining proposal relating to RTAs. Discussion could continue on this basis.    
&& The Chairman noted the discussion that had taken place with respect to document WT/COMTD/W/192. As there was one remaining proposal contained therein, he indicated that the issue would need to remain on the agenda. When a new document was submitted, an appropriate reference number would be attributed to it. He encouraged continued engagement among Members in order to have more substantive progress by the next meeting.
The Committee took note of all interventions.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs. He indicated that for Egypt's accession to the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), the parties had been requested to provide the data for the preparation of the factual presentation by 6 June 2017. Data was only received from Seychelles. Turning to the agreement between the Dominican Republic and Panama, he informed the Committee that the Secretariat had received data and would begin shortly drafting the factual presentation on this agreement. As for the accession of Afghanistan to the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA), he noted that the parties had not as yet submitted the data requested by 22 December 2016. The Secretariat had received data only from Bangladesh for the original SAFTA notification.
He then moved on to the Arab Mediterranean Free Trade Agreement (Agadir Agreement) between Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Tunisia, and said that data had been received from Egypt, Jordan and Morocco. A draft factual presentation was sent on 11 April 2017 and comments, which were requested by 23rd May 2017, had been received from Egypt, Jordan and Morocco but thus far not from Tunisia. The Secretariat was also still waiting to receive clarification on data from Tunisia and Egypt which had been requested by 15 July 2016. Moving to the agreement between the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and Singapore, the Chairman indicated that although a draft factual presentation had been sent to the parties, the Secretariat was still waiting to receive complete data from the GCC parties, which had been requested by 23 November 2015. He added that only Kuwait had provided data on which clarification had been sought by the Secretariat. Data on preferential tariffs and exceptions to the most-favoured nation (MFN) rates had also not been received from the other GCC parties. In the case of the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the East African Community (EAC), the Secretariat awaited comments on the draft factual presentation, which were requested by 16 June 2014. For a number of other RTAs – namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, India and Bhutan, and Cuba and El Salvador – the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties. He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible. He went on to say that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
&& The representative of the United States said that the US accorded great importance to the transparency of RTAs, and that the CTD was charged to maintain purview over the agreements notified under the Enabling Clause. However, a number of these agreements had languished for some time. Accordingly, he requested the active engagement of the Chairman, including through in-depth consultations with those parties that were supposed to provide comments on the draft factual presentation and/or the requisite data to prepare the draft factual presentation. The involvement of the Chair in addressing these issues would help identify the challenges that these countries had been facing in supplying the requisite information. It would also help the CTD to make progress on the vast and growing number of agreements that had been notified under the Enabling Clause, but had not yet been reviewed and those that had not been notified but were in force.   
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update.
&&	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India, which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The representative of Egypt said that systemic concerns had been raised by some Members, including Egypt, over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. He noted that a number of delegations had previously expressed the view that the Enabling Clause did not provide the appropriate legal basis to justify the formation of a customs union involving the reduction or elimination of NTMs. However, others had argued that the non-prescription of criteria or conditions for the elimination of non-tariffs measures (NTMs) did not exclude customs unions among developing countries from the coverage of the Enabling Clause. The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification. This originated from the CTD's terms of reference, which stipulated that the CTD was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO. In addition, paragraph 4 of the terms of reference mandated the CTD to consider any questions with regard to either the application or the use of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, which included questions relating to the invocation of the Enabling Clause to notify customs unions among developing countries. He hoped that Members could have a substantive discussion on the systemic concerns that had been raised. The present sub-item needed to be maintained on the CTD's agenda until a solution was found.
&& The representative of India indicated that his intervention related to the three sub‑items under the present agenda item, since the three RTAs referenced in these sub-items had been "dually notified" under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. He noted that the systemic concerns that were raised by China, Egypt and India over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV were pertinent even now, but they remained unaddressed. Some Members had expressed the view that the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 were outside the scope of the CTD, and needed to be discussed in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR). The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification. Pointing to the terms of reference of the CTD contained in document WT/L/46, he noted that the CTD was designated to serve as a focal point for consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO and its relationship to development-related activities in other multilateral agencies. He added that the Committee could consult with other WTO bodies in addressing the systemic concerns raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175. This was in keeping with paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference which entrusted the Committee to review periodically, in consultation as appropriate with the relevant bodies of the WTO, the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, and in particular LDC Members, and report to the General Council for appropriate action. In concluding, he indicated that the three sub-items under the present agenda item should remain on the CTD's agenda until the systemic and specific concerns arising from "dually notified" RTAs were addressed.
&& The representative of Nigeria recalled that his delegation had previously expressed its view on the systemic concerns relating to the particular subject. Therefore, he encouraged further consultations among Members so as to address as soon as possible these issues.
&& The representative of the United States said that the sub-item under consideration did not accurately reflect what Members were supposed to discuss. His delegation had repeated in previous CTD meetings that the GCC Customs Union was not a dual notification, and therefore should not be part of any conversation on systemic issues. In his view, the item relating to the GCC issue was not clear, nor had any work been performed on this issue in the Committee. In closing, he suggested that the agenda should be cleaned up so as to accurately reflect the business at hand.
&& The representative of the European Union said that she wished to make her intervention on the three sub-items under the present item. She underscored that for the EU, it was of extreme importance to clarify the legal and procedural issues arising from RTAs being notified under different legal provisions. Nonetheless, the GCC Customs Union should be distinguished from the two other RTAs. This was because the GCC Customs Union issue was not one of dual notification, since Article XXIV of the GATT was the legal basis for notifications of customs unions. The EU's position had been repeated on several occasions at previous CTD meetings. Discussions at future meetings would benefit from having clarification from the proponents on what exactly the Committee would be discussing under the present sub-item.   
&& The Committee took note of all the statements made.  
&&	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea 
&&The Chairman said that the remaining sub-items under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between ASEAN and Korea, and the notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement on Trade in Goods between India and Korea. 
&& The representative of the United States expressed his disappointment that these sub-items remained on the agenda. For his delegation, it was inappropriate to maintain these sub-items. He noted that any Member had the right to notify an RTA in a way that it felt the most appropriate, and regretted that the sub-items were being used by some Members to advance their own wider agenda. He then urged those Members that wanted these sub-items to be maintained on the agenda to think carefully about the rationale for this. Referring to the remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192 that had been discussed earlier, he noted that the objective was meant to be the submission of joint notifications by Members. If the concerned delegations wanted a discussion on this matter to take place in the Committee, this should be clearly reflected on the agenda.  
&& The Chairman encouraged further engagement among Members to explore possible ways to move these issues forward. He expressed his availability to undertake informal consultations in order to facilitate finding solutions.  
&& The Committee took note of all the statements made.  
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)
No Member took the floor under this sub-item.
&& COMMUNICATION FROM URUGUAY ON BEHALF OF THE LATIN AMERICAN INTEGRATION ASSOCIATION (WT/COMTD/W/224)
&& The Chairman said that a communication was received from Uruguay, on behalf of the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA). This communication was circulated to Members in document WT/COMTD/W/224.  
&& The representative of Uruguay read out the communication contained in document WT/COMTD/W/224. She, inter alia, reaffirmed in full the contents of communications WT/COMTD/W/217 and WT/COMTD/W/220, circulated in the CTD on 14 June 2016 and 3 October 2016 respectively. Referring to the explanation in the CTD Chairman's communication WT/COMTD/W/223 on the criteria for drawing up the list of non-notified RTAs, first published in September 2011, she inquired why there was a modification of the March 2013 list (WT/REG/W/73) involving the inclusion of a separate title for "Agreements under the LAIA Framework". This new version of the list was introduced at the 68th session of the CRTA, and there was no record of the adoption of this new criterion in the minutes of the previous session. She additionally made reference to the CTD Chairman's comment in the communication WT/COMTD/W/223 concerning the lack of a "consensus" for circulating the document "Report to the WTO on Instruments Concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo" under the symbol WT/COMTD/N/*, and argued that WTO Members could not object to a notification made by another Member country. Should there be any questions, this could be done on the basis of the document notified and circulated as such. The Committee and the Secretariat did not have the authority to reject or object to a notification or to give it a different character from the one required by the notifying Member. She inquired, without prejudice to what she previously stated, as to why the CTD Chairman believed that notifications duly submitted by LAIA member countries could not be considered in the CTD, and were thus subject to the decisions adopted in the CRTA. According to paragraph 18 of the Transparency Mechanism, the CTD was the body entrusted with the implementation of the Mechanism for RTAs falling under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.
She went on to request that the CTD Chairman circulate to WTO Members, within the CTD, the replies to the EU's communication circulated as document WT/REG/W/109 of 22 September 2016. She added that notwithstanding the fact that communications WT/COMTD/W/217 and WT/COMTD/W/220 contained information relevant to many of the questions contained in the EU's questionnaire and despite the fact that the questionnaire was erroneously submitted to the CRTA, LAIA member countries that were parties to the different agreements listed in document WT/REG/W/105, wished to reaffirm their continued commitment to the principle of transparency, including by providing additional replies in the annex of the communication WT/COMTD/W/224. This was done without prejudice to any comments or replies that the LAIA members might wish to provide individually - in relation to particular aspects of the specific agreements to which they were parties - in a dedicated session of the CTD, as provided for in paragraph 18 of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs.
&& The representative of Brazil said that the collective replies to the questions from the EU were submitted to the WTO as document WT/COMTD/W/224. He indicated that these replies were presented to the CTD, because for LAIA member countries, the CTD was the appropriate forum to address issues related to instruments notified under the Enabling Clause. He reiterated the commitment of his delegation to transparency and its willingness to contribute to improving the work in the regular bodies of the WTO.
&& The representative of Argentina associated his delegation with the statement made by Uruguay regarding the document WT/COMTD/W/224 on behalf of LAIA countries.
&& The representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela also supported the intervention by Uruguay on behalf of the LAIA countries, including the full content of the document WT/COMTD/W/224.
&& The representative of the European Union welcomed LAIA members' effort in providing replies to its questions. She said that she wished to provide at the present meeting preliminary comments on the responses contained in document WT/COMTD/W/224. Detailed comments would be provided at the meeting of the CRTA. First, she noted that the EU's questions to LAIA member countries were not erroneously submitted to the CRTA, as claimed by LAIA members. Indeed, these questions were submitted to the CRTA because the EU was seeking clarifications on the Agreements listed in the non-notified RTAs list prepared by the Secretariat and circulated at every CRTA meeting. Second, she clarified that the EU was not objecting to a notification made by LAIA members and that the aim of the EU's questions to LAIA members was mainly to understand the content of their notifications and annual reports, in particular their legal status. She went on to say that notifications needed to respect the notification template for RTAs and be notified by the individual members concerned by the arrangement, in order to trigger the notification process and allow for the necessary transparency. Third, she turned to the substance of the replies provided by LAIA members in the aforementioned communication. She recalled one legal argumentation provided by LAIA members, which was that the regional agreements (AR), Economic Complementarity Agreements (ACE) and partial agreements constituted "mechanisms for the implementation" and were the "instruments for the development of the objectives and functions of the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo" and were thus to be interpreted as falling under its legal umbrella. With respect to this legal argumentation, she underscored that for the EU delegation, the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo was a political declaration of intent and did not contain concrete RTA disciplines and tariff treatment provisions. She subsequently requested that LAIA countries clarify the meaning of "implementation".
She went on to indicate that at this stage, the EU did not see how the subsequent tariff granting agreements - which were built on the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo - could indeed be characterised as implementing measures only falling under Section D of the Transparency Mechanism. Therefore, she requested that LAIA countries provide more details on some of the agreements contained in the list of non-notified RTAs so as to allow Members to understand that these agreements were indeed only implementing measures. Fourth, she highlighted the inconsistency in the interpretation by LAIA members that a newly acceded country to LAIA (e.g. Panama) was covered by the original 1980 Treaty of Montevideo and therefore exempted from any notification, given that Cuba did notify its accession to LAIA. In closing, she reiterated the readiness of the EU delegation to engage in constructive discussions with the Chair and LAIA members in order to make progress on this longstanding issue and enhance further transparency in RTAs.
&& The representative of the United States said that, while his delegation would continue to engage with LAIA members on the content of the document in future meetings of the CRTA, he wished to provide some preliminary comments at the present CTD meeting. He said that those comments were without prejudice to the US' view that these LAIA agreements remained non-notified. Accordingly, the CRTA was the appropriate forum to discuss these issues. He additionally noted that the sharing of the US' views in the CTD should not be considered as the expression of the readiness of his delegation to consider that eventual notifications under the Enabling Clause would be appropriate. Turning to the LAIA communication itself, he argued that there were some fundamental unanswered questions about what exactly LAIA members were submitting with respect to their annual and biannual reports to the CTD. For the US delegation, the recent submission made by LAIA members in document WT/COMTD/N/53 reflected further clarifications of these members' views. While this clarification was helpful and might contribute to make progress on this issue, further discussion would be needed on what constituted a notification. He subsequently moved on to consider LAIA members' responses to EU's questions. He said that these responses confirmed that the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo contained only political level objectives with respect to future tariff and non-tariff preferences to be extended among the LAIA members. By way of illustration, he referred to the responses provided in paragraph 1.2 of document WT/COMTD/W/224 and said that these responses had shown that no specific treatment for any specific products was set out in the Treaty itself.
He made reference to two other responses by LAIA members. The first one was provided in paragraph 1.3 (c), and stipulated that specific tariff preference negotiations were subsequently undertaken in the context of the Regional Agreements on Market Opening for Bolivia, Ecuador and Paraguay, and the Regional Tariff Preference Agreement. Additionally, the responses indicated that bilateral or plurilateral tariff preferences were negotiated separately under the Partial Scope Agreements provision of the Treaty, and referred to as ACE. The second response was an assertion made later in the document - that both Regional Agreements and Partial Scope Agreements were modifications of the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, under paragraph D of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. In light of these responses, he reiterated the longstanding view of his delegation that the 1980 Treaty contained only political objectives and accordingly, it was not appropriate to assert that the subsequent establishment by LAIA members of tariff preferences were modifications of an existing agreement. He noted that while the additional Protocols to the Agreements negotiated by LAIA members might be appropriately considered as modifications to existing preferences according to paragraph D of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, Regional Agreements and Partial Scope Agreements did not fall under paragraph D. Taking up the issue relating to the accession of Panama, The representative of the US said that he did not understand how LAIA could assert that a simple clause in a political document that allowed accession by future parties had exempted existing and future parties from any transparency or notification obligations arising from the extension of new tariff or non-tariff preferences. He went along the lines of the EU and noted that Cuba's notification of its accession to the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo was an indication that prior to the establishment of the RTA Transparency Mechanism, LAIA members recognized their obligation vis-à-vis other WTO Members to notify these agreements. In that respect, he called upon Panama to properly notify all its relevant agreements. He reaffirmed that his delegation would note for the record that RTAs containing preferential treatment that went beyond tariffs would not be notifiable under the Enabling Clause. This was because the Enabling Clause was specifically limited to tariff preferences, and its coverage of non-tariff measure preferences would be permitted only in accordance with conditions decided upon by all Members. For the US delegation, these conditions had not yet been established. In closing, he expressed the appreciation of his delegation for LAIA members' engagement on these important issues and looked forward to continuing cooperation on this matter. 
&& The representative of Uruguay requested that the delegations of the EU and US send in written form their comments to her delegation, which would in turn transmit them to the LAIA Secretariat. 
&& The representative of Japan reiterated the view of his delegation that a systemic issue of this nature should be discussed and resolved in the CRTA. Accordingly, he looked forward to constructive discussions on this matter at the July 2017 CRTA meeting. He took note of the new submission from Uruguay (WT/COMTD/N/53) on behalf of some LAIA members concerning their new agreements signed under the 1980 Montevideo Treaty, for the period 1 January 2016 ‑ 31 December 2016. He underlined that some improvements were made in this new submission in terms of the format of the document and its legal clarity, and considered these as a positive step forward. However, further examination of this notification would be needed, as it was circulated immediately before the present meeting. He reserved the rights of his delegation to make further comments at a later stage. Finally, he reaffirmed Japan’s position that any substantive agreement concluded outside of the WTO framework should be reviewed in the appropriate forum of the WTO based on the factual information and through proper procedures.
&& The representative of Panama informed the Committee that Panama was in the process of taking the necessary steps to notify the pending agreement to which it was party. He added that further consultations would be needed to ensure that this notification would be as uncontroversial and user-friendly as possible. In that respect, he requested Members to be patient so as to allow his delegation to do the requisite work. Moving onto the systemic concerns raised in the present and past meetings, he indicated that Members had different interpretations of the rules governing a Member's submission of notification, including the forum in which such notification would be made. In his view, in the event a notification would not meet WTO Members' expectations, the latter should be pragmatic, because an apparent shortcoming could be due to the complexity of the coordination that needed to be ensured. Otherwise, lengthy discussions would take place on procedural issues, - like in some past meetings - and no progress would therefore be made on the substantive issues, including transparency, questions, and replies. 
&& The Chairman encouraged Members to continue to discuss the issues relating to the LAIA agreements with a view to finding a way forward.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the March 2017 meeting of the CTD, the Committee had considered four communications on e-commerce. He asked if Members had any comments or views to share under this agenda item at the present meeting. 
&& The representative of Chinese Taipei welcomed the fact that discussions on e-commerce took place at the November 2016 and March 2017 CTD meetings and that the Work Programme on E-commerce had become a standing item on the CTD agenda. He informed the Committee that his delegation would be circulating before the summer break, written papers on e-commerce for discussion at the next CTD meeting. He also shared some of the views expressed in these papers. He noted that e-commerce had changed the way of conducting trade in the modern world, because the availability and efficiency of digital transmission had created new methods of trading, such as e-books, 3-D printings, and telemedicine. Therefore, it was important to find ways of bridging the digital divide, in particular by helping developing country Members, especially LDCs, getting access to information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure and services, hence enhancing their e-commerce readiness. 
He went on to say that one of the most useful ways of analysing the e-commerce matter at the WTO was to look into the fundamental differences between e-commerce and traditional trade. In particular, barriers applied to the digital trade through the Internet were significantly different from those encountered in traditional trade. He took the example of cyberspace trade barriers - most of them being applied at the early stages of the transaction process - and argued that the restrictions that they introduced on access to data or information on the internet, had been preventing potential buyers or consumers from even noticing the existence of the foreign commodity. These would definitely preclude the comparison of goods and services, and any order, shipment or customs check, and therefore wipe out all trade opportunities at the early stage of the transaction process. Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) would be particularly disadvantaged, as the majority of them did not have other channels of access to potential foreign buyers. Against this background, he considered important and fundamental that the WTO ensure reciprocal and equal access to the Internet for all its Member countries. In addition, this equality had to apply to all stages of an electronic transaction, including during the communication and access stages, before any transaction would be made or any matching of demanders and suppliers would take place.
&& The representative of China reiterated the strong commitment of China to the discussion on e-commerce, given the importance of the latter for development. He added that this commitment was exemplified by the communication that China had co-sponsored. He suggested that in light of the sensitivity and complexity of the e-commerce issue, Members should reflect carefully on the e‑commerce elements that could be included in the outcome of MC11. He went on to propose a series of questions on which Members could reflect in the perspective of MC11. These included: (i) what specific development elements can be reflected in MC11 e-commerce outcome?; (ii) what kind of technical-assistance actions regarding e-commerce could Members take under the WTO framework?; (iii) would Members be flexible to accept some best practices on e-commerce as an MC11 outcome provided that they would be best endeavour initiatives?; (iv) would Members agree that elements like streamlining customs procedures on e-commerce and the mutual recognition or promotion of e-signature and e-authentication would be beneficiary for developing Members and SMEs?; and (v) what would be the challenges and opportunities for developing Members, especially the LDCs in this regard?
&& The representative of Nigeria reaffirmed the active engagement of his delegation on discussion on e-commerce. He recalled the importance of the development aspects of e-commerce and noted in that respect that Nigeria had co-sponsored a proposal on e-commerce and was also member of the Group of Friends of E-commerce for Development, which had organized several workshops to deepen Members' understanding on the e-commerce issue. He additionally reminded the Committee that the work being carried out in the CTD was governed by the MC10 Ministerial Decision on E-commerce, which urged Members to continue the work under the 1998 Work Programme on Electronic Commerce, based on the existing mandate and guidelines and on the basis of proposals submitted by Members in the relevant WTO bodies, as set out in paragraphs 2 to 5 of the Work Programme. In closing, he said that his delegation found the series of questions proposed by China very pertinent and would review them in the perspective of MC11.
&& The representative of the European Union expressed satisfaction with respect to the discussion generated by the communication that it had co-sponsored. She seized the opportunity to welcome the new co-sponsors of this communication, namely Moldova and Ukraine. She emphasized the importance that the EU accorded to technical assistance and capacity building in support for e-commerce development in the digital area of its development agenda. She went on to argue that the EU was keen on discussing challenges and opportunities in the e-commerce area. For example, the development aspects of e-commerce would be at the heart of the EU's forthcoming Aid-for-Trade strategy. The EU also enacted recently a European Investment Plan, which might very strongly support digitalization. In addition, the EU was envisaging in its External Investment Plan considering the potential actions to support digitalisation and a separate strand of work to support building/updating of the national regulatory frameworks, including in online trade. Another example was the recent initiative called "Digital for Development" that the EU had undertaken with a view to streamlining development assistance in four priority areas related to digital economy including, digital infrastructure, of which the necessary regulatory frameworks; digital literacy and digital skills; digital for growth, entrepreneurship and job creation; and digital technologies as an enabler. She believed that this initiative could be part of future discussions on the challenges associated with e-commerce.
&& The representative of South Africa, on behalf of the African Group, recalled that the African Group had been approaching the exploratory discussions under the Work Programme on E‑commerce from a perspective that had given paramount importance to the development implications of e-commerce, taking into account the economic, financial, and development needs of developing countries. She indicated that the Group would be interested in an exchange of views and experiences on the basis of the current Work Programme on E-commerce. For the Group, the immediate priority of the Committee should be a fuller assessment of the wide-ranging disruptions that would result from the fourth industrial revolution, the growth of digital trade and e-commerce. In that respect, discussions in the CTD under the Work Programme should take up issues that would prioritize the needs of developing countries and LDCs, especially the challenges to and ways of enhancing their participation in electronic commerce. For exporters of electronically delivered products, these challenges included, inter alia, the improvement of access to infrastructure and transfer of technology, as well as the movement of natural persons.
She went on to suggest that discussion on e-commerce should be framed around measures that foster inclusion and equitable development for all developing and least developed countries. Specifically for the African Group, critical areas of interest for future discussion on e-commerce included the reality of increasing digital inequality, the importance of digital rights, the existing extremely high market concentration levels in the current global e-commerce space, and the range of attempts at a national level to shape digital flows in order to influence trade and affect national digital catch-up. Addressing these issues would help African governments explore their own policy options, with a view to achieving Africa’s longstanding developmental objectives of industrial development, structural transformation and employment, in the context of the profound changes brought on by the so-called "Fourth Industrial Revolution". 
She requested that the statement delivered by the African Group at the March 2017 CTD meeting be reflected in the minutes of the present meeting. 
This statement, as reflected in the Minutes of the 101st session of the CTD, went as follows: the representative of South Africa, on behalf of the African Group indicated that the tabling of submissions in the CTD was in line with paragraph 1.1 of the 1998 Work Programme, and consistent with paragraph 1 of the Nairobi Decision on e-commerce. She said that continental integration, structural transformation and industrialization were the overriding priorities for Africa, as had been laid out by African Trade Ministers. She made reference in this regard to the Continental Free Trade Area (CFTA), as well as to Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want, and emphasized the need for work undertaken at the multilateral level to support Africa’s continental integration agenda. With regard to e-commerce, she said that the African Group approached the exploratory discussions under the 1998 Work Programme from a perspective that gave paramount importance to the development implications of e-commerce, taking into account the economic, financial, and development needs of developing countries. In this light, she believed that several issues that were included in the proposals under consideration were better suited for discussion in the Council for Trade in Goods (CTG), the Council for Trade in Services (CTS) or the TRIPS Council. Furthermore, some of the issues fell outside the scope of the 1998 Work Programme, or were being taken up extensively in other international organizations. She urged the proponents to refine their proposals in order to make them specific to the body where discussions should take place, as per the Work Programme. 
She went on to say that the African Group wanted the CTD to take up issues that placed at their centre the needs of developing countries and LDCs. She highlighted in this regard the importance of addressing ways of enhancing the participation of developing countries in e‑commerce, and the associated challenges. A number of examples were provided, including with respect to infrastructure, industrialization and workforce skills. It was noted that the potential benefits of e-commerce for developing countries could not be assumed or asserted. It was pointed out, inter alia, in this regard that fixed broadband penetration remained at 0.7% in Africa and the LDCs, and Africa was the only region in the world where broadband penetration remained below 20%. Bringing about socially equalizing effects would not be possible when only some had access to digital technology – whilst others had partial or no access, and also had no rights over the technology. According to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), four countries accounted for 80% of business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce, which was the largest form of e-trade. With regard to business-to-consumer (B2C) e-commerce, the Middle East and Africa together accounted for only 2.5%. Accordingly, discussions in the CTD had to address the asymmetrical nature of the existing global e-commerce space, in order to enable Africa to become e-commerce ready. One of the overriding questions of the African Group was how to build an inclusive growth and equitable development trajectory for all developing countries and LDCs. She encouraged Members to share their experiences on measures employed to develop capabilities in the digital economy. In closing, she expressed the commitment of the African Group to engage in a comprehensive discussion in the CTD on all issues relating to the development implications of e-commerce.
In closing her intervention at the present meeting, the representative of South Africa, on behalf of the African Group, highlighted some elements of the African Group's statement delivered on the March 2017 CTD meeting, and reflected above. She noted that a number of issues contained in the proposals on e-commerce would be better suited for a discussion in the other relevant bodies, such as the CTG, the CTS and the TRIPS Council. This statement also indicated that at least two submissions on e-commerce did not cover the most important elements in the Work Programme under development. Furthermore, some of the issues fell outside the scope of the 1998 Work Programme, or were being taken up extensively in other international organizations. Therefore, the proponents were urged to refine their proposals in order to make them specific to the body where discussions should take place, as per the Work Programme.
&& The representative of Uganda, on behalf of the LDC Group, noted that the proponents of the various proposals had taken into account the process that had been earlier suggested to Members, which was that submissions relating to e-commerce needed to be first taken to the relevant bodies, as set out in paragraphs 2 to 5 of the 1998 Work Programme. Discussions would need to have matured in these bodies before being reported to the General Council. He recalled a number of elements from paragraphs 1.1 and 1.2 of the Work Programme, and emphasized that the non‑negotiating mandate of the Work Programme was exploratory in nature. He went on to say that, since the establishment of the Work Programme, the digital divide for LDCs had widened. In theory, e-commerce was supposed to help surmount the obstacles faced by weaker countries when competing with stronger players. However, in reality, most LDCs had to deal with a number of constraints – relating to insufficiencies in basic infrastructure, electricity and internet access, as well as to the high cost of broadband connectivity. LDCs also faced a number of bottlenecks that prevented them from taking advantage of the opportunities that were theoretically available through e-commerce platforms. The LDC Group believed that, in order for LDCs to be able to benefit from e-commerce, the three key issues, including access, affordability and availability, needed to be addressed. He went on to provide some figures that put into context the present situation of the LDCs. He mentioned, inter alia, that only 15% of the population in LDCs used the internet. Fixed broadband penetration remained at below 1% in Africa and the LDCs. In light of the low penetration rate in the Internet use, LDCs were not in a position to take advantage of the benefits of e-commerce. 
He indicated that discussions under the Work Programme needed to focus on overcoming the challenges that were hindering LDCs from becoming e-commerce-ready. It was suggested that discussions could focus on a number of specific issues, including access to electricity, access to digital infrastructure and cheap and fast broadband, inadequate skills, and technology transfer. He went on to express support for the intervention by the African Group, and particularly noted that most of the proposals under consideration fell outside the scope and mandate of the 1998 Work Programme. He invited the proponents to narrow down their submissions to issues specific to the CTD, and to focus on the elements contained in paragraph 5.1 of the Work Programme, with a view to addressing the digital divide. He also highlighted the need to complement, and not undermine, initiatives within Africa, and in particular Agenda 2063: "The Africa We Want". He believed that it was important to examine the implications of e-commerce for the structural transformation and industrialization of Africa, and what the impact would be on domestic markets, domestic manufacturers and service suppliers. Finally, he outlined the plans of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) to connect 1.5 billion people to the internet, and regretted that funds were not being made available for this purpose. In this regard, he expressed concern with the downward trajectory in Aid for Trade, particularly for LDCs, and stressed the need for consistency in the message and practice of donors.
&& The representative of Uganda, on behalf of the LDC Group, added that he wished to highlight some points of the statement delivered by the Group at the March 2017 CTD meeting. He said that the starting point was the 1998 Work Programme on E-commerce that allowed it sufficient space to have an extensive and exhaustive discussion on e-commerce. This Work Programme had no negotiating mandate, but was, however, exploratory in nature. He argued that while in theory the e-commerce phenomenon could be beneficial to consumers and businesses in weaker countries and help enterprises become stronger players in the international trading system, in reality, most LDCs faced a number of constraints, which prevented them from taking advantage of opportunities theoretically available through the e-commerce platforms. These constraints included, inter alia, insufficient basic infrastructure and access to electricity and to the Internet, high cost of broadband connectivity. Discussions in seminars on e-commerce organized by different agencies at the WTO had shown that some WTO Members, including developing countries, had derived substantial benefits from e-commerce. However, it was still unclear what domestic regulatory policy frameworks were adopted by these countries to afford their domestic industries the requisite policy space, and protection, to grow and thrive until such a time that they became strong, emerging and dominant players. In this light, the LDC Group requested that major players share their experience on the digital industrial policies that they employed to, inter alia, guarantee their digital rights and ensure their current prosperity. Turning to the way forward, he suggested that as most of the submissions on e-commerce fell outside the scope and mandate of the Work Programme, the proponents should narrow their submissions to issues specific to each particular body. In addition, in the event this would not be possible, the proponents should focus on the development-related aspects of the work programme, with a view to considering the examination of issues at the heart of the digital divide that needed to be resolved in order to build the e-commerce readiness of LDCs. These included the improvement of access to infrastructure; transfer of technology; the movement of natural persons; and the use of information technology.
&& The representative of Zimbabwe expressed support for the intervention by South Africa and Uganda. She underscored the importance of exchanging information in line with the mandate of the Work Programme and urged the Committee to focus discussion on the requirements of the mandate of the Work Programme, taking into account the financial, economic and development needs of developing countries. She reiterated that there was no mandate to negotiate rules on e‑commerce at the WTO. She believed that in light of the existing digital divide between developed and developing countries, it would be premature to discuss rule-making on e-commerce at this stage. She went on to say that there was no consensus on the launch of e-commerce negotiations as required under paragraph 34 of the Nairobi Declaration. She invited Members to avoid discussions of issues that went beyond the scope of the WTO and the mandate of the Work Programme such as, the Internet governance, which had been one of core issues of other international organizations such as the ITU and the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS). She underlined the importance for developing countries of sovereign rights over data, as such data represented valuable national asset. Developing countries should be allowed to have the requisite policy space - so as to build up and store their own data locally - and the capacity to develop their own cross border platforms. She noted that the 2017 WSIS Forum had clearly shown that the major challenges that Africa was facing in terms of digital divide were energy shortage and access to the grid connection. In that respect, she noted with concern that the digital divide between developed and developing countries continued to grow with the rapid expansion of the digital economy. She invited the Committee to take a developmental approach and deliberate on how to increase developing countries' capabilities so as to bridge this digital divide.
She additionally requested that Members exchange information and discuss ways to promote transfer of technology to developing countries, improve infrastructure, promote the development of digital industrial policies and online platforms in developing countries and address the extremely high market concentration levels in global e-commerce. Such discussions could be framed around the impact of the digital industrial revolution on inequality, digital rights, job creation and retention in developing countries as well as the type of development cooperation suitable for developing countries that needed to embark on digital industrialization. She then called on the proponents of submissions on e-commerce to revise their proposals so as to align them with the mandate of the Work Programme, and in particular to make them specific to the body – CTD, CTG, CTS and TRIPS Council- where discussions should take place, as per this Work Programme. Finally, she invited the proponents to eliminate from the proposals elements that went beyond the scope of the WTO or elements on rule-making.
&& The representative of Swaziland expressed support for the interventions by South Africa, Uganda and Zimbabwe.
&& The representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela said that his delegation supported the examination of the e‑commerce issue in the context of the 1998 Work Programme on E-commerce, which did not have any negotiating mandate. He pointed to the importance of addressing a number of issues of interest to developing countries, including infrastructure for e-commerce, the digital gap, in particular access to internet, digital platforms and the exchange of experience, so as to allow developing countries to derive real benefits from their participation in e-commerce.
&& The representative of Japan reiterated the importance that Japan accorded to e-commerce and digital trade as well as to its positive impact on development. He re-emphasized the need to adopt a concrete and focused approach to harvest concrete outcome on e-commerce at MC11. In that respect, he suggested that Members consider what could be done from a pragmatic perspective for MC11 and beyond. He also expressed the readiness of his delegation to actively engage in this discussion.
&& The representative of India recognized that e-commerce had become a major driver of international economic activity and international trade. In India, e-commerce was transforming the way business was being conducted, and represented one of the fastest growing segments of the economy. However, growth of e-commerce activities had given birth to new challenges, both for domestic and cross-border trade. These included issues relating to consumer protection and the sale of counterfeit goods and services, the safety of online payments, e-authentication procedures and digital signatures, taxation, as well as other challenges relating to shortages of skilled manpower, human resource development and logistics. As in most developing countries, including India, rules on these issues were still evolving, his delegation believed that it was premature to discuss rule-making in the area of e-commerce. Instead, discussions on e-commerce should be limited to the non-negotiating mandate of the Work Programme, and particularly focus, in the CTD, on addressing the development needs of developing countries. For example, as the growth of digital trade and e-commerce was dependent on technology, the Committee should examine how to ensure an adequate transfer of technology. Similarly, Members needed to consider ways of reducing the digital divide, promoting increased internet access, and enhancing the mobilization of financial resources to develop the digital infrastructure in developing countries and LDCs. He also highlighted the importance of cooperation amongst Members, and sharing of experiences in areas such as consumer protection, safety of online payments, taxation, human resources development and logistics. Cooperation in the area of cyber security, electronic signatures and electronic documents was also important. In closing, he stressed the need for greater efforts by national governments and the international community to enhance the readiness of countries to engage in, and benefit from, digital trade. He also urged proponents to narrow their proposals and come up with specific issues that could be discussed in the CTD.
&& The representative of Ecuador supported the intervention by, amongst others, South Africa, Uganda, Zimbabwe and Venezuela. While also supporting any initiatives within the Work Programme on E-commerce, she called upon Members to bear in mind that many of the past and present proposals did not have great meaning in the context where the majority of WTO Members did not enjoy some fundamental services, including a minimum access to the Internet and electricity. She was of the view that the Work Programme represented a framework for discussions that would help developing Members deepen the understandings of their needs so as to ensure a fair integration into the global economy, including through digital trade. As developing countries had different experiences and expectations for MC11, it would be important to have a very clear framework for negotiations on e-commerce ahead of MC11. In that respect, proponents should reformulate their proposals and ensure that they aligned with the Work Programme on e‑commerce.
 && The representative of Singapore said that she wished to briefly share information about the Lunch Panel hosted by ASEAN on 27 April 2017, as part of the UNCTAD E-commerce Week. She noted that the event touched upon the development aspects of e-commerce and helped find synergies between the discussions taking place in UNCTAD and WTO on the development aspects of e-commerce. The event featured the theme “Can E-commerce Trade Rules help MSMEs in Developing Countries?”. The panellists included the WTO Secretariat, Singapore, Cambodia, the Global Express Association (GEA), the International Trade Centre (ITC) and the Thailand Vice Minister for Commerce, His Excellency Mr Winichai Chaemchaeng, who provided opening remarks. Panellists shared view on how e-commerce had enabled MSMEs to better integrate into the global economy, including by relying on existing WTO rules that applied to e-commerce as well as the common types of e-commerce rules found in RTAs. It was noted that interest in e-commerce cut across development levels in ASEAN, and this was exemplified by the commitment to some e‑commerce disciplines taken by ASEAN countries in the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (FTA). She informed the Committee that the outcome document, which provided a summary of the Lunch Panel reflections and key takeaways from this Panel was circulated in the CTD, the CTG, the TRIPs Council and the General Council. ASEAN Members looked forward to engaging constructively with other interested WTO Members on how to take forward the work on e-commerce.
&& The representative of Nigeria highlighted three points. First, the Committee had the responsibility to continue discussing e-commerce on the basis of the existing mandate and guidelines of the Work Programme on e-commerce as well as on the basis of proposals submitted by Members. Second, the proposal that Nigeria had co-sponsored was consistent with the focus of the CTD's discussions on the development implications of electronic commerce. Third, the Committee should consider a number of issues of interest to developing countries - some of which were highlighted by previous speakers - such as bridging the digital divide, access to infrastructure, technology, capacity building, along with other issues relating to the participation of developing countries in e-commerce. This would help Members have a better understanding on the e-commerce issues in order to take the e-commerce work forward. In closing, he believed that as in every Ministerial meeting there would be a decision on e-commerce at MC11. However, such decision could be similar to or go beyond the previous ones, and its scope would ultimately be decided upon on the basis of the Membership's consensus. As a result, the issue as to whether it was premature, or not, to make rules on e-commerce would be decided at an appropriate time.  
&& The representative of Cuba said that as noted by her delegation in other bodies of the WTO, Cuba was of the view that the work on e-commerce should be undertaken only on the basis of the 1998 Work Programme. She expressed full support for the interventions by South Africa, Uganda, Venezuela, India and Ecuador. 
&& The representative of Cameroon expressed surprise that the agenda item under consideration referred to the Work Programme on E-commerce whereas the first delegation which intervened made reference to a market access issue. He recalled that the discussions in the CTD should focus on the development aspects of e-commerce so as to ensure that developing country Members would be able to derive full benefits from their engagement on e-commerce. The negotiating aspects of e-commerce should be dealt with in other WTO bodies, while the development aspects should be addressed in the CTD - as the latter remained - above all, the body where the pertinence and effectiveness of Members' work was judged in terms of its development impact on developing countries. In his view, the main problem that should be addressed in the CTD was the digital divide among developed and developing countries. He argued that at a seminar organized by the Friends of E-commerce for Development, the Director-General had acknowledged that half of the world's population experienced an important digital gap, which could further increase. This explained why the discussion in the CTD should aim to reduce the digital gap, rather than enlarging it to a digital gulf. Overall, he proposed that the Committee consider two issues: first, what policies could help developing countries reduce the digital divide and benefit fairly from e-commerce?; second, would traditional means such as development aid help address the digital divide?. Referring to the Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), he said that there were no binding financial commitments from developed Members to finance the acquisition of capacity for countries that lacked such capacity. It followed that a WTO Agreement on e-commerce should be able to help Members genuinely participate in e-commerce, including by allowing developing countries to develop the requisite capacity to effectively engage on digital trade. The CTD had a key role in that respect. In closing, he hoped that the different proponents of submissions on e-commerce would take into account the interventions by South Africa, Swaziland, Cuba, Venezuela, Ecuador, and India so as to reflect development concerns in their proposals.
&& The Committee took note of all the statements made.  
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the Preferential Trade Arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in Dedicated Sessions of the CTD. He noted that at a previous meeting of the CTD Regular session, Members had been informed that the US's trade preferences for Nepal were notified under the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs. The Secretariat had now received the US tariff schedule relating to these preferences and was in the process of drafting the factual presentation. Turning to the other PTAs to be considered in Dedicated Sessions, he said that the situation remained the same as was reported to Members at the March 2017 CTD meeting. In particular, there were five PTAs that had been notified - since the establishment of the Transparency Mechanism - for which the Secretariat had still not received the full set of data required for the preparation of factual presentations. These included the PTAs that were being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation, Thailand and Chinese Taipei. He urged the notifying Members to provide the requisite data and information as soon as possible. In closing, he said that he also wished to mention that some Members had still not submitted data on imports by duty scheme, as provided in the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs. These included Iceland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Morocco, New Zealand, Switzerland, Tajikistan and Turkey.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update. 
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered. 
&& The representative of Cambodia, on behalf of the LDC Group, thanked Members for providing DFQF to LDCs, as mandated in the Hong Kong and Bali Ministerial Decisions. He urged them not to backtrack on the implementation of the 2005 Hong Kong Ministerial and the 2013 Bali Ministerial Decisions on DFQF market access for LDCs, so as to provide increasingly greater market access to LDCs, in a manner that would allow them to raise their trade volume. He also said that the developing country Members, declaring themselves in a position to do so, should, prior to the next Ministerial Conference, seek to improve their existing DFQF coverage for products originating in LDCs in a manner that would raise LDCs' trade volume. He went on to recall that the Bali Ministerial Decision had instructed Members to notify DFQF schemes for LDCs and any other relevant changes, pursuant to the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs. He requested that the CTD should continue to annually review the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to the LDCs, and report to the General Council for appropriate action. Finally, he reminded Members that the Group had submitted the draft Terms of References (ToRs) in the CTD for a clinical examination of DFQF implementation, with a view to identifying the problems hindering the full implementation of the DFQF market access. Therefore, he encouraged Members to inform the LDC Group of their concerns regarding these ToRs so as to allow it to accommodate these concerns.
&& The representative of Uganda expressed support for the intervention by Cambodia. With respect to the revised ToRs, he explained that it had not been possible to accommodate all requests made by delegations during the consultations. In particular, the Group had decided to maintain the reference to the Hong Kong Decision, because it was felt that this Decision provided the appropriate background and mandate. Furthermore, the removal of the reference to this Decision from the revised ToRs had systemic implications for all LDC specific issues, including cotton, preferential rules of origin and the services waiver. He questioned the suggestion that no references could be made to the Doha Development Agenda (DDA), noting in particular that this had further implications, for example with respect to the implementation of the Ministerial Decisions from the Bali and Nairobi Ministerial Conferences. He also observed that the proposed clinical examination was not about the future, but rather about how DFQF had been implemented in the past. Any recommendations resulting from the study would have to be agreed to by consensus in the CTD.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The representative of Uruguay said that, on 12 June 2017, Uruguay had submitted a document on behalf of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay and Uruguay, which were members of LAIA. The document, circulated as WT/COMTD/N/53, contained 16 individual notifications that corresponded to each of the Agreements in the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo for the period covering 1 January 2016 – 31 December 2016. The notifications were developed and approved by the LAIA member states under the related Agreements, on the basis of the model established in the document WT/COMTD/63 dated 12 November 2007. These notifications were presented under the individual obligations of WTO Members to notify the instruments concluded under paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause and in compliance with sections D to G of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs, adopted by the Decision of 14 December 2006, without prejudice to notifications submitted individually by LAIA member states to the CTD or the CRTA. She added that the LAIA signatories of the aforementioned agreements had expressed their willingness to provide any additional information that might be required with respect to any particular aspects of the agreements at a dedicated session of the CTD, in accordance with paragraphs 16 and 18 of the Transparency Mechanism on RTAs.
&& The representative of Brazil supported the intervention by Uruguay, and noted that the individual notifications of the agreements concluded in 2016 under the umbrella of the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo were transmitted to the CTD and contained in document WT/COMTD/N/53. These agreements were notified under the Enabling Clause and the notification was drawn up in strict accordance with the standard format provided in document WT/COMTD/63. The notifications were submitted in accordance with individual notifications' obligations of Members, in compliance with the provisions in sections D to G of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. He stressed that all the information relating to LAIA Agreements and required in the notification format had been sent to the WTO Secretariat. Nonetheless, the delegation of Brazil was ready to supplement this information, including with respect to any particular aspect of the agreement to which Brazil had been signatory, and in accordance with paragraphs 16 to 18 of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs. He reiterated the willingness of Brazil to participate actively in the discussions aiming at the enhancement of transparency provisions applicable to RTAs within the CTD. 
&& The representative of the European Union welcomed the notification contained in document WT/COMTD/N/53. Her delegation considered this submission a positive step, as it addressed some of the concerns that had previously been raised, including with respect to the use of the standard RTA notification format. She indicated that her delegation would provide its comments at a later date, as the 16 notifications contained in the document were still under consideration.
&& The representative of Argentina said that his delegation subscribed to the presentation of document WT/COMTD/N/53 as made by Uruguay.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
&&The points in this paragraph, made by Egypt at the 90th Session and also reflected in the minutes of the 92nd, 93rd, 95th, 97th and 100th Sessions, are reflected once again in the minutes of this meeting at the request of the Egyptian delegation.
&& The delegation of Uganda on behalf of the LDC Group, requested that the statement delivered by the Group at the March 2017 CTD meeting be reflected in the minutes of the present meeting.
 
&& The points in this paragraph, relating to the revised proposal by the LDC Group, were made by Uganda at the 100th and 101st Sessions. They are reflected once again in the minutes of this meeting at the request of the delegation of Uganda.









WT/COMTD/M/97

-  PAGE 1 -


WT/COMTD/M/103

-  PAGE 19 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/103


10 November 2017
(17-6111)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/ NUMPAGES  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 19
Committee on Trade and Development
103rd Session
 




