WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/63
29 June 2007


(07-2771)


Committee on Trade and Development
Sixty-Third Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 25 MAY 2007 

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B. C. Servansing (Mauritius) 


 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875970" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC170875970 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875971" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC170875971 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc170875972" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc170875972 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc170875973" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc170875973 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875974" C.	declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries	 PAGEREF _TOC170875974 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875975" -	presentations by the food and agriculture organization and the united nations conference on trade and development	 PAGEREF _TOC170875975 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875976" D.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC170875976 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875977" -	communication from the european communities on the agreement on trade in goods of the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between the association of south east asian nations (asean) and the people's republic of china (wt/comtd/51/add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875977 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875978" -	communications from the united states on the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between asean and the people's republic of china, the protocol to amend the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between asean and the people's republic of china, and the agreement on trade in goods of the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between asean and the people's republic of china (wt/comtd/51/add.3 and wt/comtd/51/add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875978 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875979" -	communication from japan on the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between asean and the people's republic of china and the agreement on trade in goods of the framework agreement on comprehensive economic cooperation between asean and the people's republic of china (wt/comtd/51/add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875979 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875980" -	communication from brazil on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875980 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875981" -	communication from china on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875981 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875982" -	communication from india on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt//comtd/57/add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875982 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875983" -	communication from pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875983 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875984" -	communication from the european communities – responses to questions submitted by brazil, china, india and pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (wt/comtd/57/add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875984 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875985" -	generalized system of preferences – notification by japan (wt/comtd/n/2/add.14)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875985 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875986" E.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (wt/l/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875986 \H 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875987" F.	paragraph 51 of the doha declaration on identifying and debating developmental aspects of the negotiations, in order to help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected (wt/comtd/w/143/rev.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875987 \H 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875988" G.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC170875988 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875989" -	communication from the united states (wt/comtd/w/149/add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC170875989 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875990" H.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC170875990 \H 16
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc170875991" (i)	Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2006 (WT/COMTD/W/157)	 PAGEREF _Toc170875991 \h 16
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc170875992" (ii)	Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2006 (WT/COMTD/W/158)	 PAGEREF _Toc170875992 \h 16
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC170875993" I.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC170875993 \H 19




ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 63rd Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3012/Rev.1 issued on 21 May 2007.  
The agenda was adopted.
&& The Chairman said that he wished to report on the Aid for Trade meeting which had taken place on 27 April 2007, and which had focused on boosting trade finance for developing countries.  He said that Members had had a chance to meet representatives of international financial institutions (IFIs), mainly the regional development banks and the International Finance Corporation.  The latter ran a global network of trade finance facilitation programmes for small-scale traders and bankers in developing countries.  The report on the meeting could be found in documents WT/AFT/W/25 and WT/COMTD/AFT/W/1.  He informed the Committee that Members felt that trade finance facilitation programmes run by the IFIs were successful examples of Aid for Trade projects, as they were cost‑effective – with a high leverage on the trade of developing countries.  They offered a global coverage for small- and medium-sized enterprises and small banks from around the world.  The programmes also contained a strong technical assistance component to allow developing countries to handle their own trade financing.  It was hoped that the meeting would help strengthen existing contacts and build others between the IFIs and the donors, thereby helping to expand such programmes.  In the future, it was planned for the IFIs to report on any progress made to the Aid for Trade Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanism. 
He also informed Members that the Second CTD Session on Aid for Trade was scheduled to take place on 19 June 2007, and would focus on the Standards and Trade Development Facility, as well as on capacity building to facilitate trade.  The Third CTD Session on Aid for Trade, focusing on trends and priorities in infrastructure building, was scheduled to take place on 9 July 2007.  He said that consultations were ongoing to prepare a roadmap of work on Aid for Trade, and this would soon be circulated to Members.  
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
-	PRESENTATIONS BY THE FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION AND THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
&& The Chairman recalled that it had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that a panel discussion would be held at the present meeting with the participation of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Bank.  It had also been agreed that the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) would be invited to report on the outcome of its meeting on commodities that took place on 21 March 2007.  He informed the Committee that commodities experts from the World Bank had not been available to participate in the present meeting.  He, however, welcomed Mr. David Hallam, the Chief of the Trade Policy Service in the Trade and Markets Division of the Economic and Social Development Department of the FAO.  He also welcomed back Mr. Olle Ostesson, the Officer-in-charge of the Commodities Branch at UNCTAD.  He said that he would first invite the representative of the FAO to make his presentation, focusing on what the FAO was doing in the area of commodities to deal with fluctuating prices, adding value to products and medium to long-term strategic planning.  The representative of UNCTAD would then make his presentation, which would also deal with a new "Global Initiative on Commodities" of which UNCTAD was part.
&& The representative of the FAO said that the FAO was concerned with the generation and dissemination of knowledge and sought to contribute to development goals. Emphasis was placed on analysis, studies, and human and institutional capacity building.  The organization also provided direct support to its members on commodity-related issues.  Much of the commodity-related work in the FAO was the responsibility of the Trade and Markets Division (formerly the Commodities and Trade Division), though other technical departments of the FAO also dealt with commodity issues.  The FAO additionally collaborated in its commodities work with other international organizations, for example the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), UNCTAD and the World Bank.
He said that prices of primary commodities had been experiencing a long-term decline, of about two per cent per year on average in real terms.  Significant price fluctuations around the declining trend had also been observed.  The LDCs as a group had been particularly affected by a sharp decline in their income terms of trade.  He said that the Trade and Markets Division analyzed commodity price trends and variability, and also undertook regular reviews of individual commodities, including the short-term and medium-term outlook for each.  All of this work was disseminated in various reports, and could also be found on the FAO website.  He also noted that a lot of discussion had taken place recently in the FAO's Committee on Commodity Problems (CCP) on the subject of bio-fuels.  In this regard, he said that bio-fuel demand was having a major impact on the world market prices of a number of commodities, as well as their pattern of production.  A new FAO programme funded by the German government was looking at the implications of bio-fuel demand for commodity markets and food security.  The FAO had also been concerned recently with the phenomenon of import surges, which appeared to have increased in frequency for some countries in recent years, and which had a major impact on price variability.  Work in this area concerned characterizing import surges and trying to find ways of detecting them.  He explained that the objective of all the initiatives he had described was to contribute to market transparency.  The greater the amount of objective analytical information that was available, the more stable markets might become.  He said that members of the CCP had recently indicated a strong demand for capacity building to help them undertake their own analysis of price and market developments.  He added that it was also important to look at the behaviour of the various funds and their impact on commodity markets, but relatively little work had been done in this area up to now.
He went on to say that the FAO was also concerned with policies affecting commodity markets.  A series of technical consultations on a commodity-by-commodity basis had been undertaken in recent years, looking at the impact of different types of policies, including liberalization policies, on each commodity and the lessons that could be learned.  The analysis had tried to identify the winners and losers from liberalization and reform in the short run.  The FAO had also looked at some specific measures that had been proposed to try and ameliorate the situation regarding commodity price fluctuations.  For example, the feasibility of supply management schemes was  explored in a study which was presented at a meeting of the CCP.  He said that while the conclusion of the CCP at that meeting was that such schemes were neither feasible nor desirable, the opposite conclusion was reached at a side event to the meeting in which participated a number of non‑governmental organizations (NGOs).  The feasibility of risk management tools was another area that the FAO was looking into.  The organization was part of an international task force dealing with this issue, in which the World Bank took the lead.  Demand promotion schemes for commodities was an additional area in which the FAO participated, the most well-known example being in the tea sector.  In particular, the FAO had devised a tea brand and had launched a number of promotional schemes to stimulate demand.  The organization was currently sponsoring the international year of natural fibres, intended to promote demand for natural fibres.
On the issue of adding value, he said that vertical diversification capturing value-added could generate growth and reduce poverty.  The Trade and Markets Division had undertaken a number of market studies for value-added products, for example a recent one on non-traditional agricultural exports.  The study had highlighted, inter alia, the fragility of commodity markets, as well as concerns relating to sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures and technical barriers to trade (TBT).  The FAO was also interested in competitive behaviour through global value chains and in exploring the real winners from adding value to commodities.  In this regard, he observed that the gains did not always go to smallholder producers.  A new initiative had also been launched within the FAO to evaluate the impact of foreign direct investment on the agricultural sectors and processing industries in developing countries.  The organization additionally provided technical support and training in the technology area, in particular with regard to the transfer of processing-related technology.  The issue of standards and certification was also one in which the FAO was deeply involved, and the organization was currently implementing a project in this area for five West African countries.
With regard to the FAO's work in strategic planning, he said that the organization's current long-term analysis looked towards the year 2030.  He explained that FAO studies of this nature looked at the long-term prospects for commodities, and agriculture in general, including analyses of the effects of urbanization, globalization, shifting food consumption patterns, technology possibilities and resource competition.  Medium-term outlook studies were undertaken largely in collaboration with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).  The FAO also conducted studies on technical possibilities for diversification through a categorization by agro‑ecological zones and by different agricultural production systems.  Work was additionally undertaken with the CFC to define medium and long-term strategies on a commodity-by-commodity basis. 
He said that the FAO additionally provided direct support to its member countries upon request.  The support was intended to help countries in their commodity strategy formulation and related policy formulation, as well as to build human and institutional capacity.  The organization worked closely with the CFC on product and market development projects, and was also one of a number of organizations involved in a major project funded by the EC with the objective of helping develop the commodities sector in African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries.  The FAO was also involved in a number of broad regional strategic studies relating to commodities.  For example, support was being provided to the African Union in a study on the potential development of a common market for agricultural products in Africa.  Finally, he said that the FAO participated in a number of regional programmes for food security, which looked at regional, commodity-related issues and policies, and which provided a background to national commodity strategies.      
&& The representative of UNCTAD said that the 21 March 2007 UNCTAD meeting on commodities had taken place as part of the 11th Session of UNCTAD's Commission on Trade in Goods and Services, and Commodities.  He informed Members that the Commission had confirmed the broad thrust of UNCTAD's work on commodities, in particular with respect to the need to ensure that small producers could access markets and benefit from the recent surge in demand for commodities.  Several ways to ensure this had been discussed, including issues relating to access to credit, the provision of information and the importance of creating commodity exchanges.  He recalled that he had discussed these and other issues during his presentation at the last meeting of the CTD.
He said that he wished to move on to discuss a new "Global Initiative on Commodities" (GIC), which had come out of a meeting held in Brasilia on 7 to 11 May 2007, organized by the ACP Group of countries, the CFC, UNCTAD, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the Government of Brazil.  More than 200 participants from governments, commodity enterprises, research institutions and NGOs had attended.  The meeting was the first preparatory event for UNCTAD XII, which would be held in Accra, Ghana in April 2008. 
In terms of background to the meeting, he said that several LDCs, including many commodity-dependent countries, were unlikely to meet the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving world poverty by 2015.  More generally, it was impossible to eliminate poverty, achieve sustainable development and attain the targets of the MDGs without improving the conditions and prospects of commodity producers.  Many countries depended on commodities as a source of livelihood, employment, foreign exchange and public revenue, and to provide the principal stimulus for economic growth.  Developing countries were facing the challenge of industrializing and meeting the growing demands of their populations at a time when the constraints on the natural resource base and the environment were more severe than ever.  More than half of the commodity trade of developing countries was now accounted for by trade among these countries, with such trade increasing in all regions.  Developing countries also accounted for most of the growth in world commodity demand.  The challenge for developing countries was to sustain – even accelerate – the growth momentum over the coming years for economically, environmentally and socially sustainable development.  The GIC aimed to re-launch the commodities agenda from a poverty reduction and development perspective, to raise the profile and understanding of the commodities problématique through sensitization of the international community, and to identify an international strategy for commodities based on coherence, governance and solidarity at all levels. 
In the context of development assistance, he said that the point was made at the meeting in Brasilia that significant improvements were required in the quantity, quality, predictability and development effectiveness of development assistance targeting the commodity sector.  In addition, participants at the meeting called for a reversal in recent declines in official development assistance (ODA) support for agricultural development in developing countries, and recognized that concerted efforts needed to be made to provide aid for raising agricultural productivity, technological development and access to credit for farmers.  It was also recognized that financial assistance needed to be provided to commodity-dependent developing countries in order to build and upgrade physical infrastructure such as roads, ports, storage facilities and irrigation, and to eliminate supply bottlenecks.  Also in the context of ODA, it was agreed that the Aid for Trade initiative should assess the needs of commodity‑dependent developing countries and support their diversification efforts, including by supporting the introduction of appropriate technology and by setting up effective SPS‑ and TBT‑related infrastructure for meeting standards and other market requirements and achieving sustainable production and processing systems.  Support was also needed to meet the adjustment costs of trade reform and preference erosion, and for capacity development and trade-related technical assistance.
On issues relating to finance, debt and earnings instability, the GIC highlighted that MDG‑consistent debt sustainability frameworks for commodity-dependent countries required that export earning shortfalls be taken into account when designing debt-relief measures.  In addition, international financial and monetary policies, especially exchange and interest rate policies of developed countries, needed to be more sensitive to the particular circumstances and needs of commodity-dependent developing countries.  Initiatives were also required to deal with the negative effects of the instability of commodity prices and export earnings.  Areas to be dealt with in this regard included consideration, where appropriate, of supply management schemes in the context of international commodity agreements, price risk management and the establishment of viable safety‑nets for small producers.  It was also emphasized that compensatory finance schemes should be timely, should be easy to access, should not include conditionalities and should include pass-through mechanisms to take into account the interests of producers and consumers.
In the trade area, the GIC noted that a successful conclusion of the Doha Round should effectively address the concerns of commodity-producing developing countries.  With regard to market access, concerns included reducing tariffs, tariff escalation and tariff peaks, as well as greater transparency in the application of SPS and TBT rules in developed countries.  With respect to world agricultural trade reform, concerns included the timely elimination of export subsidies and a significant reduction in trade-distorting domestic support.  Finally, with regard to policy space, the Brasilia meeting participants recognized that commodity-dependent developing countries needed to be provided with sufficient flexibilities in undertaking commitments concerning agricultural and non‑agricultural trade liberalization.  These countries needed to be able to protect food security and rural livelihoods, promote rural development and provide adequate support for the building of productive capacity and export competitiveness.
Governance issues were also treated at the meeting in Brasilia.  Meeting participants had in particular called for the International Task Force on Commodities – launched at UNCTAD XI – to be made operational and to be provided with sufficient resources.  Civil society initiatives to convert the efforts of the GIC into a popular campaign were also encouraged, especially those aimed at improving the sustainability of commodity trade and improving governance in commodity value chains.  There was a call for international commodity bodies to be strengthened in their role of providing expertise and assistance to specific commodity sectors in commodity-dependent developing countries.  Finally, in view of the important role played by global enterprises in all aspects of commodity production and trade, it was recognized that these enterprises needed to increase their contribution to sustainable development, good working conditions, remunerative employment and poverty reduction.
On supply-side issues, the GIC called on developing country governments, drawing on increased financial support from the international community and acting in partnership with the private sector where appropriate, to take steps to improve infrastructure in order to improve yields, reduce transaction costs, mitigate environmental and health impacts and reduce losses on products in transit.  Developing country governments were also called upon to take proactive measures – both directly and by creating and enhancing an enabling environment – to facilitate access to land and to extend and improve services, quality control and verification procedures.  The need for developing country governments, research organizations and the enterprise sector to build up capacity and capabilities for research and development was also identified, as was the need to tap and adapt new technologies to meet local requirements, build competitiveness and increase productivity.  Developing country governments, supported by the international community, were additionally called on to improve the capacity of commodity producers and processors to meet product and process standards, whether mandatory or voluntary, and to ensure that information about standards reached producers.  Moreover, standard-setting bodies, whether official or private, were asked to ensure that, in setting standards, the interests of developing country commodity producers were taken into account.
He said that value chain issues were also highlighted in the GIC.  It was recommended that developing country governments, supported by the international community, should work to strengthen producers' associations, incentives and laws relating to anti-competitive behaviour as well as improve producer capabilities in order to make it possible for developing country producers to enter the world supply chain on equitable terms.  It was also agreed that developing country governments and the private sector should identify areas for value addition and processing of primary products that were internationally competitive, while importing countries were called on to remove barriers to trade in processed products.  Governments of developing countries and Regional Economic Communities were asked to support, in cooperation with the private sector, the creation of effectively functioning domestic and regional commodities markets.  Areas to be treated in this regard included the removal of infrastructural bottlenecks, as well as the removal of tariff and non-tariff barriers to regional trade and South-South trade, inter alia by strengthening the Generalised System of Trade Preferences (GSTP) and concluding the third round of the GSTP negotiations.  The international community and developing country governments were also asked to support the efforts of developing country producers to exploit the opportunities offered by new and dynamic sectors – including special and niche products such as geographical appellations, fair trade and organic labels – and were also asked to act, along with the private sector, to improve commodity producers' access to market information.
He went on to describe the outcome of the meeting with respect to the issue of finance for  diversification and competitiveness.  He said that the meeting participants in Brasilia had called on the international community to support the establishment of an export diversification and productivity improvement fund and scale up the financial resources available to the Second Account of the CFC.  They had also agreed that developing country governments should create regulatory environments enabling national stakeholders to use modern finance and risk management instruments, and should, with the support of the international community, strengthen the capacity of developing country financial institutions to provide credit to small producers and support to small and medium enterprises, including through microfinance schemes and use of new forms of collateral.  The international community, developing country governments and the enterprise sector were asked to support the establishment of effectively functioning commodity exchanges in developing countries to reduce transaction costs, improve price discovery mechanisms and support the development of domestic and regional markets.  The international community was additionally called on to encourage the development of South-South trade finance institutions and mechanisms, and to design and set up an appropriate mechanism to deal with the loss of revenues that African cotton producers faced as a result of declines in cotton prices.
Finally, on the use of resource rents, he said that the participants had recommended that governments of resource-rich developing countries minimize the negative effects of large resource in‑flows on domestic inflation and relative prices.  It was further recognized that developing country governments should ensure a balance between the objective of attracting foreign direct investment and that of maximizing government revenues through appropriate taxation and regulatory policies.  Developing country governments, in cooperation with the enterprise sector and civil society, were also asked to strengthen the linkages between the mineral sector and the local/regional economy with a view to fostering diversification.  It was also agreed that developing country governments should use resource rents to ensure long-term sustainability by replacing the depleting natural resource capital by investment in material and human capital.
In terms of next steps, he explained that the meeting in Brasilia was the starting point for a sustained initiative aimed at achieving a global consensus on addressing the critical issues for commodity development in developing countries.  The organizing agencies had agreed that the further elaboration and concretization of the GIC would take place in an inclusive process involving all stakeholders.  In this regard, he said that encouragement would also be given to commodity-related initiatives undertaken by non-governmental actors, including those conducted in cooperation with the private sector, international commodity bodies and inter-governmental organizations.  The GIC would be further elaborated in 2008 at UNCTAD XII and at the scheduled review of the Monterey Conference on Finance for Development, and would also be on the agenda of the 63rd General Assembly of the United Nations.
&& The Chairman thanked the representatives of the FAO and UNCTAD for their presentations, and opened the floor for questions and comments.
&& The representative of Kenya said that the commodities problem needed a multifaceted solution, and that the WTO had an important role to play in this regard.  He explained that national efforts could be undermined by trade barriers in importing countries, and it was in the context of the negotiations in the WTO that trade barriers could be reduced.  His delegation considered that continued discussion in the CTD on the problems faced by commodity-dependent, developing countries was very useful, and he hoped that the Committee might eventually agree on a list of recommendations in this regard.  He also suggested that at some point it would be useful to have one or more presentations by private sector institutions working in the commodities area.   
&& The representative of the FAO said that the points raised by Kenya were extremely pertinent. Trade policy issues were very significant in the context of finding a solution to the commodities problem, and much discussion was taking place in this area.  He also agreed that the private sector had an important role to play in the debate, since trade in commodities was undertaken by private sector organizations, and since private standards were also becoming extremely important.  He said that in the FAO's experience as an intergovernmental organization, it had proven difficult at times to engage private sector institutions in debate, but it was something that the FAO kept working at.   
&& The representative of UNCTAD said he agreed that trade policy issues remained crucial to the commodities problem, and also agreed on the importance of engaging the private sector.  He explained that a transformation was currently taking place in commodities markets, where industries in developing countries were becoming increasingly big global players and where South-South trade in commodities was becoming increasingly important.  The same phenomenon was being observed in investment flows.  He predicted that standard-setting bodies would evolve as the importance of developing countries grew in international trade and investment.  He emphasized that policies should be designed to ensure that the changes taking place in the global economy did not leave the smaller producers out of the picture, and said that engagement with the private sector was crucial in this regard.
&& The Chairman said that he had noted Kenya's proposal to eventually involve one or more private sector institutions in the CTD's debate on commodities.  For the next meeting of the CTD, however, he proposed that the World Bank be invited to make a presentation, since commodities experts from the World Bank had not been available to participate in the present meeting.
It was so agreed.  
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES ON THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.2)
-	&& Communications  FROM THE UNITED STATES ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, THE PROTOCOL TO AMEND THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.3 AND WT/COMTD/51/ADD.5)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM JAPAN ON THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS OF THE FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT ON COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC COOPERATION BETWEEN ASEAN AND THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (WT/COMTD/51/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman recalled that communications from the EC, the US and Japan raising questions on the notifications made by ASEAN and China were circulated in 2006 as documents WT/COMTD/51/Add.2, Add.3 and Add.4, respectively.  His predecessor in the Chair had informed the Committee at its 58th Session on 6 July 2006 that the responses from ASEAN and China had been submitted bilaterally to each of the three Members that had raised questions.  A number of delegations had then indicated their wish to see all the responses, and were of the view that the responses should be circulated as a CTD document.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would consult informally with the concerned delegations, and would report back to the CTD.  In this regard, he informed the Committee that the consultations he had undertaken to date had been quite positive, and he believed that the issue could be resolved soon. 
He said that a new communication from the United States on this matter had also been received, and had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/51/Add.5.  He inquired whether the US representative wished to introduce the communication.  
&& The representative of the United States said that she agreed with the Chairman's assessment that the issue could be resolved soon.  She did not, however, wish to make a statement concerning the new communication, since the communication did not contain any new questions, and since the matter was being discussed in private consultations. 
&& The representative of China said that ASEAN and China had some concerns with the new communication from the US.  He acknowledged that questions 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 in document WT/COMTD/51/Add.5 were not making additional queries.  However, the position of ASEAN and China was that appropriate responses had already been provided to these questions, in compliance with the requirements of the Enabling Clause and within the notifying Members' capacity as developing countries.  With regard to question 2 in document WT/COMTD/51/Add.5, he said that it required ASEAN and China to provide the total number of tariff lines that would be duty-free under full liberalization, while the original question from the US had only asked for the percentage of tariff lines that would be duty-free.  Question 2 could, therefore, be considered a new question.  While he once again expressed concern with the US communication, he  said that ASEAN and China remained open to discuss the matter further in informal consultations.      
&& The representative of Malaysia, on behalf of the ASEAN member countries, said that he associated himself with the intervention by China.  He looked forward to further discussion in informal consultations in order to have the matter resolved. 
&& The Chairman proposed that he continue with his informal consultations and report back at the next CTD meeting.  
It was so agreed. 
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT//COMTD/57/ADD.3)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD on 11 May 2006.  && Communications  raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4, respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  He said that it had been agreed at the last meeting of the CTD that the item would remain on the agenda for the present meeting.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
&& The representative of Brazil said that his delegation considered that the EC had not provided all the information that had been requested.  His delegation was also of the view that a bilateral exchange of information was not sufficient to guarantee an adequate degree of transparency for preferential schemes.  He said that information and trade data concerning the EC's scheme should be available universally, as was the case with other GSP schemes.  This would allow Members to assess the consistency, coverage and the application of criteria set out in the EC's scheme.  He indicated Brazil's willingness to work with Members to find a satisfactory solution to the matter. 
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the EC's responses to questions posed in earlier CTD meetings were being studied in her capital.  She remarked that the EC’s claim that the new special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance ("GSP-plus") was based on clear, transparent and non-discriminatory criteria was not in consonance with her delegation's view.  The scheme had some very obvious infirmities which were of immense concern to affected domestic lobbies in Pakistan, and consequently to the government.  She drew the attention of Members to paragraph 2(a) of the Enabling Clause, which was the paragraph which, in the context of GSP schemes, provided an exemption from the most-favoured-nation (MFN) requirement for preferential tariff treatment accorded by developed contracting parties to products originating in developing countries.  She said that the MFN principle was the cornerstone of the WTO multilateral trading system, and observed that paragraph 2(a) did not give a carte blanche to developed countries to implement their own schemes with the discretion of choosing which countries to include and which to exclude.  In particular, preferences had to be accorded so that they were non-discriminatory and non‑reciprocal.  Moreover, it was required that the schemes covered by the Enabling Clause be designed to "facilitate and promote the trade of developing countries and not to raise barriers or create undue difficulties for the trade of any other contracting parties".  The EC's GSP-plus scheme failed to meet these provisos, and the doors to entry to the scheme were bolted and secured for new entrants.  It was also stated in paragraph 3(b) of the Enabling Clause that preferences "shall not constitute an impediment to the reduction or elimination of tariffs and other restrictions to trade on a most‑favoured-nation basis".  The GSP-plus scheme, however, acted as a strong incentive for Members enjoying such exclusive preferences to resist MFN liberalization.  Pakistan called for a debate on the EC scheme's compliance with the Enabling Clause, and reserved the right to come back to the item at the next CTD meeting.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that there was little more that could be said on the notification of the EC's revised GSP scheme, since the scheme had already been discussed exhaustively in the Committee.  The EC had also engaged in informal meetings with delegations that wished to know more on the scheme.  On the transparency issues raised by Brazil at the present meeting, he believed that these were issues that the Committee could discuss more broadly under the agenda item concerning the Decision on Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements.  He added that the EC had provided bilaterally the specific information requested by Brazil. With regard to the points raised by Pakistan on the GSP-plus scheme, he said that they had been discussed intensively in bilateral meetings between the EC and Pakistan.  He believed that the problem concerned a difference of appreciation as to whether the GSP-plus scheme was consistent with the provisions of the Enabling Clause.  The EC's view was that the GSP-plus scheme did indeed comply with the requirements of the Enabling Clause, and did not act as a barrier to MFN liberalization.  
&& The representative of Brazil said that, according to his authorities, the EC had provided the information requested by Brazil for the years 2004 and 2005, but 2006 data would also have been welcome.  He added that only data for Section IV of the Harmonized System had been provided.  He emphasized once again that the view of his delegation was that the provision of information on a bilateral basis was an inadequate measure of transparency.  As a beneficiary country, Brazil did not have any problem having data concerning its trade with the EC being placed in the public domain.  He also did not believe that other beneficiary countries would have any problems in this regard.
&& The representative of the European Communities confirmed that 2006 data had not been provided to Brazil, but explained that this was because the EC's response had been submitted to Brazil in 2006, and data was therefore only available up to 2005 at the time.  In addition, he said that, as far as he was aware, the EC's response had provided all the information requested by Brazil, and was not only limited to Section IV of the Harmonized System.  Any problems that might have occurred in the transmission of the information could, however, easily be dealt with.           
&& The Chairman said that the item should be maintained on the agenda for the next CTD meeting, since there appeared to be some outstanding issues that needed to be dealt with.  He proposed that he start a process of informal consultations with the concerned delegations, and report back to the CTD at its next meeting.  
It was so agreed. 
&& -	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES – NOTIFICATION BY JAPAN (WT/COMTD/N/2/ADD.14)
&& The Chairman said that the notification from Japan, contained in document WT/COMTD/N/2/Add.14, provided information on Japan's enhanced duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access to LDCs. He invited the representative of Japan to introduce the notification.
&& The representative of Japan said that, on the basis of the decision taken at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference on the provision of DFQF market access to LDCs, Japan had been offering enhanced DFQF market access to LDCs since 1 April 2007.  He said that his delegation had already informed all LDC delegations of the enhanced market access opportunities, which provided DFQF market access for an additional 1,101 products.  This signified a coverage of 98 per cent defined at the tariff line level, and 99 per cent in terms of import value.  His delegation believed that the provision of enhanced DFQF market access to LDCs was one of the most important measures that could be taken to facilitate the integration of this group of countries into the multilateral trading system.     
&& The representative of Bangladesh thanked the delegation of Japan for the information provided.  It was hoped that Japan would eventually take steps to offer DFQF market access for all products from all LDCs.  He also urged Japan to ensure that the preferential rules of origin for LDC products were simple and transparent, so as to allow LDCs to truly benefit from the provision of enhanced market access.    
&& The Chairman recalled that the CTD had agreed at its 32nd Session that any market access measures taken specifically in favour of LDCs under the Enabling Clause would be transmitted to the Sub-Committee on LDCs for substantive consideration.  The Sub-Committee would then report back as appropriate to the CTD.  He proposed, therefore, that the notification from Japan be transmitted for this purpose to the Sub-Committee on LDCs.
It was so agreed. 
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman recalled that at the last CTD meeting Members had a preliminary discussion on the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements, which was contained in document WT/L/672.  It had been agreed that the item concerning the Decision would remain on the agenda for the present meeting. 
He said that the General Council had requested the CTD to report back within six months on where discussions stood in regard to this Decision.  Time was, therefore, short, as the Committee would have to report at the July 2007 meeting of the General Council.  He informed the Committee that since the last CTD meeting, he had been holding informal consultations on the matter with some Members.  The consultations had brought out the point that there was a need to identify in more detail the parameters within which Members wished to work in considering transparency for preferential trade arrangements notified under the Enabling Clause.  He said the proponents had informed him that they were working on a paper which would contain the elements of what they believed should be contained in Members' notifications of preferential trade arrangements.  Once the paper was ready, he planned to continue to work informally with Members on the basis of this text, and to eventually have the matter discussed in an open-ended format.  He inquired whether Members were agreeable to his proposed way forward on this matter.
It was so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED (WT/COMTD/W/143/REV.3)
&& The Chairman said that, under this agenda item, the Committee had since its 54th Session been undertaking a review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations based on a periodically updated background paper prepared by the Secretariat.  The CTD had agreed at its 59th Session to temporarily suspend its discussion under this agenda item, in view of the fact that the negotiations were suspended at the time, but had decided at the last meeting to resume its discussion.  It was further agreed that the Secretariat would revise its paper on the developmental aspects of the Doha Round for this purpose.  He said that the revision of the Secretariat paper had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.3, and opened the floor to allow the Committee to undertake its review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations.
&& The representative of Canada said that the revised paper was a useful tool to understand the various developmental aspects of the negotiations.  His delegation had some comments of a technical nature on particular aspects of the paper, designed to increase the clarity and accuracy of some text.  The comments would be forwarded to the Secretariat.  
&& The representative of the United States said that the paper presented the state of play of the negotiations and the various positions of Members in a succinct and balanced manner.  It was a useful document which showed the degree to which development considerations permeated all aspects of the work of the WTO.  Her delegation had a number of technical comments on the paper, which would be forwarded to the Secretariat.   
&& The representative of the European Communities said that he believed the paper would be useful to the Committee in its discussion under this agenda item.  He said that any comments his delegation might have on the paper would also be forwarded to the Secretariat. 
&& The representative of Kenya said that he joined other delegations in expressing appreciation for the Secretariat document, as it helped Members understand how development issues were being treated in the various negotiating bodies.  As the document had been circulated to Members only recently, he requested that it remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting to allow other delegations to study it in detail and provide their comments.
&& The Chairman said that the Secretariat paper would remain on the agenda for the next meeting of the Committee.  In the meantime, any comments by delegations on the paper could be forwarded to the Secretariat.
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE UNITED STATES (WT/COMTD/W/149/ADD.4)
&& The Chairman said that communications under this agenda item had been received from the United States and Canada, and had been circulated as documents WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.4 and WT/COMTD/W/159 respectively.  The communication from Canada had only been received the previous day, and was not reflected in the formal agenda of the meeting.  He invited the two delegations to introduce their submissions.
&& The representative of the United States said that, following earlier submissions by the US under this agenda item, the communication in document WT/COMTD/W/149/Add.4 brought Members' attention to the responses received from the public to the Federal Register notice relating to the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs. Comments had been received from a wide range of interested stakeholders, including from delegations in Geneva, government officials from capitals, embassies and other inter-governmental organizations, and could be found on the website of the Office of the US Trade Representative (USTR).  She said that posting public comments on the internet was an unusual step for her delegation.  However, given the global reach of interest in this issue, her delegation believed that it was important to do so in order to add to the debate in Geneva.  Interested Members were encouraged to visit the USTR website.  Her delegation strongly supported Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, and was actively working to implement the terms of the Hong Kong Decision to achieve commercially meaningful market access opportunities for LDCs.  Her delegation was also willing to consult informally with any delegation wanting to discuss the US process in more detail.    
&& The representative of Canada said that, as a follow-up to Canada's intervention at the 61st Session of the CTD in November 2006, his delegation was pleased to submit a written communication with details about Canada's Least-Developed Countries' Tariff (LDCT) Programme.  This written communication was subsequent to two Canadian notifications submitted in February 2003 and May 2004 on the same programme, and which were contained in documents WT/COMTD/N/15/Add.1 and Add.2, respectively.  Canada was submitting the present communication to provide background information on the LDCT programme and a description of its operation. 
He said that Canada's updated LDCT initiative was introduced on 1 January 2003 to help improve the economic growth of LDCs through trade by eliminating tariffs and quotas on almost all of their exports to Canada.  Canada's LDCT initiative provided DFQF market access for approximately 99 per cent of products originating from LDCs, including in their areas of key interest, for example textiles and apparel.  Document WT/COMTD/W/159 also provided details of the rules of origin, which his delegation believed made it easy for LDCs to actually take advantage of zero tariffs and to access the Canadian market.  It was hoped that Canada's rules of origin would serve as an example to other developed and developing countries looking to implement DFQF schemes.  Significantly, Canadian imports from LDCs had almost tripled since the initiative was introduced at the beginning of 2003.  His delegation hoped that the information provided in the communication was helpful to Members, and looked forward to hearing from other Members on their domestic processes required to implement DFQF market access, or on their existing programmes.  He said that since the communication from Canada had been circulated only recently, his delegation was willing to revert to it at the next meeting of the CTD.
&& The representative of India said that he wished to share with the Committee the announcement made very recently by the Indian Commerce Secretary that India proposed to introduce, in a phased manner, a DFQF scheme for LDCs in 2007.
&& The representative of Australia said that Australia had been providing DFQF market access for all products from all LDCs, with no exemptions and no phase-in periods, since 1 July 2003.  The notification of the scheme could be found in document WT/COMTD/N/18.
&& The representative of Bangladesh expressed appreciation for the information provided by Members on the steps they were taking, or had taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  He also acknowledged the transparency and simplicity of Canada's rules of origin for LDC products.  It was hoped that other Members would take steps to ensure that their preferential rules of origin provided meaningful market access to LDCs.  He urged the United States to complete its internal process expeditiously so that LDCs could benefit as early as possible from DFQF access in the US market.  He welcomed further information from India in due course on its DFQF scheme for LDCs.
&& The representative of Lesotho, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed appreciation for the information provided by various Members on the provision of DFQF market access for LDCs.  He in particular thanked India, as a developing country, for its announcement, and looked forward to receiving further information on India's scheme.  He hoped that other developing countries would launch initiatives similar to India's.  He also emphasized the importance and benefits to LDCs of transparent and simple rules of origin in DFQF market access schemes for LDCs.   
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training, 1 January to 31 December 2006 (WT/COMTD/W/157)
Technical Cooperation Audit Report for 2006 (WT/COMTD/W/158)
&& The Chairman said that there were two reports for consideration under this agenda item, namely the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training for 2006 – circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/157 – and the Technical Cooperation Audit (TCA) Report for 2006 – circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/158.  He proposed that the Committee consider the two reports together.  The Secretariat would, therefore, briefly introduce the reports, after which the floor would be opened.
&& The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) said that the Annual Report on Technical Assistance and Training provided a quantitative and a qualitative overview of the Secretariat's technical assistance and training activities undertaken in 2006.  The report identified a total of 486 Geneva- and field-based technical assistance (TA) activities, representing some 30,000 participant days.  While it had been possible to maintain a reasonable geographical balance, particular attention was given to Africa and the LDCs.  The number of regional activities remained relatively stable compared to the previous year, while the number of national activities increased.  This was consistent with the notion that more targeted trade-related technical assistance (TRTA) was required at the national level.  As for the regional trade policy courses (RTPCs), these  continued to build on the achievements that had been made in previous years.  The year 2006 was also the final year for two of the partnerships which had been formed with universities in the context of the RTPCs.  With regard to eTraining, he said that seven courses had been held in 2006, involving 685 participants.  This represented a significant increase from 2005, and a further expansion could be expected in 2007.  Internship and trainee programmes also continued to be well appreciated.  In 2006, a total of 31 people benefited from the Netherlands Trainee Programme, and 108 people were recruited under various other internship programmes. 
He said that the funding of TRTA activities continued to be an issue, as was highlighted in the last section of the report.  While enough funding had been available to complete the 2006 activities, at some points during the year the Secretariat had run into difficulties due to the unevenness and unpredictability in the receipt of voluntary contributions.  This state of affairs had persisted into 2007, and the Director-General had made the situation clear in a statement at the May 2007 General Council meeting.  Since then, some contributions had been received.  However, the necessary contributions and pledges to reach the target of CHF 24 million by the end of June were still missing.  The Secretariat would shortly be convening some informal consultations with interested Members to explore options to enhance stability and predictability in financing TRTA activities.  This would include, inter alia, consideration of multi-year budgets.  Finally, he expressed his thanks to the many partner institutions, Secretariat staff and the contributors to the various funds, as well as to the Members for their understanding and guidance.       
&& The head of the Technical Cooperation Audit Unit (TCAU) said that the TCA Report for 2006 took into account the fact that a comprehensive external review of the WTO's TRTA – the Strategic Review – was  conducted that year, and that the Final Report of the Strategic Review was discussed at the 60th Session of the CTD in November 2006.  The 2006 TCA Report did not, therefore, re-examine the issues that had been covered by the Strategic Review, for example the WTO's comparative advantages, or the relevance and overall efficiency of the management of the WTO's TRTA programme.  Instead, the TCA Report focused on how technical assistance and its management performed in 2006, and how they could be further improved and strengthened in the future.  Performance was looked into with a view to verifying, inter alia, achievements relative to the objectives set out and the satisfaction of the participants with the results.  The process was reviewed on the basis of the performance indicators used in the previous year.  While the focus was not on finding mistakes, the TCAU was nevertheless critical whenever it found that something could be improved or changed, and areas for improvement throughout the TA cycle were therefore suggested.  The TCA Report also included a number of updated lessons learned, as well as an executive summary which captured the main findings, conclusions and recommendations made.  He noted that the 2006 Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan) made specific reference to the recommendations  in the 2005 TCA Report, and that the preparation of the TA Plan for 2007 also paid attention to the TCA recommendations.  
He observed that the 2006 TRTA programme was similar to that delivered in earlier years.  The similarity was explained not only in terms of size – about 500 activities, reaching more than 14,500 people – but also by the continued high satisfaction of the beneficiaries with the TRTA.  It appeared that the current planning system, driven by the massive TA needs of the Members, encouraged the Secretariat to maximize the number of TRTA activities every year.  This led to the conclusion that, overall, the quantitative approach still prevailed over a qualitative one.  More focus on quality might result in a lesser number of TA activities of a generic or introductory type, but the rest would be longer in duration and more oriented to problem-solving and capacity building.  Such an approach would certainly require not only the support of the Members but also the exploration of new TA modalities and avenues, such as establishing close linkages between the different TRTA products. 
It had been found that the average duration of the workshops, seminars and other such activities had increased, which was in line with the recommendations of the TCAU.  He explained that the longer the duration, the better the opportunity to provide more in-depth tackling of the subject matter and to use more exercises and other interactive methods.  In spite of the overall good assessment, however, the TCAU had found that there was room for further improvement in the planning and design phases, in the implementation and evaluation phases, and in the frequency and quality of reporting about TRTA activities.  Earlier recommendations that were believed to be still valid were repeated for future implementation.  Regarding substance, the TCAU felt that there should be a more systematic approach to capacity building at the national level and a better match between the participants' needs and the TRTA programme concerned.  This would be facilitated by the formulation of division-wide, consistently used TRTA objectives supported by indicators of achievement.  It was also believed that training of trainers courses would further enhance the effectiveness of the delivery of technical assistance. 
He went on to refer to new information acquired through ex-post evaluations, which had started the previous year.  He said that one ex-post evaluation looked into the impact and relevance of five eTraining courses on participants' work and careers, and an extract of the main findings of that evaluation was included in the TCA Report.  The main conclusion in this regard was that eTraining was a mature product and was being further developed to become more in-depth and specialized.  As had been mentioned in the previous year's report, the TCAU believed that more divisions should rely on eTraining by using it as a replacement for time spent on generic introduction courses.  He said that eTraining could also be used by divisions for a better selection of the participants and as a pre‑condition to offer more in-depth technical assistance.  The TCAU was working on ex-post evaluations of two trade policy courses held in 2006, as well as of the Reference Centre programme. 
Finally, he said that a good results-based management should regularly utilize evaluative information.  He explained that the availability of such information and its dissemination was crucial, and suggestions for improvements in the reporting and follow-up mechanism had been made.  In keeping the TRTA products at the high quality needed by the Members, it was very important that  managers also attribute high priority to planning, implementation, evaluation, reporting and systematic follow-up actions.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that his delegation agreed with the Secretariat in the justification for the increase in national activities, but was of the view that the utilization rate for Geneva and regional programmes was higher than that for national activities.  As a result of logistical and funding problems, there was a limitation to the benefits the host country of a national activity could hope to obtain.  He wondered if the WTO could in future assist with the local costs.
&& The representative of Lesotho, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed the hope that TA activities would continue and even increase, with more training of trainers to ensure sustainability.  He said that it was also important to ensure that the standards and quality of TA were maintained, and the monitoring aspect was therefore important.  He invited donors to continue to contribute to the WTO's TA programme, which he deemed very useful and effective.  He added that the Integrated Framework (IF) was a very effective mechanism for the integration of LDCs into the multilateral trading system, and noted with satisfaction the efforts that were being made to enhance it.
&& The representative of Canada said that his delegation looked forward to discussing TA funding issues during the informal consultations that would be organized by the ITTC.  He said that the annual reports on the WTO's technical assistance and training programme continued to improve, but that they could still benefit from a more rigorous results focus.  In addition to regional and country-level analysis, information could be provided on how activities were allocated in terms of themes and types.  It would also be useful to have an assessment of the relationship between the activities delivered and the initial plan that Members agreed to.  He said that Canada supported the key recommendations found in the 2006 TCA Report, and hoped that the Secretariat would take steps to implement the recommendations in a timely manner.  His delegation believed that the WTO should continue to streamline and focus its TRTA activities, and that it should take a deeper – not a wider – approach to its TRTA by reducing the number of activities and implementing them with a view to generating cumulative effects.  His delegation also believed that it was possible to move beyond division-wide objectives and towards organization-wide objectives.  He added that if the WTO's TRTA was really to be demand-driven, it was critical that it address and respond appropriately to the feedback from recipients of TRTA.  In this regard, his delegation welcomed the introduction of the ex-post evaluation approach.  Finally, he said that it would be useful if the Secretariat could at some point provide the Committee with an update of the state of play with regard to the Strategic Review and the implementation of its recommendations.
&& The representative of India said that he had a comment to make on Annex 2 of the 2006 TCA Report.  He observed that in terms of the sectoral coverage of the WTO's TRTA activities, there had been sharp percentage declines in some areas.  For example, the percentage allocated to the advanced negotiations courses on the Doha Development Agenda had declined from 18.25 per cent in 2002 to 5.83 per cent in 2006.  Similar declines could be observed in other areas, for example market access and TBT.  On the other hand, there had been an increase in the percentage allocation in some areas, for example TRIPS and development.  He asked the Secretariat for clarification on how these changes had come about.
&& The representative of Norway said that Norway was a firm supporter of the WTO's technical assistance and training programme, in particular through its contribution to the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (DDAGTF).  In the view of his delegation, the WTO – and in particular the ITTC – contributed substantially to the efforts that were being made to help integrate developing countries into the multilateral trading system.  He emphasized, however, the importance of TA activities being geared towards the need of recipients, and highlighted the importance of appropriate needs assessments.  He noted with satisfaction that there were continued efforts to strengthen the needs-assessment approach, including through the Trade Policy Review process.  He remarked that partnerships with relevant organizations and institutions, including academic institutions, created synergies and added value. However, it was important for such partnerships to be coordinated and integrated with other relevant initiatives, including at the country level.  He observed that LDCs had been associated with 44 per cent of the activities, and said that Norway was in favour of providing continued strong priority to LDCs.  He also expressed appreciation for the WTO's continued participation in the IF and its enhancement.  Norway was a strong financial supporter of the IF, and aimed to continue with its support.  He noted the discussions that were taking place on institutional changes that would allow more predictable and stable funding for WTO TRTA.  He said that Norway made an effort to transfer its contribution as early as possible in the budget year, and asked other donors to aim for the same.  In view of the current institutional setup in Norway, however, he explained that his delegation might have a problem with a multi-year funding approach.
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation would shortly contribute CHF 525,000 to the DDAGTF.
&& The representative of Madagascar said that her delegation supported the statement made by Lesotho.  She encouraged donor countries to provide funds on a stable basis so as to allow TRTA activities to continue.
&& The representative of Korea said that his delegation would make a contribution of US$350,000 to the DDAGTF.  It was hoped this contribution would help developing countries to integrate into the multilateral trading system.
&& The representative of Bangladesh said that his delegation supported the statement made by Lesotho.  In addition, he agreed with the points made by Nigeria.  He explained that LDCs in particular had severe problems in finding resources when national activities were hosted.  He asked the Secretariat to look into possible ways of providing the necessary resources to LDCs, thereby increasing the effectiveness of national activities.
&& The Director of the ITTC expressed his appreciation for the suggestions that had been made by Members.  The Secretariat would explore how they could be incorporated into the next technical assistance and training plan.  With regard to India's query, he said that the Secretariat would provide a response as soon as possible.
&& The head of the TCAU said that the TCAU had been working to implement the ex-post evaluations for some time, and he was pleased that the initiative had been launched.  Three such evaluations had been ongoing simultaneously, of which the one focusing on eTraining had been concluded.  The recommendations from the others would be shared with Members. With regard to the Strategic Review, he said that those recommendations that were easy to implement and were not of a policy nature had been incorporated into the 2007 TA Plan.  Internal discussions were currently ongoing in the Secretariat and focussed on needs assessment, selection of participants, outsourcing and partnership with other organizations.
&& The Committee took note of the reports and of all interventions.  
OTHER BUSINESS 
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.

__________

WT/COMTD/M/63 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/63 	Page  PAGE 19



 

 

 

 



