 
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 24 APRIL 2018
Chairman: H.E. Mr. Taonga Mushayavanhu (Zimbabwe) for items A to I
and H.E. Mr. Diego Aulestia (Ecuador) for items J and K
 
A.	adoption of the agenda	2
B.	observers	4
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	4
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	4
C.	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)	4
-	Committee on Trade and Development Mandate: Focal Point for Consideration and Coordination of Work on Development in the WTO – Proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208)	5
-	Operationalization of the CTD's Mandate: a Proposal to Deliver Outcomes based on the MC8 Mandate – Proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	6
D.	notifications under the enabling clause	7
-	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements – Status Report on the Committee's Work	7
(A) 	Notifications received pursuant to Enabling Clause (Paragraph 4(a))	8
- 	Notification of Regional Trade Agreement – Submitted by Argentina, Brazil,    Chile, Mexico, Paraguay and Uruguay (WT/COMTD/N/53)	8
- 	Agreement between India and Thailand (WT/COMTD/N/54)	8
- 	Agreement between Mercosur and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) (WT/COMTD/N/55)	8
- 	Agreement between Mercosur and Egypt (WT/COMTD/N/56)	8
- 	Agreement between Ecuador and El Salvador (WT/COMTD/N/57)	8
(B) 	Questions from the United States to the delegations of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay, and Uruguay regarding document WT/COMTD/N/53 (WT/REG/W/126 – WT/COMTD/W/232)	9
(C) 	Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/233)	11
-	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – Communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	11
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	12
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)	13
E.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	14
-	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements – Status on the Committee's Work	14
- 	Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/234)	14
F.	REVIEW OF THE STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	14
G.	WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE	15
-	Ministerial Decision of 13 December 2017 (WT/MIN(17)65 – WT/L/1032) – Statement by the Chairman	15
H.	OTHER BUSINESS	17
I.	ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	18
J.	ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT	18
K.	DATE OF THE NEXT MEETING	19


	•	adoption of the agenda
&& The Chairman said that, as he had indicated at the informal, open-ended meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) held on 21 March 2018, a convening notice with a proposed agenda had been circulated four weeks in advance of the present meeting. This had been done to address the request made at the 104th Session to reinstate the four-week timeframe for the issuance of meeting notices, which was laid out in the CTD's rules of procedure. He recalled that he had also explained at the informal, open-ended meeting that Members would have the opportunity to consider and comment on the proposed agenda as necessary, and that a more concrete agenda would subsequently be circulated according to the ten-day timeframe for the issuance of meeting notices – similar to what was mentioned in the General Council's rules of procedure, and in line with the practice that the CTD had been following for many years. He hoped that this approach had proven useful to Members. He went on to say that the proposed agenda for the 105th Session of the CTD was contained in document WTO/AIR/COMTD/13/Rev.1, circulated on 13 April 2018. 

&& The representative of Japan said that he wished to make an intervention under "Other Business" concerning an informal dialogue that his delegation would organize on the issue of trade and development.


&& The representative of South Africa, on behalf of the African Group, indicated that she wished to make an intervention under "Other Business" concerning the 2018-2019 Aid-for-Trade Work Programme.


&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that he also wished to make an intervention under "Other Business" concerning the Aid-for-Trade Work Programme.


&& The representative of India requested clarification from the Secretariat concerning the appearance on the agenda of the notifications of the regional trade agreements (RTAs) between India and Thailand, MERCOSUR and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), MERCOSUR and Egypt, and Ecuador and El Salvador. These notifications were listed under the agenda item "Notifications under the Enabling Clause". He referred Members to paragraph 18 of the Transparency Mechanism for RTAs (RTA TM) which stated, inter alia, that for purposes of performing the functions established under the Mechanism, the CTD would convene in Dedicated Session. In this light, he believed that the appearance of these notifications on the agenda of the CTD's Regular Session was not consistent with the mandate laid out in the RTA TM. 
A representative of the Development Division recalled that the appearance of notifications of RTAs on the agenda of the CTD's Regular Session had initially been requested by a Member at the 104th Session. Subsequently, at the informal, open-ended meeting held on 21 March 2018, the Chairman had explained to Members how the notifications would be reflected on the agenda, on the basis of the requests made. Guidance would therefore be required from Members on the way forward in this regard. He also observed that, under the current practice, Dedicated Sessions on RTAs were not convened frequently. Only eight such sessions had been held to date. If the objective of listing RTA notifications on the agenda was to regularly take note of them, from a practical point of view it would be difficult to do so in the Dedicated Session, if the current practice were maintained. 
&& The representative of the United States, in response to the intervention by India, said that his delegation, when requesting the RTA notifications on the agenda, had also had to give some thought as to where these notifications should be placed. He indicated that his delegation was flexible in this regard. One possibility might be to maintain the notifications under the agenda item "Notifications under the Enabling Clause", while having a separate agenda item concerning the implementation of the RTA TM, which would include the Chairman's report on the status of factual presentations and any other relevant issues. He added that, while the RTA TM laid out a procedure to follow after an RTA was notified, the actual notification requirement came from the Enabling Clause. He also observed that the Dedicated Sessions on RTAs were convened only once a factual presentation was ready, and the frequency of these meetings was not sufficient to allow the Dedicated Session to regularly address notifications and issues relating to the implementation of the RTA TM.       


&& The representative of India said that it was the Dedicated Session that had been entrusted to perform the functions established under the RTA TM, and these functions were not limited to the review of factual presentations. He explained that his delegation did not have any objection to discussing systemic issues relating to RTA notifications in the Regular Session, for example issues relating to the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) notifications. The concern related to the listing on the agenda of the notifications of the agreements between India and Thailand, MERCOSUR and SACU, MERCOSUR and Egypt, and Ecuador and El Salvador, as these related to the implementation of the RTA TM. He stressed the importance of abiding by the provisions of the RTA TM.
 && The representative of the United States said that his delegation had requested the listing of RTA notifications on the agenda in order to conform to established practices in the WTO. In this regard, he explained that notifications under GATT Article XXIV were listed on the agenda of the Council for Trade in Goods (CTG), while notifications under GATS Article V were listed on the agenda of the Council for Trade in Services (CTS). These notifications were subsequently transmitted to the CRTA. He believed that the CTD had a role to play in ensuring the smooth functioning of the RTA TM, but also stressed once again that the notification requirement did not stem from the RTA TM itself, but rather from the Enabling Clause. He additionally indicated that he was unclear about India's position on this matter, given that India had been requesting for many years the appearance on the Regular Session agenda of the notifications concerning the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union, the agreement between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea, and the agreement between India and Korea. He believed that it was important to be consistent with regard to the reflection of RTA notifications on the agenda.


&& The representative of India indicated that, in the view of his delegation, it was appropriate for systemic issues arising from the implementation of the RTA TM to be reflected on the agenda of the Regular Session. However, the actual implementation of the Mechanism needed to take place in the Dedicated Session. While RTA notifications made to the CTG and the CTS subsequently flowed into the CRTA, notifications to the CTD did not flow to any other body. His delegation did not wish for the CTD to go against the mandate laid out in the RTA TM.


 && The Chairman observed that one reason for issuing the agenda for the present meeting well in advance was to allow Members' concerns to be addressed ahead of time. He appreciated, however, that it was possible for some concerns to arise on the day of the meeting as well. Noting that the next Chairman would need to look into the issues raised by India, he asked whether the Committee could proceed to adopt the agenda, with the inclusion of the three interventions requested under "Other Business".        
&& The representative of India said that, while he did not wish for the Committee to agree to an agenda which contained issues relevant to the CTD's Dedicated Session on RTAs, he was nevertheless willing to go along with what Members decided, on the understanding that his delegation's concerns were taken into consideration and appropriately addressed, and were reflected in the minutes of the present meeting.   


&& The Chairman proposed that the agenda item relating to "Other Business" be considered before the agenda items relating to the elections of the Chairpersons of the Sub-Committee on least developed countries (LDCs) and of the CTD.         
The agenda was adopted as amended.
	•	observers 
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers


&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organisation, the Inter-Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement


&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record. He indicated that if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed.
	•	trade and development – work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)


&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. In this regard, there were two submissions containing proposals for consideration at the present meeting. The first proposal – contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 and submitted by Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group – was for the CTD to report on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies. The second proposal under consideration – submitted by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group – was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. In this document, the remaining proposal for consideration was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. He went on to say that the two documents had been appearing on the CTD's agenda for several years. Despite the informal consultations held by several CTD Chairpersons, including himself, little progress had been made to date. He recalled that, at the last CTD meeting, a number of the proponents had reiterated their positions, while some other Members had reminded the Committee of their concerns with the two proposals. With regard specifically to document WT/COMTD/W/192, the proponents had indicated that they were still working towards submitting a revised document, the intention being to reflect therein only the proposal which remained under consideration. This message had also been conveyed at the informal, open-ended meeting held on 21 March 2018. He hoped that some further progress could be reported at the present meeting.
-	Committee on Trade and Development Mandate: Focal Point for Consideration and Coordination of Work on Development in the WTO – Proposal from Barbados, Belize, China, Cuba, Ecuador, India, and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/208) 


&& The representative of India recalled the CTD's mandate from MC8, as well as the six paragraphs in the terms of reference (TORs) of the CTD, as contained in document WT/L/46.  His delegation requested information from the Secretariat on the activities carried out relating to each of these six areas over the past year. With regard to the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208, he explained that it was a simple rephrasing of the CTD's TORs. The proponents believed that it was appropriate for the CTD to report regularly on the development-related work taking place in other WTO bodies, while providing the necessary recommendations to the General Council on achieving better coordination within the WTO on development issues. He also indicated that his delegation did not understand the concerns expressed by some Members on the proposal. He suggested that these Members should go through the work carried out by the CTD in past years, and in particular in 1996. In this regard, he drew the Committee's attention to paragraph 5 of the 1996 draft report of the CTD to the General Council dated 28 October 1996, which was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/19. According to this paragraph, the Committee had agreed to review the implementation of provisions in favour of developing country Members on the basis of contributions from Members and from the WTO bodies responsible for monitoring the implementation of the Uruguay Round commitments. To assist in this exercise, the Chairman had invited the Chairpersons of other WTO bodies to submit information on how provisions in favour of developing countries had been dealt with in their respective Committees. On the basis of these responses, the Secretariat had prepared background documentation presenting the replies received in an analytical format. In closing, he explained that the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 sought to re-start work in the CTD that had been done in the past. His delegation was open to discussions with other delegations in this regard. He requested that the sub-item concerning document WT/COMTD/W/208 be maintained on the CTD's agenda.


&& The representative of China expressed support for the intervention by India. He noted that the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208 was a paraphrasing of the CTD's TORs, and that Ministers had given the instruction to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. He believed that following these instructions would contribute favourably to work on development in the WTO, and would enhance the credibility of the organization. Finally, he highlighted the proponents' openness to participate in small-group consultations with interested Members, and requested that the sub-item concerning document WT/COMTD/W/208 be maintained on the agenda.


&& The representative of Ecuador requested that the present sub-item be maintained on the CTD's agenda.


&& The representative of South Africa, on behalf of the African Group, indicated that the Group wished for documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/208 to remain on the agenda.


&& The representative of the European Union said that her delegation's understanding of the MC8 mandate was different from that of some other Members. Her delegation's view was that, in order to implement the MC8 mandate, the CTD should further explore the positive link between trade and development. This needed to be based on constructive exchanges on clearly identified topics, in line with the instruction from MC8 to carry out focused work. The proposals submitted in the context of the MC8 mandate that had previously been agreed to by the Committee responded to the requirement of being focused, and the European Union had engaged constructively in the discussions that had led to agreement. However, her delegation continued to have concerns with the proposals that remained under consideration, as they did not respond to this requirement. She indicated the European Union's openness to meet with the proponents in order to try to better understand the objectives underlying these proposals.
&& The representative of Canada indicated that her delegation continued to have concerns with the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/208. Canada did not believe that the CTD had the authority to require other WTO bodies to report to it, nor did it have the authority to provide recommendations to the General Council on the work undertaken by other bodies. She also observed that attempts to separate out the development-related aspects of other Committees’ work would be challenging, and might trigger a theoretical debate about what constituted development. Additionally, such an approach could create a duplicative process – which would not be desirable in light of resource constraints – and might water down discussions through the absence of technical experts from the substantive Committees. In closing, she said that the end objectives of the proposal, and what exactly would be achieved, remained unclear to her delegation.


&& The representative of the United States indicated that a sufficient number of years had passed for the two remaining proposals to have been fully considered by the Committee. The proponents needed to address the concerns raised by other Members – either by revising their proposals, or by dropping the proposals altogether. The sub-items concerning these proposals needed to be removed from the CTD's agenda until the proponents had something new to offer. The United States had repeatedly stated that there was no consensus for these proposals to remain on the agenda. It was not the case that there was any unfinished business to be addressed. 


&& The representative of India explained that the proponents of WT/COMTD/W/208 simply wished for the CTD to restart work that it had been doing in the past. He pointed out that, in 1996, the CTD Chairman had invited the Chairpersons of other WTO bodies to submit information on how provisions in favour of developing countries had been dealt with in their respective Committees, and that the Secretariat had prepared background documentation presenting the replies received in an analytical format. He requested the Secretariat to provide the references to the background documentation that had been prepared. 


A representative of the Development Division indicated that the Secretariat would look to find the information requested by India, and would be in touch with the Indian delegation in this regard.
&& The Chairman encouraged continued engagement among Members in order to try and make progress.
&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Operationalization of the CTD's Mandate: a Proposal to Deliver Outcomes based on the MC8 Mandate – Proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)   


&& The representative of India referred to the remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192, which was for the CTD to make a recommendation for the parties to RTAs to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. He said that the RTA TM provided for several notifications to be carried out by Members, party to RTAs. In order to avoid misunderstandings and to help ensure a timely consideration of RTAs, and hence the smooth operation of the RTA TM, it was important for the parties to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. Based on the suggestions by some Members, the proponents were continuing their consultations with their capitals with a view to submitting a revision of document WT/COMTD/W/192 so as to reflect only the remaining proposal. The matter of removing the other proposals from the document was being carefully considered. A particular concern in this regard related to the removal of the proposal calling for the Secretariat to update its document on the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, since there had been no update to the document since 2016. In closing, he expressed the proponents' willingness to engage in informal consultations with interested Members in order to make progress. 


&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation always welcomed the opportunity to discuss the RTA TM in the CTD. With respect to the remaining proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192, the United States had repeatedly indicated that this proposal suggested a diminishing of Members' substantive rights and obligations under the GATT, the GATS, and the Enabling Clause. In his delegation's view, there was no prospect for consensus on the proposal in either the CTD or the CRTA. The only outcome from the proposal would be to provide one Member with the right to prevent others from complying with their notification obligations, which would be prejudicial in the face of any dispute settlement proceedings regarding a particular RTA. The proponents had failed to address this concern. Finally, he noted that notification obligations were not embedded in the RTA TM, but rather in the GATT, the GATS and the Enabling Clause. 


&& The representative of Canada welcomed the indication from India that the proponents were working towards submitting a revision to document WT/COMTD/W/192. She noted that India had observed in its intervention that the Secretariat paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions had not been updated since 2016. In this regard, she recalled that the Committee had agreed that the report would be updated after two years, and her delegation was therefore expecting an update in 2018. She hoped that this would address India's concern. She also noted that Canada did not support the remaining proposal in document WT/COMTD/W/192. In her delegation's view, notifications of RTAs should remain the responsibility of individual Members, and a requirement for joint notifications risked exacerbating issues with regard to non-notified RTAs. It was also not clear how joint notifications would contribute to fulfilling the instructions from MC8 to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. Finally, she noted that, pursuant to paragraph 28 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration, the CRTA had been instructed to consider systemic issues arising from RTAs.  


&& The representative of the European Union indicated her delegation's interest in seeing a revised version of document WT/COMTD/W/192. She noted that her delegation was expecting an update in 2018 to the Secretariat paper on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions, and therefore did not believe that this matter should be a concern for the proponents. With regard to the remaining proposal in the document, she shared her delegation's view that this should be part of a wider discussion in the context of the implementation of paragraph 28 of the Nairobi Ministerial Declaration. 
&& The representative of India said that, while he agreed with the United States that notification obligations stemmed from the GATT, the GATS and the Enabling Clause, it was the RTA TM that laid out the procedures to consider the notified RTAs. His delegation's view was that systemic issues relating to RTAs – including those addressed in the remaining proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192 – needed to be discussed in the Regular Session of the CTD. However, for RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause, the implementation of the RTA TM needed to take place in the CTD's Dedicated Session on RTAs. He requested that the present sub-item be maintained on the agenda.    


&& The Chairman encouraged continued engagement among Members in order to try and make progress.


&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.
	•	notifications under the enabling clause
-	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements – Status Report on the Committee's Work


&& The Chairman said that he wished to share a few observations under the present sub-item, since this was the first time that it appeared on the CTD's agenda. He recalled that, at the last meeting, a number of concerns were raised – and specific requests were made – regarding the implementation of the RTA TM in the CTD, in particular in the context of the need for closer harmonization between the practices in the CTD and the CRTA. As was the case with past CTD Chairpersons, he believed that it was in Members' interests for the CTD and CRTA to maintain similar practices, to the extent possible, in the implementation of the Mechanism. Furthermore, as CTD Chairman, he believed that it was important for him to address the concerns that had been raised. Accordingly, along the lines of the requests made – and in line with what he had explained at the informal, open-ended meeting held on 21 March 2018 – notifications of RTAs under the Enabling Clause were specifically listed on the agenda of the present meeting. He noted that a similar practice had recently started in the CRTA. In addition, his report on the status of preparation factual presentations had been circulated as a Committee document, similar to what was done in the CRTA.
He also recalled another concern raised at the last CTD meeting, which was that, while CRTA document symbols allowed a tracking of all subsequent documentation relating to an individual RTA from the time of notification, this was not the case in the CTD. After discussing the matter with the Secretariat, it was his understanding that notifications in the CTD – which concerned not only RTAs, but also Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) schemes and other preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) – were circulated according to the document series which had been applied since 1995. A unique number for each RTA or PTA had then been assigned for subsequent documentation – for example, factual presentations or questions and replies documents. However, to address the concern raised, it was possible for the unique number to be henceforth reflected on the notification itself. Finally, he informed the Committee that he had recently met with the Chairman of the CRTA to discuss issues relating to the implementation of the RTA TM. He believed that this meeting had been useful for both Chairs, as it had allowed them to compare practices and procedures across the two Committees, with the participation of the respective Secretariats. It was felt that periodic meetings between the two Chairs – and continued regular meetings between the respective Secretariats – should take place on issues relating to the implementation of the RTA TM. From his perspective as CTD Chairman, he had taken away from the discussion the potential need for more regular consultations with the parties to RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause. In a number of cases, for example, the full set of data or information required for the preparation of the factual presentations had not as yet been submitted. He also believed that it might be worth following up on issues relating to the implementation reports due under paragraph 15 of the RTA TM, since the CTD had not received any as yet. It would be for his successor to consider how to take some of these issues forward.  
(A) 	Notifications received pursuant to Enabling Clause (Paragraph 4(a))  
- 	Notification of Regional Trade Agreement – Submitted by Argentina, Brazil,    Chile, Mexico, Paraguay and Uruguay (WT/COMTD/N/53)
	- 	Agreement between India and Thailand (WT/COMTD/N/54)
-		Agreement between Mercosur and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) (WT/COMTD/N/55)
	-	Agreement between Mercosur and Egypt (WT/COMTD/N/56)
	-	Agreement between Ecuador and El Salvador (WT/COMTD/N/57) 


&& The Chairman said that the notifications listed under the present sub-item concerned firstly document WT/COMTD/N/53, submitted by Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay and Uruguay. The other listed notifications were the agreement between India and Thailand circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/54; the agreement between MERCOSUR and SACU circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/55; the agreement between MERCOSUR and Egypt circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/56; and the agreement between Ecuador and El Salvador circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/57.


&& The representative of the European Union requested clarification from the parties to the MERCOSUR-SACU agreement as to why they had notified this agreement under the Enabling Clause. She indicated in this regard that paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause did not cover preferential non-tariff barriers, and could not justify the elimination of such barriers among the parties to customs unions. The view of her delegation was that customs unions needed to be notified under GATT Article XXIV. She added that the agreement went beyond preferential tariff concessions, and covered areas such as technical barriers to trade (TBT), sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures and safeguards. Finally, she called on Members that had notified RTAs to cooperate with the Secretariat in the preparation of factual presentations. 


&& The representative of the United States indicated his appreciation to the Chairman for the efforts made to address the concerns raised at the previous meeting regarding the implementation of the RTA TM in the CTD, and expressed hope that the incoming Chairman would continue the work in this regard. He welcomed the placement of RTA notifications on the agenda, as he believed this would help enhance transparency and provide the Committee with the opportunity to comment on the regional integration efforts of Members. He also expressed support for the points raised by the European Union, and shared his delegation's view that the Enabling Clause provided only for tariff concessions. With regard to the India-Thailand agreement and the MERCOSUR-SACU agreement, he urged the parties to provide the data and information that would allow the Secretariat to prepare the factual presentations. He indicated that his delegation would consider requesting these notifications back on the agenda, if there was no progress in this regard. Turning to the EcuadorEl Salvador agreement, he observed that the agreement went beyond tariff concessions, and in this light questioned the appropriateness of notifying it under the Enabling Clause. In addition, noting that the agreement had been notified only by El Salvador, he indicated that such a notification would not be possible if the remaining proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192 – discussed under the previous agenda item – were implemented. This illustrated the point made by his delegation several times, which was that it was the individual right of a Member to make a notification, and this should not be affected by a requirement to notify an RTA jointly.       


&& The representative of Paraguay inquired whether the points raised by the European Union and the United States on the MERCOSUR-SACU agreement could be provided in writing, so that the parties could transmit them to their capitals. She also indicated that the parties were in touch with the Secretariat regarding the preparation of the factual presentation. 


&& The representative of South Africa said that, like Paraguay, she wished to request the European Union and the United States to provide their comments on the MERCOSUR-SACU agreement in writing. She also indicated that the deadline for the submission of data to the Secretariat had not yet passed. The parties were presently working to submit the required data.


 && The representative of India reiterated his delegation's view that the present sub-item should not have been included on the agenda of the CTD's Regular Session. India believed that notifications of RTAs should form part of the agenda of the CTD's Dedicated Session on RTAs. He noted that his delegation had agreed to include this sub-item on the agenda for the present meeting, with the understanding that the Chairman would facilitate discussions on a way forward in this regard. He did not wish for a precedent to be set for future meetings of the Regular Session. 


 &&  The Committee took note of the interventions made.
(B) 	Questions from the United States to the delegations of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay, and Uruguay regarding document WT/COMTD/N/53 (WT/REG/W/126 – WT/COMTD/W/232)


&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation's questions to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay, and Uruguay regarding document WT/COMTD/N/53 had been circulated in both the CTD and the CRTA. While these questions related to a notification made to the CTD, the United States felt that it was necessary and appropriate to submit this document to the CRTA as well, because the issues raised therein had been under discussion in the CRTA for some time. He said that the United States had significant concerns regarding the inconsistent implementation of the RTA TM across the two bodies, and actions taken in one Committee had implications for the other Committee. He also drew Members' attention to the European Union's questions to the LAIA member countries, circulated in the CRTA in document WT/REG/W/124. With regard to document WT/COMTD/N/53, he explained that his delegation had circulated its questions because the intent of the document was unclear, and this lack of clarity undermined the purpose of notification obligations. His delegation was seeking clarification on why the parties had chosen to deviate from Committee practice with respect to the use of the notification format, which had always been understood to relate to only one agreement under a particular document symbol. He asked whether the Members that had submitted the document were intending to notify agreements, or modifications to previously notified agreements. His delegation was raising this issue because the document contained sixteen different instruments, covering five separate agreements, which did not have the same signatories. 
In addition, he noted that some of the instruments referred to in the document related to RTAs that had never been notified to the WTO. In this light, his delegation did not believe that these could be considered as subsequent notifications, but instead had to be understood as notifications of the RTAs themselves, thereby triggering the process for review under the RTA TM. The document apparently aimed to serve distinctly different purposes for each of the different instruments, and his delegation therefore had difficulties accepting it in its current form. With regard to the cover note on the document, he observed that there appeared to be a conditionality applied to the submission, which indicated that the document was without prejudice to notifications submitted individually by LAIA members. This conditionality made the document meaningless, as it implied that the document had not been submitted by the parties, or that it would have no standing in the event that another document was submitted. It remained unclear to his delegation how the approach taken by the parties in document WT/COMTD/N/53 would facilitate the implementation and functioning of the RTA TM. In closing, he expressed his hope that responses to his delegation's questions would be received soon and that, through a continued dialogue, his delegation would be able to better understand the intention of the parties, and that outstanding differences of views could be resolved.


&& The representative of Brazil said that the concerned delegations were currently coordinating and consulting amongst themselves in order to provide in the CTD their responses to the questions raised by the United States.


&& The representative of Argentina indicated that the concerned delegations were working on their responses, which would be provided in the CTD.


&& The representative of Mexico said that her delegation was working with the other concerned delegations with a view to providing responses as soon as possible.


&& The representative of Chile indicated that the concerned delegations were currently working to submit their responses to the questions raised by the United States.


&& The representative of Uruguay said that the concerned delegations would provide responses to the questions from the United States as soon as possible. She additionally asked 
if the United States could provide its comments at the present meeting in writing.


&& The representative of the European Union believed that the questions posed by the United States were pertinent, and would allow the parties in their responses to address some of the concerns raised on their notification. She reminded the Committee that her delegation had submitted a number of questions to LAIA member countries in the CRTA. Finally, she welcomed the consultations that had taken place between the CTD and CRTA Chairs, and shared her view that regular exchanges would be helpful.  


&& The representative of Canada said that her delegation attached great importance in ensuring that Members respected their obligations under the RTA TM. She welcomed the questions posed by the United States, and expressed hope that this would lead to an exchange of information that would help Members better understand the basis on which the notifications contained in document WT/COMTD/N/53 had been made, and how to comply with the RTA TM.    


&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation to Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, Chile and Uruguay for the indication that replies were being prepared to his delegation's questions, and also welcomed the comments by the European Union and Canada. He requested that document WT/COMTD/N/53, as well as his delegation's questions on the document, be maintained on the agenda. He additionally requested that the Secretariat take note of the questions and concerns that Members had raised with respect to the document, and stressed the importance of ensuring that notifications to the CTD were consistent with notifications made in other WTO bodies. 
&&  The Committee took note of the interventions made.
(C)	Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/233)  


&& The Chairman said that his report on the status of the preparation of factual presentations, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/233, contained eighteen separate entries relating to the status of factual presentations to be finalized. In some cases, the full set of data had not been submitted, while in other cases not all comments on the draft factual presentations had been received. He urged all the parties to these agreements to provide to the Secretariat the required data and information as soon as possible. He also informed Members that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following CRTA procedures, a factual presentation on PICTA would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were completed. 
He went on to say that he wished to make a few observations about the three RTAs which had been notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV, and which had been referenced on the CTD's agenda for many years. As he had indicated at the informal, open-ended meeting on 21 March 2018, he believed that it was important to keep track of where things stood with regard to the preparation of the factual presentations on these three RTAs in the context of the CTD. This was why his report included entries relating to the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea agreements. However, the GCC Customs Union was not referenced in his report because, as he had informed the Committee at the informal, open-ended meeting held on 21 March 2018, the factual presentation on this agreement had already been circulated. In particular, the factual presentation was circulated on 21 March with the CTD document symbol WT/COMTD/RTA/9/1, and the CRTA document symbol WT/REG276/1. He added that, in his discussion with the CRTA Chairman that he had referred to earlier, issues relating to the RTAs notified under both provisions were touched upon. This was one area where both Chairs believed that they should maintain close contact. In closing, he encouraged continued engagement among Members in order to find a way forward in the CTD with regard to the issues relating to the RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.


&& The representative of the United States believed that it was useful for Members to have the Chairman's report circulated as a Committee document in advance of the meeting. He expressed his delegation's continued concerns about the delays in the preparation of factual presentations, and urged Members to provide the required data or comments to the Secretariat. He highlighted in particular his interest in receiving an update on the India-Nepal agreement and also noted, in response to the earlier intervention by South Africa, that the deadline for the submission of data on the MERCOSUR-SACU agreement had already passed. 
&&  The Committee took note of the Chairman's report, and of the interventions made.     
-	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Notification of Customs Union – Communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)


&& The representative of India indicated that his intervention related not only to the present sub-item, but also to the two following sub-items. He noted that the systemic concerns raised by China, Egypt and India over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV were pertinent even now, but remained unaddressed. He recalled that, on 19 November 2007, the GCC Customs Union was notified to the CTD under the Enabling Clause. This notification was discussed in the CTD under "Other Business" at the 69th, 70th, 71st, and 72nd Sessions held respectively in May, July, October and December 2008. Since the 73rd Session held in March 2009, the notification of the GCC Customs Union had been discussed under the agenda item "Notifications under the Enabling Clause". The sub-item concerning the GCC Customs Union notification was introduced at the request of a developed Member, over concerns that the notification had been made exclusively on the basis of the Enabling Clause. Some developed Members did not favour moving forward with the process of reviewing the GCC Customs Union in the CTD until there was further clarification on the legal justification for such a procedure. The GCC Customs Union was later notified to the CRTA under GATT Article XXIV on 6 October 2009.
He went on to say that the CTD had not as yet reached a consensus on the issue of the notification and consideration of the GCC Customs Union – notwithstanding the justifications provided in support of the notification made under the Enabling Clause, and despite the assertion by the CTD Chairperson in October 2008 that the GCC Customs Union was scheduled for factual consideration at a CTD dedicated session. Instead, the subsequent notification under GATT Article XXIV was deemed by some developed Members as the legal premise for examining this RTA in the CRTA. Some developing Members had raised systemic concerns over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union to both the CTD and the CRTA, and the undertaking to refer the agreement to the CRTA. These systemic concerns impinged upon the mandate and the terms of reference the CTD, as well as on the Enabling Clause, the RTA TM, and the rights and obligations of Members in a manner that extended to the realm of strengthening the multilateral trading system (MTS) and its development dimension as highlighted by the Seventh WTO Ministerial Conference. In closing, he requested that the three sub-items remain on the agenda until the systemic and specific concerns arising out of the "dually notified" RTAs were addressed.


&& The representative of China expressed support for the intervention by India. He said that the systemic and specific concerns relating to dual notifications were laid out in document WT/COMTD/W/175, and requested that the present sub-item be maintained on the agenda. 


  && The representative of Egypt indicated his support for the interventions by India and China, and requested that the present sub-item remain on the agenda.


&& The representative of the European Union said that her intervention related to the present sub-item, as well as to the two following sub-items. With regard to the GCC Customs Union, her delegation noted with appreciation that the factual presentation and the Secretariat's general incidence calculation had been circulated, and that a fax had been sent to Members announcing that a review would take place in the CRTA. Turning to the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea agreements, she said that it was important to clarify the legal and procedural questions arising from agreements being notified by each party under different legal provisions. With respect to the ASEAN-Korea agreement, she regretted that no progress had been made, and encouraged the parties to make additional efforts in this regard. She noted that this situation had prevented the Committee from reviewing the goods aspects of the agreement, whereas the services aspects had already been discussed in the CRTA. She also regretted that no progress had been made regarding the India-Korea agreement, and again encouraged the parties to make additional efforts to find a solution. 


 && The representative of the United States said that the GCC Customs Union notification concerned a customs union, and this made this particular notification different from non-customs union RTA notifications. With regard to document WT/COMTD/W/175, he noted that his delegation had not found any specific issues relating to the notification of the GCC Customs Union. The cosponsors of the document appeared to be seeking a discussion of a systemic nature on RTAs, which was outside the scope of the CTD. Any systemic discussion on the rules for RTAs needed to take place in the CRTA.  
&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea


&& The representative of the United States welcomed the inclusion of this sub-item on the agenda, and noted that a correct listing would need to include the document symbol WT/COMTD/N/33, which was the ASEAN member countries' notification of 6 July 2010. Although this notification should have initiated the review process set out in Section C of the RTA TM – thereby providing transparency regarding the preferential treatment extended by the parties – the review process had not been initiated, because some of the parties had still not submitted the required data to the Secretariat. Referring to the RTA TM, he noted that data needed to be made available within 10 weeks – or 20 weeks in the case of RTAs involving only developing countries – after the date of notification of the agreement. However, in the case of the ASEAN-Korea agreement, almost eight years had passed since the notification. It was his understanding that data remained outstanding from Cambodia, the Philippines and Viet Nam. He urged these parties to provide the necessary data to the Secretariat without any further delay. He also observed that Lao PDR, which was a member of ASEAN, had not been identified as a party to the ASEAN-Korea agreement in the notification of 6 July 2010. In this regard, he requested clarification as to whether Lao PDR was a party to the agreement – and if so, whether it would submit a notification, and subsequently the necessary data to the Secretariat. Finally, he noted that some Members had raised questions regarding the venue for the mandated review of the ASEAN-Korea agreement. While it was important to reach a consensus on a path forward for the review, his delegation did not believe that the question of venue should be a reason for Members to avoid fulfilling their obligations under the RTA TM.


&& The representative of Korea said that issues relating to dual notifications of RTAs had appeared on the CTD's agenda for several years, and that his delegation had engaged in discussions with interested Members, and with CTD Chairs, with a view to resolving the matter. He indicated that Korea had duly notified its RTAs – and in particular the ASEAN-Korea and IndiaKorea agreements – in accordance with GATT Article XXIV and GATS Article V, and in compliance with the RTA TM. While the Enabling Clause was designed to allow developing Members to accord differential and more favourable treatment in tariffs to each other, he was unsure whether the ASEANKorea and India-Korea agreements fell into this category. In this regard, he expressed some doubt on having separate considerations of the two agreements in the CRTA and in the CTD, but indicated that his delegation was open to the possibility of handling the matter in a joint meeting of the two bodies. 


&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between India and Korea (Goods)


&& The representative of the United States welcomed the inclusion of this sub-item on the CTD agenda as a reminder of the outstanding data that was due for the preparation of the factual presentation on the India-Korea agreement. He said that his delegation would revert to this subitem at the next meeting with a more detailed statement, in which it would ask India for an update regarding the status of provision of the required data, which was about eight years overdue. 
&& The representative of India indicated that his intervention related not only to the present sub-item, but also to the previous two sub-items. Referring to elements of document WT/COMTD/W/175, he noted that it had been argued that the non-adoption or prescription of criteria or conditions for the elimination of non-tariff measures (NTMs) did not exclude customs unions providing for the elimination of non-tariff measures from the coverage of the Enabling Clause, nor should this impair developing Members' rights in taking such actions within their RTAs. In this regard, he shared his delegation's view that customs union among developing countries could be notified under the Enabling Clause, and that the Enabling Clause covered more than just tariffs. He believed that Members needed to consider the legal and procedural implications of notifying the GCC Customs Union on the basis of the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV, without either notification being withdrawn. Members also needed to consider the role of the CTD and the CRTA in reviewing an RTA notified under both provisions. He additionally pointed to the question of how the CTD should deal in the future with RTAs between developing Members that were notified under the Enabling Clause, insofar as this related to the fulfilment of paragraphs 1 and 4 of the CTD's TORs. Another issue was whether a Member could notify an RTA under a specific legal provision unilaterally – without the consent of the other parties to the RTA – and whether a notification could be made on behalf of all the parties to the RTA under another legal provision. Furthermore, the implications arising from Members retaining a notification under the Enabling Clause – but not conducting a factual consideration of the RTA in the CTD – needed to be addressed, as did the question of how this would figure specifically in the case of the GCC Customs Union, where a factual review had been scheduled.  


&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.  
	•	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements
-	Implementation of the Transparency Mechanism for Preferential Trade Arrangements – Status on the Committee's Work
- 	Status of the preparation of factual presentations – Report by the Chairman (WT/COMTD/W/234)  
&& The Chairman said that he had circulated a report, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/234, on the status of the preparation of factual presentations on PTAs. In summarizing the information in the report, he informed the Committee that, as had been mentioned in past meetings, there were five PTAs that had been notified since the establishment of the Transparency Mechanism for PTAs (PTA TM) for which the Secretariat had still not received the full set of data or information required for the preparation of the factual presentations. These were the PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation, Chinese Taipei and Thailand. In addition to statistical data that was missing, it was his understanding that, for at least some of these PTAs, up-to-date regulations in an official WTO language had not been notified to the CTD, as was required under the PTA TM. Without these regulations, the Secretariat would not be in a position to complete the factual presentations – even if the statistical data were submitted. He therefore urged the notifying Members to provide all the required data and information as soon as possible. In closing, he said that this was the first time that the CTD Chairperson's report on the status of PTA factual presentations had been circulated as a Committee document. He recalled that he had indicated at the informal, open-ended meeting of the CTD's Regular Session on 21 March 2018 that he would proceed in this manner, as he believed this would be useful for Members.  


&& The representative of the European Union regretted that some Members had not as yet been able to provide the required data and information for the preparation of the factual presentations. She indicated that her delegation would welcome updates from these Members in this regard, including in the context of any difficulties they were facing.


&& The representative of the United States called on the Members implementing the PTAs mentioned in the Chairman's report to provide the required data and information in order to allow the Secretariat to complete the factual presentations. She observed that, for some of these PTAs, the data was overdue by more than six years. This diminished transparency for all Members. 


 && The representative of the Russian Federation indicated that his delegation was working to submit the necessary data and information to the Secretariat.


  && The representative of South Africa said that she had taken note of the observation by the United States under agenda item D that the deadline for the provision of data in the context of the MERCOSUR-SACU agreement had passed. She informed the Committee that South Africa had already provided the required data to the Secretariat, and would work with the other SACU parties to ensure that the outstanding data was submitted. 
 &&  The Committee took note of the Chairman's report, and of the interventions.
	•	REVIEW OF THE STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning duty free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered. 


&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, emphasized the importance of DFQF market access for the integration of LDCs into the MTS, as well as for their growth and development. The LDC Group appreciated the efforts of those developed Members that were providing DFQF market access on all of their tariff lines – or on at least 97% of their tariff lines, pursuant to the Hong Kong DFQF Decision – as well as the efforts of developing Members in this regard. However, he noted that DFQF implementation had not led to the significant impact on LDC exports that had been hoped for. Certain Members whose markets were of fundamental importance to LDC exports had yet to provide duty-free access on at least 97% of their tariff lines. Furthermore, in some cases, the remaining 3% of tariff lines subject to duties often included products of export interest to LDCs – for example, textiles, clothing and certain agricultural and industrial products. According to the Secretariat Note contained in document WT/COMTD/LDC/W/65/Rev.1, the average applied tariffs by developed Members in 2015 on textile and clothing products from LDCs were 3.2% and 6.5%, respectively. He also noted the infrastructural constraints that LDCs had to deal with in their efforts to export their products. While stressing the importance to LDCs of enhanced DFQF market access, he also called for an in-depth analysis of the problems faced by LDCs. He believed in particular that an examination of the utilization of preferences at the tariff line level would help to determine where to focus discussions in order to help increase LDC exports. In this regard, he recalled that the LDC Group had submitted a proposal in 2016, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/218/Rev.1, for a clinical examination of DFQF implementation. Some Members had been reluctant at the time to agree to the draft TORs for the proposed study. He stressed that the proposal aimed simply for the preparation of a technical study by the Secretariat, in order to allow an understanding of what was preventing LDCs from taking fuller advantage of the preferences granted, and to come up with the best possible responses. He expressed his hope that Members could agree to the proposal.
&& The representative of Bangladesh expressed support for the intervention by Chad. He noted that, while the objective laid out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was to double the LDCs' share of global exports by 2020, the LDCs' share had actually decreased in recent years. He urged Members to agree to the draft TORs submitted by the LDC Group for a clinical examination of DFQF implementation. He also expressed disappointment that, at a recent meeting of the Committee on Rules of Origin, delegations had not provided updates on the steps taken to implement the Nairobi Decision on preferential rules of origin for LDCs. He called on Members to consider the spirit of the Hong Kong and Bali DFQF Decisions, as well as the Nairobi Decision on preferential rules of origin, and to faithfully implement these Decisions in order to help LDCs increase their share of global exports.


&& The representative of the European Union recalled that the European Union provided DFQF market access for all products from LDCs, except for arms and ammunition. She encouraged other Members, including emerging economies, to endeavour to provide better market access to LDCs.
&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.
	•	WORK PROGRAMME ON ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
-	Ministerial Decision of 13 December 2017 (WT/MIN(17)65 – WT/L/1032) – Statement by the Chairman


&& The Chairman drew Members' attention to the Ministerial Decision concerning the WTO's Work Programme on E-Commerce adopted at the Eleventh Ministerial Conference (MC11). This Decision, of 13 December 2017, was contained in documents WT/MIN(17)/65 and WT/L/1032. He highlighted that the Decision called, inter alia, for a continuation of the work under the Work Programme on E-Commerce, based on the existing mandate, with an endeavour to reinvigorate the work. In this context, he recalled that the CTD was one of the four subsidiary bodies of the General Council that was mandated to implement the Work Programme on E-Commerce. On the basis of the MC11 Decision, he invited Members to consider possible ways forward for the CTD in the e-commerce area, and to share any ideas with the Committee. He also indicated that, as per the MC11 Decision, the General Council would hold periodic reviews on the Work Programme on ECommerce, based on reports submitted by the relevant WTO bodies. The next review would take place at the July 2018 session of the General Council.	 


&& The representative of Chinese Taipei welcomed the decision taken at MC11 to continue the work on e-commerce. His delegation stood ready to contribute to this work, and to help build a more inclusive and fair MTS. He indicated that he wished to introduce two submissions by his delegation, circulated in February 2018 in documents JOB/DEV/53 and JOB/DEV/54. With regard to the first submission, he said that e-commerce provided a unique opportunity for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) to reach out and engage in the global market. However, cyberspace trade barriers (CTBs) – which were interventions by governments in the cross-border transmission of information by electronic means – had a restrictive effect on international trade. His delegation's view was that the CTB issue deserved greater attention, since overcoming the digital divide and CTBs were key preconditions for MSMEs to connect online and access potential local and foreign buyers. He went on to say that the second submission contained his delegation's observations on the 3D printing revolution and the sharing economy. He noted that the rapid advent of 3D printing and demander-supplier matching services were creating new kinds of ecommerce manufacturing and trading patterns, which often by-passed traditional border controls. He suggested that Members should consider these issues, in order to address possible asymmetric regulatory treatment. In closing, he indicated that his delegation was willing to share more in-depth analysis in the e-commerce area, and to join in capacity-building efforts. He expressed hope that the two submissions from his delegation would help to clarify important dimensions of e-commerce, and facilitate discussions on e-commerce, development and capacitybuilding in the WTO. 


&& The representative of Bangladesh suggested that a dedicated session of the CTD could be held in May 2018 to discuss e-commerce, for which the Secretariat could prepare a background paper on the key elements relating to the CTD under the Work Programme on E-Commerce. He also proposed that the second submission introduced by Chinese Taipei could form part of the discussion, particularly with regard to the revenue implications of e-commerce. He hoped that the Committee could agree at the present meeting to hold a dedicated session.  


&& The representative of the European Union said that her delegation was supportive of discussions in the e-commerce area. With regard to the suggestion from Bangladesh, she requested that a written proposal be submitted in order to allow her delegation to give it due consideration. 
&& The representative of China said that he had taken note of the two submissions introduced by Chinese Taipei. He also referred Members to the statement on the Work Programme on ECommerce delivered by his delegation at the CTS meeting held on 2 March 2018. 


&& The representative of Bangladesh, in response to the intervention by the European Union, said that he did not see the need to submit a written proposal on his suggestion for a dedicated session on e-commerce to be held. He explained that the elements of his suggestion – including the proposal for a Secretariat background paper, and the idea to address parts of the submission by Chinese Taipei – were already contained in the Work Programme on E-Commerce. He called for a discussion on substance rather than on procedure. Holding a dedicated session on e-commerce would allow the Committee to provide a substantive report to the General Council at its July 2018 meeting. 


 && The representative of the European Union explained that she would need a written proposal from Bangladesh in order to be able to consult with her colleagues working in the e-commerce area.


&& The representative of India recognized that e-commerce had become a major driver of international economic activity and international trade. In India, e-commerce was transforming the way business was being conducted, and represented one of the fastest growing segments of the economy. However, the growth of e-commerce activities had given birth to new challenges, both for domestic and cross-border trade. These challenges were well highlighted at the E-Commerce Week organized by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) on 1620 April 2018, and included issues relating to consumer protection, the sale of counterfeit goods and services, the safety of online payments, e-authentication procedures and digital signatures, taxation, as well as other challenges relating to shortages of skilled manpower, human resource development and logistics. As rules on these issues were still evolving in most developing countries, his delegation believed that it was premature to discuss rule-making on e-commerce at the WTO. Instead, discussions on e-commerce should be exploratory and confined to the nonnegotiating mandate of the Work Programme on E-Commerce, as agreed by Ministers at MC11. The bodies mandated to implement the Work Programme on E-Commerce had highlighted a number of technical issues within the scope of the relevant WTO Agreements which required deliberation. He also shared the view that a distinction needed to be made between the gains from e-commerce, and the likely benefits of rule-making on ecommerce. With regard to work that could be undertaken in the CTD, he pointed to the elements laid out in paragraph 5.1 of the Work Programme on E-Commerce, and stressed that discussions on e-commerce in the CTD needed to focus on how to address the development needs of developing countries. A critical component of this discussion should be on how to ensure an adequate transfer of technology, given that the growth of digital trade and e-commerce was technology-dependent.


 && The representative of the United States requested Bangladesh to submit a written proposal regarding the suggestion to hold a dedicated session on e-commerce. She explained that this would allow her to consult with her capital.


 && The representative of Bangladesh indicated that his proposal was in line with the mandate of the CTD under the Work Programme on E-Commerce. He explained that he wished to avoid procedural matters, and focus on substance. The proposed dedicated session on e-commerce would allow a substantive discussion to take place, and would provide input for the report to the General Council on the work of the CTD in this area. 


&& The representative of Canada said that, like others, she wished to request a written proposal from Bangladesh, as this would allow her to consult with her colleagues working on e-commerce.


&& The Chairman noted that some ideas on possible work for the CTD in the e-commerce area had been shared, and some Members had requested additional information. He proposed that 

the Committee take note of all interventions, and that the present item be maintained on the agenda for the next meeting.        
It was so agreed.  
	•	OTHER BUSINESS


&& The representative of Japan said that Members had shown a growing interest since MC11 to have broader and fundamental discussions on trade and development. Discussions in this regard had already been held at the mini-Ministerial meeting held in New Delhi in March 2018, and some informal exchanges were currently taking place in Geneva. His delegation saw value in continuing free and frank dialogue on the subject, and therefore wished to make its own contribution to facilitate the process by organizing a Member-driven activity. Details of the format and content of the activity were still under reflection, although the preliminary feeling was that a workshop or seminar would be useful, with the participation of external experts such as academics. His delegation had been consulting informally with some Members about the possibility of holding such an activity, possibly before the summer break, and looked forward to hearing the views of the wider membership. Japan remained open to continue discussing this matter with any interested delegation. 


&& The representative of South Africa, on behalf of the African Group, referred to the discussion that had taken place on the Aid-for-Trade Work Programme at the CTD's reconvened 42nd session on Aid for Trade, held on 23 April 2018. In particular, she recalled that the Group had requested some more time before it would be in a position to inform Members on whether or not it could agree to relinquish its position on having a footnote in the current version of the draft AidforTrade Work Programme – contained in document JOB/DEV/52/Rev.3. She observed in this regard that the document was the result of an intensive process, in the context of which even a reference to industrial policy had been rejected. Notwithstanding Africa’s long-term development objectives for industrialization and structural transformation, in the spirit of cooperation the Group had indicated that it was willing to forego a number of important issues critical to those objectives, in order to move forward with the Aid-for-Trade Work Programme. She also recalled that the Group had submitted written comments that were substantive in nature, and which intended to improve and strengthen the Aid-for-Trade Initiative. As recipients of Aid for Trade, the member countries of the African Group believed that they were in a position to identify ways to realize the objectives of the Aid-for-Trade Initiative. The comments had been provided in that spirit, and she therefore did not agree with the assertion that the African Group had politicized the Aid-for-Trade Initiative. She also expressed regret that the Aid-for-Trade Task Force recommendations adopted by the General Council on 10 October 2006 in document WT/GC/M/104 were now being called into question. She observed that it was these recommendations that gave life and form to the AidforTrade Initiative, the Global Review of Aid-for-Trade and the Aid-for-Trade Work Programmes. In closing, she indicated that the Group was still considering how it intended to proceed with the issue of the footnote, and would inform the Chairman of its decision shortly.    


&& The representative of Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that no feedback had been received from members of the Group calling into question the third revision of the draft AidforTrade Work Programme, as contained in document JOB/DEV/52/Rev.3. He believed that improvements had been made in the current text relative to earlier ones, which emphasized the importance of industrialization, structural transformation and the development of infrastructure and skills. The current text was therefore acceptable to the LDC Group, even though certain members of the Group had wished to see further improvements. The text provided a strong basis for moving forward with the aim of fulfilling the mandate of the Aid-for-Trade Initiative, which was to help developing countries, and especially LDCs, to strengthen their supply-side capacity and traderelated infrastructure in order to increase exports. He expressed his appreciation for the Chairman's efforts to work towards reaching a consensus on the Aid-for-Trade Work Programme.  
&& The Chairman said that he wished to take the opportunity to summarize the current status of the draft Aid-for-Trade Work Programme, and inform Members how he intended to proceed. He recalled that, at the CTD's reconvened 42nd Session on Aid for Trade on 23 April 2018, a textual amendment was agreed to, in the form of the deletion of the word "and" in paragraph 1.3. However, there remained some outstanding work to do, notably with respect to paragraph 3.2. Overall, he believed that significant progress had been achieved on the text, and some Members had expressed their satisfaction with the changes made between the second and third revisions of the document. However, others had noted that there existed a limit to their flexibility. He recalled that he had posed the question to Members as to whether document JOB/DEV/52/Rev.3 would be the final draft text under his chairmanship, or whether it would a final text that would be submitted to the General Council. On this matter, it appeared that the document was to be the final draft under his chairmanship. In order to capture the progress made so far, and to facilitate the work of the incoming Chairman, he indicated that the document would now be issued in all of the official WTO languages. He clarified that the document remained a draft, and that the task of arriving at a final Aid-for-Trade Work Programme would now fall to the incoming Chairman. In closing, he observed that, at no point during the various consultations on this text, had he heard any Member questioning the utility of having an Aid-for-Trade Work Programme, or expressing a desire to discontinue the work on the Aid-for-Trade Initiative. 


&&  The Committee took note of all interventions.
	•	ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST DEVELOPED COUNTRIES


&& The Chairman said that, on the basis of consultations, he wished to put forward the name of Ambassador Monique T.G. Van Daalen of the Netherlands to serve for another year as 

the Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.


&&  The Committee elected Ambassador Monique T.G. Van Daalen as the Chairperson of the SubCommittee on LDCs for 2018.
	•	ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT


&&  The Committee was informed that, at the General Council meeting of 7 March 2018, the names of the Chairpersons for 2018 had been announced, including that of Ambassador Diego Aulestia of Ecuador as Chairman of the CTD. The Committee was invited to formally elect Ambassador Aulestia.
&&  The Committee elected Ambassador Aulestia as the Chairman of the CTD for 2018.
&& The Chairman observed that the relationship between trade and development was at the heart of the MTS, and that there was a wide consensus that trade should benefit the well-being of citizens. As the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO, the CTD played an important role in that regard. He also noted that the relationship between trade and development was recognized in the Havana Charter. Finally, he expressed appreciation to the outgoing Chairman, Ambassador Taonga Mushayavanhu, and assured Members of his intention to work closely with them on the various areas of the CTD's work.
Several delegations took the floor to welcome the Chairman, and to express appreciation for the work of the outgoing Chairman. Interventions in this regard were made by the representatives of India, Chad, on behalf of the LDC Group, South Africa, on behalf of the African Group, the European Union and China.
	•	DATE OF THE NEXT MEETING


&& The Chairman said that this was a new item that had been requested on the CTD's agenda. He believed that it was useful for planning purposes to have an idea of when the next CTD meeting would be held. All efforts would be made to stick to the date that was announced, although circumstances might sometimes require some modifications, which would be duly conveyed to Members. He went on to say that the next meeting was tentatively scheduled to be held on 5 July 2018. An initial agenda would be circulated four weeks before the meeting, on 7 June 2018, as per the CTD's rules of procedure. After the circulation of this initial meeting notice, Members would still have the opportunity to request items on the agenda for the meeting. The agenda would close on 22 June 2018, and would be circulated on 25 June 2018.  
The meeting was adjourned.

__________
