
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 4 MARCH 2013
Chairperson: H.E. Ms. Marion Williams (Barbados)

 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478848" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC356478848 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478849" B.	election of the chairperson of the committee on trade and development	 PAGEREF _TOC356478849 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478850" C.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC356478850 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478851" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc356478851 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478852" (ii)	Request for observer status by the Economic Community of Central African States	 PAGEREF _Toc356478852 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478853" (iii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc356478853 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478854" D.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC356478854 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478855" -	Operationalization of the results-based management monitoring and evaluation system (JOB/TC/5)	 PAGEREF _Toc356478855 \h 4
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478856" -	Implementation of planned activities for 2013	 PAGEREF _Toc356478856 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478857" -	Preparation of the 2014-2015 technical assistance and training plan	 PAGEREF _Toc356478857 \h 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478858" E.	trade and development - work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (wt/min(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC356478858 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478859" -	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc356478859 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478860" -	Supporting ministers' guidance for focused work in the Committee on Trade and Development - proposal from Australia, Chile, Colombia and Singapore (WT/COMTD/W/191)	 PAGEREF _Toc356478860 \h 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478861" F.	electronic commerce - decision of 17 december 2011 (WT/L/843)	 PAGEREF _TOC356478861 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478862" -	Workshop on "E-commerce, Development and SMEs" (8-9 April 2013) - statement by the Chairperson	 PAGEREF _Toc356478862 \h 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478863" G.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC356478863 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478864" -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc356478864 \h 13
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478865" -	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc356478865 \h 14
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478866" -	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement  between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc356478866 \h 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478867" H.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC356478867 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478868" I.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC356478868 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc356478869" -	Better utilization of the market access provided to LDCs under duty free and quota free - communication from Nepal, on behalf of the LDC Group (WT/COMTD/W/194)	 PAGEREF _Toc356478869 \h 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478870" J.	election of the chairperson of the sub-committee on least‑developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC356478870 \H 18
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC356478871" K.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC356478871 \H 18


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Committee was informed that the draft agenda for the 87th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/4081 circulated on 22 February 2013, and that a matter would be raised under "Other Business" concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system. 
The agenda was adopted as amended.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Marion Williams of Barbados as the Chairperson of the CTD for 2013. Appreciation was expressed for the work of the outgoing Chairperson, Ambassador Mothae Anthony Maruping of Lesotho.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairperson recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). She said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  She proposed that these organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed. 
Request for observer status by the Economic Community of Central African States
&& The Chairperson said that a request had been received from the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) for observer status in the CTD. The communication, dated 3 December 2012, came from the Secretary General of ECCAS, and was addressed to the Director‑General of the WTO. She went on to say that she was aware of the discussions that had taken place in the CTD on the issue of observer status. She was also aware that the Chair of the General Council had been holding consultations on matters relating to observer status in the organization. The request from ECCAS had, nevertheless, been brought to Members' attention for their consideration.
&& The representative of Cameroon expressed his hope that the request from ECCAS could be considered positively by the Committee.
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation could accept ECCAS' request on an ad hoc basis.
&& The Committee agreed to grant ECCAS observer status on an ad hoc basis.  
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairperson said that the positions of delegations were on the record. She reiterated that she was aware of the discussions that had taken place on this issue in the CTD, as well as the informal consultations that the Chair of the General Council had been holding. She was also aware that some Members had requested that the CTD Chairperson hold independent consultations on this matter, and that consultations had been held by her predecessors. She indicated in this regard that she was willing to work with Members, if they so wished, to try to help find convergence on a way forward. Members were also encouraged to consult amongst themselves. She suggested that the Committee revert to this matter at its next meeting.
It was so agreed.
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
&& The Chairperson invited the Deputy Director-General in charge of development issues to speak first under this agenda item. The floor would then be given to representatives of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) to provide further information to Members on technical assistance (TA) issues.  
The Deputy Director-General said that, in 2012, the ITTC had strengthened its measures to improve the content, delivery and management of TA. She wished to mention four of the ITTC's measures in particular. The first measure was the introduction of a new, five-year, e-learning strategy. The second measure was concerned with improved partnership terms for the delivery of TA. These were based on shared cost for TA delivery, with a movement away from ad hoc cost‑sharing and towards systematic cost-sharing arrangements. The third measure was to improve coordination within the Secretariat in the delivery of TA. The fourth measure was the introduction of results-based management (RBM). These measures had contributed to reducing pressure on the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund (GTF), thereby enabling the Secretariat to carry forward enough resources to not disrupt or delay the implementation of activities in 2013.
She went on to provide details of the e-learning programme. She informed the Committee that 33 on-line courses had been made available on a permanent basis in 2012. Over 6,500 individuals had enrolled in these courses, representing an increase of 33% relative to the previous year. Of the specific subjects covered, the highest number of participants was registered in the courses on sanitary and phytosanitary measures and on trade in services. Participants from LDCs accounted for 30% of the total. With regard to the regional distribution of participants, 39% were from Africa, 26% from Latin America and 20% from Asia and the Pacific. A new course methodology titled "My Course" was finalized and made available at the end of 2012. The aim was to guide participants in identifying gaps in their WTO knowledge and accordingly selecting the appropriate training material. The five-year e-learning strategy, which had been approved by senior management, would allow the WTO to provide a comprehensive and diverse training programme. The programme would remain responsive to the changing needs of beneficiaries and would guarantee maximum returns of the resources invested, in line with RBM.
-	Operationalization of the results-based management monitoring and evaluation system (JOB/TC/5) 
&& The Director of the ITTC recalled that Members had been briefed at the informal CTD meeting of 27 June 2012 on the Secretariat's efforts to design an RBM monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. Referring to document JOB/TC/5, she said that the design of the system had now been completed. The M&E system was the Secretariat's strategic tool for achieving targeted results and outcomes relating to TA. The system was designed to provide a continuous flow of information to measure the progress being made towards achieving the expected results. It served three key purposes. The first was to provide the ITTC with a framework for measuring progress towards the achievement of results and outcomes. The second was to strengthen the ITTC’s capacity to improve the performance and management of TA activities. The third purpose was to enable all TA services and their results to be measured against stated objectives, so as to provide accountability to Members and other relevant stakeholders. 
She informed the Committee that the forms used by the ITTC to collect data and monitor progress towards achieving outputs - the Back-to-Office Report (BTOR), the Participants Evaluation Form (PEF), the Regional Activity Request (RAR) form and the National Request Form - had been amended and aligned with the new M&E framework, as well as with the OECD's Development Assistance Committee (DAC) criteria. This had been done in order to include emphasis on the monitoring of progress towards achieving outcomes. The new National Request Form, found in Annex I of document JOB/TC/5, replaced the one found JOB/TC/2. 
The diagram contained in document JOB/TC/5 outlined the M&E system, which was premised on three key stages. The three stages were planning, implementation, and evaluation. During the planning stage, lessons from previous M&E exercises would be reviewed, as would consultations with Members and partner agencies. Where appropriate, relevant actions would be incorporated into the planning of TA activities. Stakeholders would be mapped and categorized so as to understand who they were and how to engage with them. A needs assessment would be undertaken every two years to confirm or re-design the TA services. The TA activities would be designed using the Logframe - which was the main planning tool within the M&E framework - and would take into account the budget. Turning to the implementation stage, she said that the Logframe would be used as the basis for monitoring and evaluating the delivery of the TA services. The PEFs and the BTORs would be used to measure the progress made towards achieving the outputs recorded in the Logframe. An internal report would be prepared every 6 months to analyze performance. Once the internal reporting and review was completed, a final report would be disseminated more widely to external stakeholders and Members. 
She went on to say that the evaluation stage focused on analyzing targeted results or outcomes. Evaluations would be undertaken on a biennial basis. In the context of the 2014-2015 Technical Assistance and Training Plan (TA Plan), the Secretariat would present refined outcomes with indicators to measure progress during 2014 and 2015. The evaluation would cover four areas. The first area was concerned with a specific level of the progressive learning strategy (PLS). The second area had a course focus in order to determine the value and quality of a specific course. In the third area, the focus was at the country level, so as to determine the readiness of a given country to apply WTO Agreements and rules, as well as to clarify the context in which participants worked. General capacity building was the focus of the fourth area. The purpose here was to determine countries' abilities to build national consensus on WTO issues and, for acceding countries, to determine preparedness for WTO accession.
In terms of next steps, she said that the intention was to further develop the framework online. The ITTC's TA database would be made more interactive, in particular with the creation of a dashboard for internal and external use. All the TA forms, including the National Request Forms, would be provided online. The objective was for the M&E system to be fully implemented as an online system by the end of 2013.  
&& The representative of Nepal, on behalf of the LDC Group, expressed appreciation for the focus on better aligning TA with capacity gaps. He was encouraged to note the LDCs' present share of TA, and hoped that the share would increase further in keeping with the LDCs' needs and requirements. He stressed the importance of TA for developing countries, and especially LDCs. 
&& The representative of Nigeria said that the planning stage of the M&E system was particularly important. In this light, he wished to know more about the format of the needs assessment exercise. He also noted the three challenges that were listed in document JOB/TC/5, and expressed particular concern with the challenge of obtaining funding for external evaluations. Finally, he asked whether some information could be shared on the utilization of the national activities.  
&& The representative of Cameroon said that the WTO's TA activities had led to some tangible results. He wished to raise, however, some concerns about the procedures in place with respect to some activities. He indicated firstly in this regard that capital-based officials were often not given proper information about TA activities. Second, he said that some officials working in Geneva had not had appropriate training before taking up their current positions, and were not able to benefit from appropriate training whilst in Geneva.  
&& The representative of the United States expressed support for the Secretariat's work on the M&E system. He indicated that he wished to make a few comments on the system. He noted firstly that, since each country would request different forms of TA for different purposes, it was not immediately clear in the context of RBM how the ITTC would measure the achievement of results on a larger scale. In this light, he suggested that it would be useful to provide a brief linkage to higher-level ITTC goals. His delegation also recommended the inclusion of a paragraph on benchmark data as part of the implementation stage of the M&E system. He added that the formative evaluation should make explicit some mechanism for mid-stream course correction. Finally, while praising the online data dashboard, he noted that the key would be in ensuring widespread and consistent usage.  
&& The representative of Mexico emphasized the importance of evaluating TA activities. He wished to know, however, how the evaluation would take into account beneficiaries' comments and opinions, as well as the needs that were specified by countries.  
&& The representative of Guinea said that her delegation supported the M&E system. She emphasized the importance of TA for developing countries, and particularly the LDCs.
&& The Director of the ITTC said that the planning stage of the M&E system, and in particular the issue of needs assessment, was critical. In this regard, she said that the Trade Policy Review (TPR) process had been used in the past as a way of identifying countries' needs. This approach needed to be complemented with other methods. For this purpose, the new National Request Form had been developed. Henceforth, rather than requesting the beneficiaries to mark the areas where they believed they needed assistance, the beneficiaries would be asked to describe the particular problems they were facing. This would enable a more targeted response. The Secretariat also intended to make more use of the information available from partner organizations when identifying countries' needs. Furthermore, the lessons learned in the implementation of TA activities would be used in the formulation of future activities. The comments and suggestions of beneficiaries of TA activities would also be taken into account. She added that it was important to target not only government officials in the provision of TA, but other stakeholders as well. Finally, she indicated that the ITTC was willing to discuss with Members how the M&E system could be further improved. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Implementation of planned activities for 2013
&& The Director of the ITTC said that the focus in 2013 was to ensure that TA activities were implemented without any disruption and were sequenced to match the needs of beneficiaries. As in past years, particular emphasis would be placed on providing assistance to African countries and to LDCs. The Progressive Learning Strategy (PLS) would continue to be applied, while e-learning usage would increase. She added that selections would be made in 2013 of the host universities for the regional trade policy courses for English-speaking African countries, the Latin American region, the Arab region and the Caribbean region. In addition, 2013 was the fourth  year of the WTO Chairs Programme (WCP) and, on the basis of the findings of an evaluation to be undertaken, a decision would be made as to what would happen to the programme after 2013. In this regard, a meeting with the WCP Advisory Board would be held in the course of the year. She went on to say that an official communication would be sent shortly to Members to provide the link to the new National Request Form. The intention was for Members to start using the new form as of 1 April 2013, and to eventually phase out the old form. Finally, she informed the Committee that, in order to facilitate the preparation of the 2014-2015 TA Plan, the ITTC would be holding consultations with Members. This matter would be elaborated on under the next sub-item.
&& The Committee took note of the intervention.
-	Preparation of the 2014-2015 technical assistance and training plan
&& The Head of the ITTC's TA Coordination, Partnerships and Internship Programmes Section said that the ITTC had embarked on preparations of the 2014-2015 TA Plan. The intention was to have the Plan ready before the end of July 2013. To this end, the ITTC had started consultations with divisions within the Secretariat as to what activities could be undertaken in 2014 and 2015. Consultations with Members, mainly through the regional groupings, would shortly be held to gain a better understanding of needs. Partner institutions would also be contacted to ensure that there was coherence in planned activities. In order to guide the discussions with the regional groupings, a questionnaire would be prepared and shared with Members. The ITTC's regional desks, as well as the various divisions within the Secretariat, would also play a role identifying the needs of each region. A draft TA Plan would be prepared on the basis of these processes. He went on to list a number of key elements that would form part of the Plan, including the PLS, e-learning, RBM, partnerships, regional approaches, national seminars, internship programmes and the WTO reference centres. The intention was to go for quality rather than quantity, and to build on lessons learned regarding what had worked and what hadn't worked in the past. The programmes would be specific and focused in order to respond to identified needs. Finally, he noted that there was a need to maintain some flexibility in the preparation of the Plan, given that the outcome of the Ninth Ministerial Conference (MC9) was not known at the present time.
&& The Committee took note of the intervention.
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairperson recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the link between trade and development and called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. The CTD had been directed to report the results of its work under the MC8 mandate to Ministers at the 9th Session.
She said that the MC8 mandate had been discussed at each of the formal CTD meetings in 2012. In addition, the CTD Chairperson had held several informal consultations in the course of 2012 to hear views and suggestions on what specifically could be done by the CTD under this mandate. On several occasions, the Chairperson had invited Members to consider submitting written proposals on concrete areas of work for the CTD, since written proposals were more conducive to focused discussion, and would also ensure a Member-driven process. The two written submissions that had been discussed at the 86th Session were reflected under the present agenda item. One submission - by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group - was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. The other submission - by Australia, Chile, Colombia and Singapore - was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191. She recalled that the discussions at the last CTD meeting had indicated that Members needed more time to consider the proposals contained in the two submissions. She also informed the Committee that copies of an informal paper containing an additional proposal for work in the CTD under the MC8 mandate had been placed in the meeting room by Barbados, on behalf of the Group of Small, Vulnerable Economies (SVEs). In concluding her opening remarks, she stressed the short time remaining before MC9, when the CTD was to report. In this light, there was a need for the Committee to make quick progress in identifying what work would be undertaken under the MC8 mandate. Her intention was to continue with informal consultations as necessary so as to allow progress to be made. 
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
&& The Chairperson invited the co-sponsors of the three proposals contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192 to take the floor first. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that the co-sponsors had presented their proposals at the 86th Session, and looked forward to Members' comments.  
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation had comments on the each of the three proposals contained in the submission. He indicated that the US welcomed the first proposal, which was constructive and had the potential to yield information that would be a valuable resource to Members. The proposal requested the Secretariat to update its document with an objective and analytical listing of the special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions, identifying the measures that had been taken and put forward to operationalize them. His delegation supported this statement of work and urged the Secretariat to provide its update within this framework.
With regard to the second proposal, he said that Members were in agreement that the CTD was the focal point on development matters in the WTO. That being said, the US viewed the proposal as unnecessary, and had concerns that it could be disruptive to the functioning of the WTO's system of Committees. Specifically, the US questioned the added value of this proposal in consideration of the resource burden it would create by mandating the CTD to take on such reporting. While other WTO bodies addressed a wide range of issues that might relate to development, they did so in areas where they had the requisite technical expertise to address the issue at hand, such as within the Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures or the Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade. The same Members represented in the CTD were also represented in other WTO bodies. Given how closely trade and development issues were intertwined, the US also had concerns that it could be difficult to separate out the work of other Committees into strictly development issues. While coordination with other bodies might be necessary on certain issues, adding an additional layer of Committee review simply because an issue might have a development nexus was not the best use of the CTD’s time or resources. It was also unclear what the specific problem was that needed to be addressed through recommendations to the General Council. The proponents were requested to identify specific examples of problems that they had encountered which would call for this.
Turning to the third-d proposal, he said that his delegation believed that the parties to a regional trade agreement (RTA) should work together to the extent possible so that individual RTAs could be reviewed in a timely manner, providing valuable information to the membership as a whole. However, although this proposal was stated as a recommendation, in so much as it could be used to push all developing countries to notify their RTAs under the Enabling Clause, his delegation could not agree to it. The US had made it very clear that it had no quarrel with any developing country notifying a qualifying agreement under the Enabling Clause. However, not all RTAs qualified under the Enabling Clause. Ultimately, it was up to individual Members to comply with WTO notification and reporting requirements, including those in the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for RTAs.
&& The representative of Australia began by indicating his delegation's support for the first proposal. On the second proposal, he said that the operational details of how it would work needed to be explored further. He inquired in this regard how the CTD would collect the required information from other WTO bodies. To elaborate, he asked whether these bodies would prepare reports to the CTD in addition to their existing annual reports. If this were the case, the reports to the CTD would need to be negotiated by Members. His delegation wondered whether the proponents had taken into account the impact on the workloads of the Committees that this would create. Furthermore, the same Members that participated in CTD meetings also participated in the meetings of other WTO bodies. If any Member believed that there was a lack of information on a specific development-related issue in the CTD, it could bring the matter to the Committee's attention. With regard to the third proposal, he said that his delegation encouraged cooperation between parties to RTAs in any way that improved the timeliness of their notifications and the utility and value for Members of the RTAs TM. Further details on the underlying concerns would help his delegation better understand the proposal. He also noted that changes to the operation of the RTAs TM were beyond the mandate of the CTD alone.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that the proposals were within the mandate of the CTD. He noted that Members had no difficulty with the first proposal. As for the second proposal, which called on the CTD to report on the development-related work of other WTO bodies, he noted that more discussion was necessary. Informal consultations by the Chairperson would be useful in this regard.
&& In relation to the first proposal, the representative of Japan said that he wished to remind Members that discussions on S&D provisions were taking place in the Special Session of the CTD. With regard to the second proposal, he suggested that Members needed to be cautious on the relationship between WTO bodies, in particular given the expertise of each body. On the third proposal, he said that his delegation's position was that the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR) was the appropriate body to discuss such a proposal, which related to the functioning of the RTAs TM.  
&& The representative of the European Union expressed support for the first proposal. She indicated, however, that her delegation had concerns with the second proposal, as it appeared to be calling for the CTD to have an oversight role in the work of other WTO bodies. She stressed the difficulties in delineating development activities, given the broad range of activities of WTO bodies that could potentially contribute to development. With regard to the third proposal, she said that the EU undertook an internal coordination process on matters relating to notifications and information provision. While there was a certain logic to the proposal, she requested the proponents to provide more information on how the proposal could add value, and how such a recommendation could be operationalized. She said that her delegation was available for any informal exchanges with the proponents.
&& The representative of Cuba emphasized the importance to developing countries of the threeproposals, and called on the Committee to take concrete action in this regard.
&& The representative of Egypt said that what he had heard from Members on the three proposals was encouraging. No objections had been raised on the first proposal, while a number of delegations had requested further information and clarity on the other proposals. With regard to the second proposal, he noted that the US had concerns that a new layer of review might be introduced. He did not believe that this would be the case. In his delegation's view, the fact that there was presently no coherent reporting on the development-related work in other WTO bodies undermined what the organization was delivering on development. Even though the CTD was the focal point for development-related issues in the WTO, the Committee was not informed on all the development-related work taking place in the organization. In this light, the objective of the second proposal was to encourage transparency through an annual overview of what the WTO was doing on development. The envisaged factual reporting could be done by the Secretariat of each body. The purpose was not for the CTD to become an oversight body, but simply for the Committee to fulfil its existing mandate. He also clarified that the envisaged reporting went beyond issues relating to S&D provisions alone.
Turning to the third proposal, he noted the US' concern that the proposed recommendation could push all developing countries to notify under the Enabling Clause. However, he did not believe that this would happen. The proposal did not state that Members should jointly notify under the Enabling Clause. Rather, the proposed recommendation by the CTD concerned all notified RTAs. To clarify why the recommendation needed to come from the CTD, he said that the CTD was the only Committee in the WTO discussing the unresolved matter of the three RTAs notified under both GATT Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause. The proposal aimed to avoid problems of a similar nature in the future, but did not specify that the matter needed to be resolved in the CTD. This was a compromise in the proponents' position, and was a demonstration of their willingness to engage in good faith to find a solution. In conclusion, he said that the three proposals had been thought through thoroughly. The proponents were willing to engage further with Members to shed light on the proposals. 
&& The Chairperson indicated that the Committee could agree to the first proposal, which called for an update to the Secretariat document on the implementation of S&D provisions. She added that discussions on the second and third proposals could continue at a later stage.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions and agreed with the proposal for the Secretariat to update its paper on the implementation of S&D provisions.  
-	Supporting ministers' guidance for focused work in the Committee on Trade and Development - proposal from Australia, Chile, Colombia and Singapore (WT/COMTD/W/191)
&& The Chairperson invited the co-sponsors of the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191 to take the floor. She also invited Barbados to introduce the informal paper which had been placed in the meeting room.
&& The representative of Australia said that his delegation continued to have an interest in practical and concrete items of work in the CTD that could be reported to Ministers at MC9. The co‑sponsors of the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191 had received several positive indications of interest from delegations to undertake the proposed work. The proposal was to provide a platform for Members to deliver focused presentations on their experiences in using trade for development, and the challenges and successes they had experienced. The co-sponsors intended to continue their consultations with Members on the proposal, and would keep the Chairperson and the Committee updated on this effort. The co-sponsors would also continue to take an active interest in other proposals made with regard to the MC8 mandate.
&& The representative of Barbados said that the proposal by the SVEs called for the CTD to conduct an annual workshop on development issues on the margins of one of its regular meetings.  The workshop would provide an opportunity for developing countries, of their own volition, to share their experiences on issues of direct relevance to them, within the framework of a selected topic. The SVEs viewed the convening of such an inclusive and informal forum as a pragmatic step in enhancing the work of the CTD. The proposed workshops, which were seen by the proponents as being complementary to other proposals being discussed, would help Members to better understand countries’ experiences in a particular area. Holding the discussions outside the regular Committee meetings would allow for a richer interaction and for inputs from Members on all existing and emerging areas that were of relevance to development, without prejudicing Members’ positions. 
It was proposed that the general topic or theme of the workshop be determined in the CTD, six months prior to the workshop. It was also proposed that special consideration be given to the views of developing countries, including SVEs and LDCs, in determining the theme of the workshop and in formulating the agenda. The proponents were open and flexible as to how such a modality could be improved, including the possibility of the Secretariat narrowing down the topic to one or two areas which Members could thereafter refine. In closing, she indicated that the proponents looked forward to collaborating with Members in further refining and strengthening the proposal. She also informed the Committee that the proposal would shortly be circulated as a formal CTD document.
&& The representative of Egypt welcomed the informal paper introduced by Barbados. In his view, the three submissions complemented each other. Presentations on country experiences could be made during a workshop. The background document for the workshop could be the CTD's report on the development work taking place in the WTO.
&& The representative of Nigeria said that there seemed to be similarities between the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191 and the proposal that Barbados had introduced. He noted, however, that it was necessary to ensure that developing countries and LDCs had the capacity to participate in the proposed discussions. He also wondered whether it would be possible for a consolidated document to be prepared on the work to be undertaken by the Committee under the MC8 mandate.
&& The representative of India said that it was not in the CTD's mandate to exchange country experiences. A workshop was a more appropriate forum for such discussions. The e-learning courses could also be enriched with information on country experiences. Finally, noting that there appeared to complementarities between the three submissions, he suggested that it would be useful if all the proponents met informally so as to reach a common understanding.
&& The representative of Ecuador said that the proposal introduced by Barbados could be enriched with elements of the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191, and in particular paragraph 5 of that submission. 
&& The representative of Nepal said that it was encouraging that Members had agreed to the first proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. While his delegation was open to further discussions on the remaining two proposals in that submission, in principle Nepal supported efforts to make the CTD's work more effective. He explained that, in his delegation's view, the three proposals in the submission were guided by the motivation to make the CTD function as the focal point for the coordination and consideration of development-related issues in the WTO. Members needed to gain a better understanding of what work the WTO was undertaking on development‑related issues, and how this work could be made more effective. He went on to say that his delegation had taken note of the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191. As for the proposal contained in the informal paper introduced by Barbados, he said that it could be taken positively. He indicated that it would be useful if the proponents of the various submissions could identify the complementarities in the proposals.
&& The representative of El Salvador said that his delegation was pleased that Members had agreed to the first proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. Turning to the proposal by the SVEs, he said that it sought to ensure that time and attention was devoted to individual development issues faced by developing countries. The proponents believed that the proposed workshops would contribute significantly to strengthening the work of the CTD. First, the discussions would take into account different viewpoints and would look at the contribution to development of the issue under discussion. The flexible and open format would enable Members to benefit from experiences and studies, as well as from information on ongoing projects and initiatives relating to the topic being discussed. All information gained through the discussions would provide Members with valuable input that could be used by authorities in capitals to meet development needs. He also noted the comments made on the potential complementarities of the SVEs' proposal with the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191. Finally, he indicated the willingness of his delegation, and other delegations in the SVEs Group, to contribute to a meaningful outcome to MC9 which would strengthen the link between trade and development.
&& The representative of the Dominican Republic welcomed the agreement on the first proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. With regard to the second proposal in that submission, she indicated that further discussion was required. She also expressed her support for the proposal by the SVEs, and suggested that there could possibly be some dovetailing with the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191.
&& The representative of South Africa said that the implementation of the proposals contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192 would contribute to operationalizing the mandate of the CTD as the focal point for development issues in the WTO. Turning to the SVEs' proposal, she said that it would be forwarded to her capital. As a preliminary comment, however, she indicated that the proposal seemed to represent a good basis for further work. With regard to the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191, she said that there were positive aspects to it. However, she also raised a number of questions. First, she queried whether the implementation of the proposal would help Members to enhance their development prospects or their participation in the multilateral trading system. She also wished to know what outcome the proponents envisaged from the country presentations. While the sharing of country experiences was useful, it did not differ much from the TPR exercise. Furthermore, country presentations would not take Members forward towards a concrete goal, and would not meet the MC8 mandate. In light of her comments, she suggested that further work was necessary on the proposal. Her delegation was open to consider merging relevant aspects of the various proposals.   
&& The representative of China said that the SVEs' proposal would be transmitted to his capital. As a preliminary comment, he said that the proposal appeared to have some common elements with the proposals contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192, and that these could possibly be merged. On the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191, he said that while his delegation was open to the sharing of country experiences, it was important for Members to not lose sight of the CTD's other important work. Finally, he indicated China's willingness to continue to discuss the various proposals that had been made, which a view to achieving concrete results on development issues.
&& The representative of the European Union said that a key role of the CTD was to explore the linkages between trade and development. The Committee could make a contribution by focusing on some clearly identified issues, and in this regard the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191 could add value. The SVEs' proposal demonstrated a similar interest to engage in topical discussions, which her delegation supported. The EU stood ready to explore how the two proposals could be brought closer together.
&& The representative of Jamaica said that each of the proposals on the table had merit. He encouraged Members to examine the proposals further in order to extract the essential elements. He expressed particular support for the SVEs' proposal, and suggested that the proposed annual workshop could be held during Geneva Week.
&& The representative of Japan indicated that his delegation would study the SVEs' proposal, as well as the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191.
&& The representative of Pakistan said that the various proposals on the table had common elements. She believed that there was convergence on the idea of the sharing of country experiences in workshops on the margins of CTD meetings. The topics for discussion would need to be agreed to by Members. However, the objective was not for the status quo to be maintained. Rather, recommendations would need to be formulated. She suggested that Members should look at the challenges faced by developing countries in making trade work for development. While a discussion of S&D provisions could be incorporated in the workshops, such a discussion alone would not provide the full picture of the linkages between trade and development.  
&& The representative of the United States reiterated his delegation's concerns with the second and third proposals contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. With regard to the SVEs' proposal, he indicated that it would be reviewed in his capital. On this proposal, he said that his delegation supported the idea of having focused discussions on trade and development, but also had some specific questions. He firstly asked why the proposal suggested that workshops be held on an annual basis, rather than upon request. Second, he wished to know why discussions on a topic for a workshop needed to take place six months prior to the workshop. He also asked what prevented Members from putting their issues on the agenda of the CTD or its Dedicated Session. He next turned to the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/191. His delegation believed that this was a helpful proposal. While it was clear that the contours would need to be worked out, his delegation appreciated that the proposal left Members with significant flexibility to discuss their individual experiences in using trade in the service of development. The proposal could also provide a useful platform for Members to gain valuable insights on the relationship between trade and development.
&& The representative of Egypt said that he was encouraged that many Members had pointed to the comment elements in the proposals under consideration. He noted that the SVEs' proposal mentioned that development-related issues were discussed in several WTO bodies. This was why the proponents of document WT/COMTD/W/192 had called for the preparation of a report by the CTD to reflect the WTO's work on development. He went on to say that his delegation wanted a concrete outcome for developing countries at MC9. The CTD could make a contribution in this regard.
&& The Chairperson said that there were possible synergies between the proposals under consideration. She indicated that further discussions would be required to assess how best these could be addressed in order to have an outcome that would add value. Discussions would continue in informal consultations. 
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation wished to have the opportunity to hold bilateral consultations with the proponents of the SVEs' proposal before engaging in informal consultations convened by the Chairperson.
&& The Chairperson said that this was appropriate, as the proposal from the SVEs would still need to be circulated as a formal document. She would subsequently determine an appropriate time for her informal consultations.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE - DECISION OF 17 DECEMBER 2011 (WT/L/843)
-	Workshop on "E-commerce, Development and SMEs" (8-9 April 2013) - statement by the Chairperson
&& The Chairperson said that the CTD's discussion on electronic commerce (e-commerce) since the beginning of 2012 had been in relation to the 17 December 2011 Decision taken at MC8, which was contained in document WT/L/843.
She recalled that, at the 86th Session, the Committee had agreed that a workshop on "E‑Commerce, Development and SMEs" would be held on 8 and 9 April 2013. In this regard, she informed the Committee that the Secretariat had been working on the preparations for the workshop and had recently circulated a background paper which was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/193. The paper was available to Members and to the public through the WTO's website. Since the workshop was open to the public, arrangements were being made for the participation of individuals who did not have an official WTO badge. A programme for the two-day event would soon be posted on the WTO's website. The programme would include presentations by several inter-governmental organizations active in the area of information and communication technologies. Representatives from the private sector would also be present, as would government officials from telecommunications regulatory agencies in developing countries.
&& The Committee took note of the statement by the Chairperson. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairperson said that she wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs.
She firstly informed the Committee that for a number of RTAs – namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, India and Bhutan, and India and ASEAN – the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties.  The Secretariat was also still waiting to receive the data relating to the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Community Customs Union, which were due by 8 March 2013. She urged the parties to these Agreements to provide the data as soon as possible.
Turning to the India-Malaysia Agreement, she said that the Secretariat had thus far received comments from India on the draft factual presentation that was sent to the parties. This Agreement was scheduled to be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD in June 2013. With regard to the India-MERCOSUR Agreement, she said that she wished to inform Members that the delegation of Uruguay, on behalf of the MERCOSUR State Parties, had requested a postponement of the consideration of the Agreement, which had been scheduled to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Session in June 2013. It was the Secretariat's understanding that India was agreeable to postpone the consideration of the India-MERCOSUR Agreement. The Secretariat would remain in touch with MERCOSUR and India on a possible future date for the consideration of the Agreement.  This information would be shared with the Committee when available.  
With regard to other Agreements notified under the Enabling Clause, the Secretariat had established contact with the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) concerning Panama's accession to the LAIA. The Secretariat had also established contact with the Members that were parties to the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA), in light of Afghanistan's ratification of SAFTA. The Secretariat would remain in touch with these Members in the context of eventual updates to the notifications of the RTAs in question. She went on to say that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the Agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
Finally, she recalled that, at the 86th Session, Members had been informed that the delegation of Uruguay had submitted to the Secretariat a number of biennial reports from past years on measures taken by member countries of the LAIA under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo. Some of these reports had been previously circulated as GATT or WTO documents, but it turned out that a few had not, as the Secretariat had not previously received them. In this context, she informed Members that the five reports that had not previously been circulated had now all been circulated in Spanish, and could be found in documents WT/COMTD/76, WT/COMTD/77, WT/COMTD/78, WT/COMTD/80 and WT/COMTD/81. Some of the translations of these documents had also been circulated, and the others would follow soon.
-	&& Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairperson said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The representative of India said that there were clear similarities between the three RTA notifications listed as sub-items under the present agenda item. He appreciated that they were being taken up together. He said that he wished to clarify that his delegation had not requested the insertion of an agenda item, but rather to retain the sub-items, in keeping with past practice that an item was retained on the agenda until discussions were exhausted and Members decided by consensus to drop the item. He therefore requested the continued appearance of these sub‑items on the CTD's agenda until Members addressed the issues arising from the dual notifications of the three RTAs under GATT Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause. His delegation hoped that, during the discussion at the present meeting, substantive engagement would be observed from those delegations that had so far avoided engaging on issues of serious concern to developing countries. 
He went on to say that the GCC countries had in the past indicated that it was their prerogative to notify their Agreement under the Enabling Clause, since they were all developing countries. The TM for RTAs stated that the CRTA was the implementing body for RTAs notified under GATT Article XXIV, while the CTD was the implementing body for RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause. Since the GCC countries had requested a change in the notification status of their RTA from GATT Article XXIV to the Enabling Clause, their Agreement needed to be considered under the Enabling Clause. It was not appropriate for any Member to object to this or state that the Agreement was incorrectly notified. This was a matter which had obvious systemic implications. The delegations of China, Egypt and India had listed the issues in document WT/COMTD/W/175. 
He said that some delegations saw a difference between GCC Customs Union on the one hand, and the India-Korea and ASEAN-Korea Agreements on the other. While it was true that the GCC Agreement was a customs union and the other two were not, it was important for Members to recall that the RTAs TM laid out the same procedures for customs unions as well for other RTAs. Furthermore, since all three RTAs had been "dually notified" under GATT Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause, none of them were covered by the existing procedures contained in the RTAs TM. He said that this was an important development issue which had serious implications for the participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system. A lack of substantive engagement on the systemic and specific issues would undermine the role of the CTD as the focal point for development issues. In conclusion, he reiterated his request for the three sub-items to remain on the agenda for the next meeting.
&& The representative of Egypt expressed support for the intervention by India and emphasized the rights of developing countries under the Enabling Clause. He looked forward to a substantive discussion on the issues that had been raised by China, Egypt and India.  
&& The representative of the United States sought clarification from the Chairperson as to whether the three sub-items listed under the present agenda item were being taken up separately or together.
&& The Chairperson responded that the three sub-items were being taken up separately.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation continued to have concerns with the present sub-item being listed on the agenda. The sub-item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made, and needed be removed from the agenda. He regretted that this matter had taken up so much of the Committee’s time over the past few years. These were the types of issues that took time, resources, and attention away from other pressing development matters. The US had stated its position on this issue clearly and there was no need to rehash those points. It was hoped that the Committee could move forward constructively, recognizing that the GCC Customs Union was not an issue of dual notification. The GCC Customs Union had been incorrectly notified as an Enabling Clause Agreement. This had been subsequently corrected, and the Agreement was in the pipeline to be reviewed in the CRTA, in line with the procedures of the RTAs TM. The US considered this issue closed, and continued to request that the sub-item be removed from the CTD's agenda.  
He added that the US had no quarrel with any developing country notifying a qualifying agreement under the Enabling Clause. However, this was not what the GCC Customs Union notification issue was about. The GCC Customs Union notification concerned a customs union, which made it different from non-customs union RTA notifications. With regard to the content of document WT/COMTD/W/175, his delegation had not seen any specific issues relating to the GCC Customs Union notification. The paper appeared to be seeking a systemic discussion of RTAs, particularly with regard to the issue of dual notifications. However, as had already been mentioned on many occasions, the GCC Customs Union notification was not a dual notification. In concluding, he once again expressed his hope that the Committee could move beyond this matter and focus on other areas of the CTD's work.
&& The representative of China associated himself with the interventions by India and Egypt. He said that it was not his delegation's intention to prolong the present discussion. Rather, China was seeking a satisfactory solution that appropriately addressed its concerns. The joint submission by China, Egypt and India was designed to help Members enhance their understanding of the systemic and specific issues arising from the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union, with a view to facilitating an expeditious solution. In this regard, he said that it was firstly important that the rights of developing Members under the Enabling Clause be respected. The Enabling Clause was one of the effective tools for developing countries to better integrate into the multilateral trading system and to achieve their development goals. Paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause was being increasingly used by developing countries to foster sound relationships and engage in trade liberalization with each other. This trend needed to be encouraged. Second, the central role of the CTD in development-related issues needed to maintained and strengthened. The GCC issue, which concerned the application of the Enabling Clause, was certainly within the competence of the CTD. While it might be necessary for the CTD to consult with other relevant bodies in the WTO, this did not mean that the matter should simply be passed on to these bodies. 
In closing the discussion under this sub-item, the Chairperson clarified that the CTD had been following the practice of maintaining an item on the agenda if any Member so requested.   
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea
&& The Chairperson said that the second sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement.
No Member took the floor under this sub-item.
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement 	between India and Korea (Goods)
&& The Chairperson said that the third sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the India-Korea Agreement.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation continued to have concerns with the sub-items addressing the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea notifications being listed on the agenda. These sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and should have already been removed from the agenda. The issue of dual notification was directly linked to the functioning of the RTAs TM and went beyond the CTD alone.
&& The Committee took note of the intervention.  
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairperson said that she wished to provide Members with a brief update on the preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on PTAs. She firstly informed the Committee that, on 15 January 2013, the EU had notified its trade preferences for Pakistan under the TM for PTAs. The notification was circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/41. The Secretariat was in contact with the EU concerning the information needed for the preparation of the factual presentation on the PTA. Much of the required data were already with the Secretariat, so it appeared at the present time that the PTA could be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD broadly within the timelines indicated in the PTAs TM. With regard to the thee PTAs that had been previously notified under the TM - namely, PTAs being implemented by India, China, and Chinese Taipei - there had been no significant developments since the last report to the Committee. In particular, the full set of data required for the preparation of the factual presentations of the three PTAs had not yet been provided to the Secretariat. She urged the notifying Members to provide the required data as soon as possible.
&& The representative of the European Union confirmed that her delegation was in touch with the Secretariat in the context of the information required for the preparation of the factual presentation on the EU's trade preferences for Pakistan. She urged other delegations that had made notifications under the PTAs TM to similarly provide the Secretariat with the required information.   
&& The Committee took note of the intervention.  
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
-	Better utilization of the market access provided to LDCs under duty free and quota free - communication from Nepal, on behalf of the LDC Group (WT/COMTD/W/194)
&& The Chairperson said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered. For the present meeting, a communication from Nepal, on behalf of the LDC Group, was reflected under this agenda item. She invited the representative of Nepal to introduce the communication, which was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/194.
&& The representative of Nepal, on behalf of the LDC Group, recalled that, at the time when the WTO was established, Members had recognized the need for positive efforts designed to ensure that LDCs secured a proper share in the growth in international trade. To this end, Members had pledged to offer special support to LDCs. The Uruguay Round Decision on Measures in Favour of LDCs recognized the specific needs of this group of countries in the area of market access and identified preferential market access as an essential means for improving LDCs’ trading opportunities. The issue of DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the table since 1996 and had been recognized as a means of meaningfully integrating LDCs into the international trading system. Ministers had expressed commitment to duty-free access at every WTO Ministerial Conference. As early as the 1997 High-Level meeting in Geneva, Members had indicated their intention to improve the access to their markets for LDCs' exports. In the UN Millennium Declaration of 2000, it had been agreed that a policy of DFQF access for LDCs' exports would be adopted. At the Doha Ministerial Conference in 2001, Members committed themselves to the objective of DFQF market access for products originating from LDCs and to take measures to ensure progressive improvements in LDCs' market access. At the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference in 2005, Members decided that developed countries and developing countries declaring themselves in a position to do so would provide DFQF market access for at least 97% of products originating from LDCs, defined at the tariff line level, by 2008 or no later than the start of the implementation period. Members also agreed to progressively achieve 100% DFQF market access.
He went on to say that enhanced market access had been a continued call from the LDCs. Without easy market access, LDCs' trade volumes could not increase and their continued marginalization could not be reversed. They would not be able to achieve the minimum 7% of annual GDP growth, which was a target set to reach the graduation criteria by 2020. Given the continued concentration of LDCs' exports on a limited number of products, enhanced market access conditions became all the more significant. Such conditions would help to increase export earnings, and also provide better livelihood means for the poor. Since the launch of the Doha Round, progress had been made in the provision of DFQF market access. Most developed Members provided DFQF market access for 100%, or close to 100%, of LDCs' products and thus met the terms of the Hong Kong Decision. Progress had also been made with regard to the conditions accompanying GSP schemes, through which most DFQF preferences were granted to LDCs. In addition, a number of developing countries had announced DFQF market access of varying degrees to LDCs' products. However, as was acknowledged in the Istanbul Programme of Action adopted by the 4th UN Conference on LDCs in 2011, a full realization of the Hong Kong Decision had not been achieved. There was a need for the timely implementation of the Decision. 
The Hong Kong Decision specified that Members were to notify the implementation of their DFQF schemes annually to the CTD. The CTD would annually review the steps taken to provide LDCs with DFQF market access and report to the General Council for appropriate action. The review of DFQF market access for LDCs was a standing item on the CTD's agenda. However, full and complete information was not available on the implementation of DFQF market access. This was why the LDC Group had circulated the communication under consideration. The Group requested developed Members, as well as those developing Members declaring themselves in a position to do so, to submit information on the latest line-by-line tariff treatment of LDCs' products at the next CTD meeting. Members were also requested to submit information on plans for implementing the DFQF Decision. In concluding, he requested that the communication under consideration remain on the agenda for the next meeting.
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation fully supported efforts to promote transparency with regard to information available on preference programmes. That being said, he believed that there was already a considerable amount of information available to Members, for example through the Database on PTAs. In this light, he requested the Secretariat to identify for Members the data maintained by the WTO. He went on to say that, in addition to the information available to all Members through the WTO databases, the US provided full transparency with regard to its preference programmes through information contained not only on the website of the Office of the US Trade Representative, but also on the website of the US International Trade Commission (USITC). The USITC website contained detailed information regarding the US' tariff schedule and preference programmes impacting imports from LDCs. Two options for searching through the data were provided. The user could either pull up the actual Harmonized System (HS) schedule, or find information using the USITC’s tariff search tool.  
He said that the US was fully committed to implementing its DFQF obligations consistent with the Hong Kong Decision, but believed that it was important to do so carefully, taking into consideration the potential impact of DFQF on the US' developing country and LDC trading partners that already had access to the US market through preference programmes. He explained that the US used trade preference programmes to assist developing countries through enhanced access to the US market. A key goal of US preference programmes was to assist LDCs and other low‑income countries to increase their competitiveness in the US market. Trade preferences could help poor countries gain a foothold in the US market upon which they could build and expand, including into other global markets. The US recognized that LDCs and low‑income countries were unique and that one size did not fit all. In this light, the trade preference programmes and technical assistance offered had been tailored to target specific development needs. 
There were three sets of US trade preference programmes that benefited LDCs. These were the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme, the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), and the Haiti Trade Preference Programmes - which included the Haiti Economic Lift Programme (HELP) Act, the Haitian Hemispheric Opportunity through Partnership Encouragement (HOPE) Act and the Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act (CBTPA). Each trade preference programme provided duty-free access to beneficiary country products entering the US market under specific tariff lines covered by the respective programme. The GSP scheme benefited 44 LDCs, as well as 83 non-LDC developing countries. The programme provided duty-free access for 1,500 products for LDC beneficiaries only, in addition to the 3,500 products which were duty free for all GSP beneficiary countries. AGOA was available to the 49 countries of Sub-Saharan Africa, though each country needed to meet the eligibility requirements. Currently, 39 Sub‑Saharan African countries - including 26 LDCs - qualified for benefits under AGOA. The Haiti Trade Preference Programmes benefited Haiti, the only LDC in the Western hemisphere. 
In 2011, 99.2% of non-oil imports entered the US duty free from AGOA LDC beneficiaries. In the same year, 98.2% of all imports entered the US duty free from Haiti. Any potential negative impact on LDC and developing country trading partners that already had access to the US market would need to be carefully weighed against the potential benefits to LDCs such as Bangladesh and Cambodia, which did not currently have such access. The US had structured its preference programmes in a targeted way to address development objectives and taking into account specific development needs, which varied across LDCs. Structuring and implementing the US' DFQF commitment would also need to reflect the US' goals and varying interests across the full range of developing country trading partners that could be impacted either positively or negatively.
&& The representative of Canada said that Canada had met its DFQF commitment since 2003. Canada provided duty-free access on all products - with the exception of over-access and supply‑managed dairy, poultry and egg products, which covered 101 tariff lines. The current number, which was 98.6%, was slightly different from the figure of 98.8% which was reported in the Database on PTAs. He explained that the percentage of tariff lines that were duty free varied slightly from year to year, when the overall number of tariff lines changed. However, there had been no change in product coverage for the LDCs. 
&& The representative of India said that his delegation saw the communication under consideration as a useful reinforcement of the developmental imperatives in the negotiations in the run-up to the Bali Ministerial Conference. The information being sought by the LDCs would enable Members to understand the implementation of the Hong Kong Ministerial mandate which, in a first stage, specified the provision of DFQF market access for at least 97% of products originating from LDCs. Developing Members were to have appropriate flexibility in the 97% coverage. India, despite its domestic sensitivities, had on 1 October 2012 completed five years of implementation of its DFQF scheme - known as the Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme. Through the Scheme, India provided 94% preferential duty access to products of export interest to LDCs. Of the covered lines, 85% were duty free while the remaining 9% had a specific margin of preference.  Furthermore, the Scheme covered products which comprised 92.5% of global LDC exports.
He went on to say that a comparison of LDCs' average exports over the first, three years after the implementation of the DFTP Scheme to the three-year average exports before the implementation of the Scheme showed a 63% increase.  India was working to take further liberalization measures within the Scheme by examining both the coverage and the rules of origin. While most developed country Members and some developing countries had implemented their DFQF commitments under the Hong Kong Decision, some key Members were still to implement them. One of the key developed Members seemed to have provided only 82.4% coverage under its GSP scheme, despite talks of a review of the GSP for the last seven years. India supported the LDC Group's proposal for Members to provide information on the implementation of their DFQF schemes. However, the more important task at hand was to implement the commitments of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration. When the credibility of the multilateral system was at stake, it was imperative for Members to deliver on one of the most crucial pillars of the development Round.
&& The representative of Australia said that the communication under consideration was a useful and practical contribution to a debate on an important issue. His delegation welcomed the focus on transparency and believed that the proposal had the potential to be useful and practical for the LDCs. Australia had been providing DFQF market access to LDCs - on all tariff lines with simple rules of origin - since 2003. He believed that information concerning Australia's scheme for LDCs was easily accessible. His delegation was favourable to continuing the discussion on the issues raised in the communication. In relation to the information being sought in the communication, he suggested that it would be useful if the relevant WTO databases, including the Database on PTAs, could be explored to see what was already available. The databases of other agencies, notably the International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO (ITC), might also be a useful source to explore. He additionally suggested that a presentation to the Committee could focus on the key LDC export markets.  
&& The representative of Nepal expressed appreciation to the delegations that had provided data and information on the implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs. The LDCs' objective was to get complete information as provided for in the Hong Kong Decision. It was perhaps possible to obtain data from different sources, but it was obligatory for Members implementing DFQF market access to provide the information to the CTD. The LDCs were simply exercising this right for the sake of transparency. He hoped that Members would be willing to discuss this issue with more clarity at the next CTD meeting. 
&& The Chairperson said that some useful recommendations had been made, particularly by Australia. She invited Members to explore what information was already available. She indicated that discussions would continue at the next CTD meeting. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST‑DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairperson said that she had been informed that consultations had led to the proposal for Ambassador Steffen Smidt of Denmark to serve for another year as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs.  
It was so agreed.
&& The representative of Nepal, on behalf of the LDC Group, welcomed Ambassador Smidt's re-appointment as Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs. The LDC Group looked forward to working with Members in the Sub-Committee, particularly in updating the Work Programme for LDCs.  
OTHER BUSINESS
&& The Chairperson said that a matter was being raised under "Other Business" concerning the CTD's mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  It had been the CTD's practice to hold a discussion on this subject every two years or so. On previous occasions when this item was placed on the CTD's agenda, the Secretariat had updated its statistical background paper on the participation of developing countries in global trade, in order to assist Members in their discussion. The last such discussion by the CTD on this subject had taken place in November 2011. She proposed that the CTD have another discussion on the subject at its last meeting of 2013, for which the Secretariat would once again update its background paper using the most recent trade statistics. 
It was so agreed.
The meeting was adjourned. 

__________

 The proposal was subsequently circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/195.









WT/COMTD/M/87

-  PAGE 1 -


WT/COMTD/M/87

-  PAGE 2 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/87

16 May 2013
(13-2574)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/ NUMPAGES  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 18
Committee on Trade and Development
Eighty-Seventh Session
 






