RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/3

23 October 1995

ORGANIZATION

(95-3225)

 

Committee on Trade and Development
Third (Special) Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 14 SEPTEMBER 1995

Chairman: Mr. Haron Siraj (Malaysia)

1.&&  The Chairman indicated that the agenda for the meeting was contained in airgram WTO/AIR/149.
In absence of any comments, the agenda was adopted.

A. Terms of Reference of the Working Party on the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR)
Agreement

2. &&   The Chairman recalled that the MERCOSUR Working Party, which was established by the
GATT 1947 Committee on Trade and Development in May 1993, had not been able to meet since
then. For the Working Party to operate under GATT 1994, an adaptation of its terms of reference
was needed - and that required a formal Decision by the Committee on Trade and Development. Also
of relevance were the transitional arrangements adopted by the General Council on 31 January 1995,
which applied to regional arrangements and by implication to the MERCOSUR Agreement. From
a procedural point of view, adaptation of the original terms of reference was necessary, since they
stated that the Working Party would report to the GATT 1947 Committee on Trade and Development
and also mentioned the CONTRACTING PARTIES and the Council, bodies transformed under
GATT 1994.

3. &&  The Chairman indicated that the draft text of the modified terms of reference for the MERCOSUR
Working Party (document WT/COMTD/W/3) followed the substance of those agreed for the 1995
Working Party on the Enlargement of the European Communities. He proposed the adoption of the
following terms ofreference: "To examine the Southern Common Market Agreement (MERCOSUR)
in the light of the relevant provisions of the Enabling Clause and of the GATT 1994, including Article
XXIV, and to transmit a report and recommendations to the Committee on Trade and Development
for submission to the General Council, with a copy of the report transmitted as well to the Council
for Trade in Goods. The examination in the Working Party will be based on a complete notification
and on written questions and answers”. These terms of reference should be read together with the
following Understanding: "It is understood that the statement read out be the Chairman of the Council
for Trade in Goods under item 7 of the Agenda of its meeting on 20 February 1995, as contained in
document WT/REG3/1, applies mutatis mutandis to this Working Party." The Committee on Trade
and Development so agreed.

4. && The Representative of the European Communities expressed his delegation’ s regret that no meeting
of the MERCOSUR Working Party had taken place and indicated his delegation's expectation that,
with the terms of reference adopted, the first meeting of the MERCOSUR Working Party could take
place.

B. Other Business
5. && The Chairman briefly commented on some relevant issues which would be discussed at the
next meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development. On the subject of observership, he recalled
that this matter was still outstanding in the General Council, and that the Committee had been deciding
at each meeting which organizations it would invite for its next meeting. The Chairman informed the
Committee that in August 1995, he received a letter from the Director-General of UNIDO requesting
observer status in the Committee, and that he had asked the Secretariat to reply that a definitive response
could not be given as the issue of observership was being considered by the General Council. However,
in light of the interim procedures under which the Committee on Trade and Development was working,
he invited comments on whether UNIDO could be invited to the next meeting of the Committee on
Trade and Development. In response to a question posed by the representative of the European
Communities, the Chairman indicated that UNIDO did not have observer status in the GATT 1947
Committee on Trade and Development. In the absence of further comments and in light of the ad
hoc procedures, he proposed that the Committee on Trade and Development agree to invite a
representative of UNIDO to its Fourth Session as well as all the organizations that were invited to its
Third Session. The Committee so agreed.

6.&&  Turning to the forthcoming meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development, the Chairman
indicated that it would take place on Friday, 17 November 1995. He would propose an agenda based
on the agreed programme of work in addition to two items from the last meeting of the Committee
on Trade Development: i.e. (i) review of the impact of the results of the Uruguay Round on developing
country Members, in particular on the least-developed country Members; and (ii) consideration of
measures and initiatives to assist the expansion of trade and investment opportunities of developing
country Members, in particular the least-developed country Members. Under this last item, the question
of credit and recognition for autonomous trade liberalization measures could be discussed further and,
the net food-importing developing countries’ issue would also be addressed. The Chairman recalled
that background documentation had been circulated by the Secretariat for the July meeting. Items
deriving from the programme of work were (i) review of the participation of developing country Members
in the multilateral trading system; (ii) review of the application of special provisions in the WTO system
in favour of developing country Members, and in particular least-developed country Members, including
the supervision of the implementation of Part [V and the Enabling Clause and the annual report of
the Committee of Participating Countries on the operation of the Protocol Relating to Trade Negotiations
Among Developing Countries; (iii) annual review of WTO technical cooperation activities as they
relate to developing country Members; (iv) work of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries;
and (v) future work programme of the Committee on Trade and Development. The Chairman expressed
the hope that at the next meeting, constructive comments would be made, for the benefit of the
Committee itself and of all developing country Members.

7. && On the question of notification requirements, the Chairman indicated that the seminar on
notification obligations had been very useful and instructive. He recalled that the GATT 1947 Committee
on Trade and Development dealt with notification requirements in 1965, 1966 and 1980; however,
not all decisions taken on those occasions, were strictly followed and a number of points remained
unsettled. He was of the view that given the importance the WTO attaches to notification obligations
as exemplified by the establishment of a Working Group on Notification Obligations and Procedures,
the Committee should devote some time to reviewing the notification requirements of the texts it had
been given responsibility for - i.e. Article XVIM:A, C and D, Part IV, and the Enabling Clause. He
asked delegations to reflect on this matter so as to allow a first exchange of views at the Committee
on Trade and Development's November meeting. Following a request made by the representative
of Argentina, the Chairman indicated that the Secretariat would circulate documents containing
notification obligations related to development issues as well as past decisions of the Committee on
Trade and Development on this matter. The Committee took note of the comments made.
