 
NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 2 APRIL 2014

Chairman: H.E. Mr. Pierre Claver Ndayiragije (Burundi)

 TOC \O "1-3" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314674" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC387314674 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314675" B.	election of the chairperson of the committee on trade and development	 PAGEREF _TOC387314675 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314676" C.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC387314676 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314677" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc387314677 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314678" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc387314678 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314679" D.	trade and development - work in the committee on the basis of the chairman's concluding statement from the eighth ministerial conference (WT/MIN(11)/11)	 PAGEREF _TOC387314679 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314680" (i)	Special and differential treatment provisions in WTO Agreements and Decisions (WT/COMTD/W/196) - updated note by the Secretariat	 PAGEREF _Toc387314680 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314681" (ii)	Proposals by Members	 PAGEREF _Toc387314681 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314682" -	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)	 PAGEREF _Toc387314682 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314683" -	A proposal that the Committee on Trade and Development reports to the General Council on development work in the WTO in compliance with Ministers' request issued at MC8 - proposal from Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho and Mauritius (WT/COMTD/W/202)	 PAGEREF _Toc387314683 \h 5
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314684" E.	electronic commercE	 PAGEREF _TOC387314684 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314685" -	Ministerial Decision of 7 December 2013 (WT/MIN(13)/32 - WT/L/907) - Statement by the Chairperson	 PAGEREF _Toc387314685 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314686" F.	preparatory process for the  second united nations conference on landlocked developing countries - statement by paraguay	 PAGEREF _TOC387314686 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314687" G.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC387314687 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314688" -	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)	 PAGEREF _Toc387314688 \h 9
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314689" -	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea	 PAGEREF _Toc387314689 \h 12
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314690" -	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement  between India and Korea (Goods)	 PAGEREF _Toc387314690 \h 12
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314691" -	Latin American Integration Association - Report to the WTO on instruments signed pursuant to the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, for the period 1 January 2010 – 31 December 2011 (WT/COMTD/82)	 PAGEREF _Toc387314691 \h 13
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314692" -	Latin American Integration Association - Report to the WTO on instruments concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, for the period 1 January 2012 – 31 December 2012 (WT/COMTD/84)	 PAGEREF _Toc387314692 \h 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314693" H.	notifications under the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC387314693 \H 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314694" I.	review of the transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements - statement by the chairperson	 PAGEREF _TOC387314694 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314695" J.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to Least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC387314695 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc387314696" -	Ministerial Decision of 7 December 2013 (WT/MIN(13)/44 - WT/L/919) - Statement by the Chairperson	 PAGEREF _Toc387314696 \h 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314697" K.	election of the chairperson of the sub-committee on least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC387314697 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC387314698" L.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC387314698 \H 15


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The draft agenda as contained in document WTO/AIR/4255/Rev.1 of 21 March 2014 was adopted.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND	DEVELOPMENT
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Pierre Claver Ndayiragije of Burundi as the Chairman of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) for 2014.
&& The Chairman indicated his commitment to the work of the CTD and said that he was looking forward to working with Members in operationalizing the Monitoring Mechanism (MM) on Special and Differential Treatment (S&D), which had been established by a Ministerial Decision at the Ninth Ministerial Conference (MC9) and would operate in Dedicated Sessions of the CTD.
OBSERVERS
(i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis. These were the Arab Maghreb Union, the Economic Community of Central African States, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Cooperation Organization, the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Union, the Organisation of the Islamic Conference, the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme, the West African Economic and Monetary Union, and the World Intellectual Property Organization. These organizations had been invited to the present meeting. He proposed that the same organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
(ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record. He indicated that if there were no changes in positions to extend observer status to any of the applicants, the Committee would take note and revert to the requests at the next meeting. 
It was so agreed. 
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT - WORK IN THE COMMITTEE ON THE BASIS OF THE CHAIRMAN'S CONCLUDING STATEMENT FROM THE EIGHTH MINISTERIAL CONFERENCE (WT/MIN(11)/11)
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the Eighth Ministerial Conference (MC8), Ministers had, inter alia, reaffirmed the positive link between trade and development and called for focused work in the CTD. Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the mandate of the CTD as a focal point for development work. On the agenda for the present meeting were two submissions containing proposals for work under the MC8 mandate that had been previously discussed by the Committee. One submission - by China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group - was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192. Another submission - by Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho and Mauritius - was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/202. He recalled that, at the 87th Session, the Committee had agreed to one of the proposals in document WT/COMTD/W/192. The proposal was for the Secretariat to prepare an update to its document on the implementation of S&D provisions in the WTO Agreements and Decisions. The updated Secretariat note, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/196, had been considered at the 88th and 89th Sessions. It was once again reflected on the CTD's agenda, as the first sub-item under the present agenda item. He said that the Committee would address the updated Secretariat note before turning to the second sub-item, which concerned the submissions by Members. 
(i)	Special and differential treatment provisions in WTO Agreements and Decisions (WT/COMTD/W/196) - updated note by the Secretariat
&& The Chairman said that this sub-item had been requested by Ecuador. He invited Ecuador to take the floor.
&& The Representative of Ecuador indicated that S&D was a fundamental aspect of the CTD's work. However, the subject had not been addressed in the Committee for several years, and in this light his delegation welcomed the updated Secretariat note contained in document WT/COMTD/W/196 and the opportunity it provided to review the application of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, as paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference mandated the Committee to do periodically. He indicated that the updated Secretariat note contained valuable information on the manner in which S&D provisions were being implemented, including whether any provisions were not being implemented sufficiently or not being implemented at all. The six categories of S&D provisions that had been identified contained key elements that were fundamental to the balance that was created at the conclusion of the Uruguay Round. He went on to say that, in the view of his delegation, the establishment of the MM did not relieve the CTD of its duty to comply with paragraph 3 of its terms of reference. To strengthen the CTD's work in this regard, Ecuador suggested that Members conduct a factual review of S&D provisions on the basis of the information contained in the updated Secretariat note. The intention was to maintain an oversight of S&D, which was one of the pillars of the multilateral trading system.
&& The Representative of the United States recalled that Ecuador had made a similar suggestion at the 89th Session. He indicated that it was still not clear how the proposed factual review would differ from the updated Secretariat note. It was also not clear how the work proposed by Ecuador would be different from the work of the CTD's Special Session (CTDSS), or the work of the MM. He said that his delegation would welcome a written proposal from Ecuador.
&& The Representative of Ecuador indicated that his delegation was willing to submit its proposal in writing.
&& The Representative of Uganda, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that S&D provisions, which were an integral part of the multilateral trading system, were meant to provide necessary flexibilities to the weakest and most vulnerable countries. However, despite repeated promises, the implementation of S&D provisions was weak, voluntary and largely ineffective. No significant headway had been made with regard to the mandate contained in paragraph 44 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration to make the provisions more precise, effective and operational. In addition, substantial progress had not been made in exploring new S&D provisions and making them an integral and mandatory part of the WTO Agreements. The full and faithful implementation of S&D provisions was important to allow the LDCs to benefit from trade liberalization, to use trade for sustainable development purposes and to safeguard the interests of their people. 
He went on to say that work needed to continue on the mandate in paragraph 44 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration. The LDCs also requested the Chairpersons of relevant WTO bodies to advance the negotiations in their respective areas and report back to the CTD on the progress made regarding the Category II proposals. He welcomed the establishment of the MM and noted that, even though it was not a negotiating forum, the LDCs were optimistic that it would provide developing countries with the opportunity to meaningfully and objectively assess and review the implementation of S&D provisions in order to facilitate the integration of these countries into the multilateral trading system. He also noted that it was important to distinguish between the MM and the CTDSS, and to develop complementary and collaborative approaches between the two. In concluding, he called for a prioritization of the interests and concerns of LDCs and for support in advancing LDC-specific proposals.
&& The Representative of Australia noted that Uganda had requested that a report on the status of the Category II proposals be submitted in the CTD. In this regard, he drew Members' attention to the status report on the Category II proposals that had been prepared in 2013 by the Chairman of the CTDSS and suggested that the CTDSS would be the appropriate forum for a discussion on the status of the Category II proposals.
&& The Representative of the United States expressed support for the intervention by Australia. He recalled that Members had had discussions on the implementation of certain S&D provisions in the past and expressed his hope that the MM would allow Members the opportunity to have further constructive discussions.
&& The Representative of Cameroon stressed the importance of S&D for developing countries. While pointing to the role that the MM could play in addressing some issues, he indicated that the MM could not address all concerns relating to S&D. He highlighted the need for a satisfactory conclusion to the negotiations under paragraph 44 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration, and for detailed discussions by Members on the subject of S&D.
&& The Representative of the European Union said that her delegation was involved in discussions on S&D in various WTO bodies and recognized the need for complementarity in the work of these bodies. Noting that Members had in the past had discussions on the implementation of certain S&D provisions, she expressed her delegation's willingness to engage in further detailed discussions in the context of the MM.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that the adoption of the MM did not mean that the CTDSS had ceased its operations. Negotiations would continue in the CTDSS in the context of paragraph 44 of the Doha Ministerial Declaration. He also indicated the need for complementarity in the work of the various bodies dealing with S&D issues.
&& The Representative of India expressed his support for the intervention by Egypt and for the points made by Uganda and Cameroon. He stressed that all the concerns of developing countries relating to S&D provisions could not be addressed by the MM. He noted in this regard that the CTDSS had a responsibility with respect to paragraph 44 of the Doha Declaration, and that issues relating to S&D could also be discussed in the CTD.
&& The Representative of the United States said that he did not believe there was any disagreement among Members on the bodies which had responsibilities relating to S&D. Noting that Uganda in its intervention had requested a report in the CTD on the status of the Category II proposals, he indicated that his delegation was not in a position to agree to the request at the present meeting. He explained that the information had already been prepared in 2013 for the CTDSS and it was unclear why the information was being requested in the CTD. 
&& The Committee took note of the updated Secretariat paper and of all interventions.
(ii)	Proposals by Members
-	Operationalization of the CTD's mandate: a proposal to deliver outcomes based on the MC8 mandate - proposal from China, Cuba, Ecuador, India and the African Group (WT/COMTD/W/192)
&& The Chairman recalled that there were three proposals contained in document WT/COMTD/W/192 and that the request in the first proposal had already been satisfied through the preparation of the updated Secretariat note on the implementation of S&D provisions. He invited the proponents to brief the Committee on the status of the remaining proposals in the submission.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that the proponents had not had the opportunity since the 89th Session to consult with other delegations on the remaining proposals. He reminded Members that one of the remaining proposals was for the CTD to report on the development-related work of other WTO bodies and make recommendations to the General Council on achieving better coordination on development issues. He explained that, through the proposal, the proponents wished to establish an institutional linkage between the CTD and other WTO bodies. Such reporting would facilitate the work of the CTD as the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO. The other remaining proposal was for the CTD to make a recommendation for parties to regional trade agreements (RTAs) to submit their notification and information requirements jointly. This would enable Members to avoid future systemic problems relating to RTAs. He called on Members to consider the two proposals positively.
&& The Representative of the United States indicated that his delegation had the same concerns with the two remaining proposals that it had raised in previous CTD meetings. He said that he had a question for the proponents on their proposal for the CTD to report on the development-related work of other WTO bodies. In particular, he asked if the proponents could elaborate on how this proposal was distinct from the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/202, which would be considered under the next sub-item.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.   
-	A proposal that the Committee on Trade and Development reports to the General Council on development work in the WTO in compliance with Ministers' request issued at MC8 - proposal from Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho and Mauritius (WT/COMTD/W/202)
&& The Chairman recalled that the proposal contained in document WT/COMTD/W/202 had been discussed at the 89th Session. He invited the proponents to brief the Committee on the status of the proposal.  
&& The Representative of Barbados said that, according to the CTD's terms of reference, the Committee served as a focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO and its relationship to the development-related activities in other multilateral agencies. She also referred to the CTD's reporting function to the General Council as described in paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference as well as in document WT/L/105 concerning procedures for an annual overview of WTO activities and for reporting under the WTO. She explained that the proposal was for the CTD to report to the General Council on development work in the WTO, in accordance with its mandate and in fulfilment of the instructions from Ministers at MC8 that the CTD fully operationalize that mandate. She indicated that it was unfortunate that Members should find themselves in the position to have to approve something that Ministers had already directed. While it had been previously suggested in an intervention that Members should wait until the MM was established in order to assess its relationship with the MC8 mandate, she did not believe that the MM could fulfill the MC8 mandate. The MM dealt with S&D provisions, which were only a part of the development work of the WTO. She noted that MC9 had been successfully concluded in December 2013, but Members still had not followed Ministers' instructions from MC8. She believed that Ministers' instructions from both MC8 and MC9 needed to be implemented.
&& The Representative of the United States made a distinction between the instructions from Ministers at MC8 and the proposal under consideration. Raising questions on the proposal, as had been done by his delegation, did not mean that Ministers' instructions at MC8 were not being followed. The US was of the view that the CTD was the focal point for development work in the WTO. However, Ministers had not directed the CTD to report on the development work taking place in other WTO bodies and the US was not in a position to support the proposal. The CTD reported annually on its activities, in accordance with its terms of reference, and his delegation believed that the report was appropriate. Furthermore, in the view of his delegation, paragraph 3 of the CTD's terms of reference did not mandate the Committee to report on the development work of other WTO bodies. Rather, this paragraph directed the CTD to review, in consultation with other relevant bodies, the application of S&D provisions. The first sub-item under the present agenda item was responsive to this mandate, as was the establishment of the MM.
&& The Representative of Australia said that his intervention related to the proposals under consideration in both documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202. Recalling that the Committee had been considering these proposals for some time and that the positions of delegations were on the record, he suggested that informal consultations called by the Chairman could help to move the process forward.  
&& The Representative of the European Union said that, like Australia, her comments would relate to the proposals under consideration in both documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202. She indicated that the Committee needed to work to implement the MC8 mandate, and not to modify it, which seemed to be what these proposals would effectively do if implemented. On the proposals for the CTD to report on development work in the WTO, she recalled that her delegation had previously indicated that this was not practicable or appropriate. This reporting would not add value, as it would duplicate existing reporting obligations and risked interfering with the work of other WTO bodies. The view of her delegation was that the CTD should explore the positive links between trade and development through constructive discussions on clearly identified topics. This would be in line with Ministers' instructions at MC8. Her delegation was open to informal discussions with the proponents.
&& The Representative of Nigeria said that his delegation was open to any ideas as to how the Committee could move forward in its discussion on the MC8 mandate. He believed that it was important for Members to have clarity as to what Ministers had instructed at MC8, as well as what was contained in the CTD's terms of reference. He suggested that Members could address these issues.
&& The Representative of China said that a number of years had passed since MC8 and Members had still not been able to agree on much in the CTD in terms of implementing the instructions from Ministers. He believed that the various proposals on the table had merit and hoped that progress could be made on them. He suggested that informal consultations could help to move the process forward. 
&& The Representative of Barbados stressed the importance of implementing instructions from Ministers. At MC8, Ministers had called on Members to fully operationalize the CTD's mandate as the focal point for development work in the WTO. However, it was not possible for the CTD to report on the WTOs' development work without liaising with other WTO bodies. She suggested that a framework could be prepared as to how the CTD could report on development work in the WTO, on the basis of which Members could assess how to move forward. She indicated her willingness to discuss ways forward on the proposal with interested Members.  
&& The Representative of Egypt observed that the only concrete outcome thus far in the context of the CTD's discussion on the MC8 mandate was the updated Secretariat note on the implementation of S&D provisions. He did not believe that this note by itself satisfied Ministers' instructions at MC8. He explained that the proponents of the proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202 had made their submissions in an effort to communicate what they saw as possible ways to improve the work of the CTD. He expressed his hope that Members would re-consider their positions on these proposals and indicated his delegation's willingness to participate in any informal discussions.
&& The Representative of Cameroon expressed support for the interventions by Barbados and Egypt and suggested that discussions in an informal setting might be useful to move the process forward.
&& The Representative of the United States indicated that his delegation stood ready to engage on constructive proposals. However, he expressed his disagreement with the suggestion that the implementation of the MC8 mandate required the adoption by the Committee of the proposals under consideration at the present meeting.
&& The Representative of Pakistan said that she wished to make a suggestion on a practical discussion that could be held in the CTD. She referred to the updated Secretariat note contained in document WT/COMTD/W/196 and in particular the section on the Agreement on Agriculture. In this section, it was mentioned that there was no formal indication of any recourse by developing countries to the flexibilities contained in Article 12.2 of the Agreement. She explained that one of the reasons why developing countries had not used this provision was because there was no definition of a net-food exporter. If a definition could be agreed upon, it was likely that developing countries would make use of Article 12.2. In this light, she suggested that the CTD could make a recommendation to the Committee on Agriculture to develop a definition of a net-food exporter. She believed that work of this nature would help to make S&D provisions more effective.
&& The Representative of India said that the CTD had been reporting annually to the General Council even before MC8, as had other subsidiary bodies of the General Council. Therefore, in giving their instructions at MC8 mandate, Ministers had wanted more from the CTD than its annual report. The CTD was a special body in the WTO, since it was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of development-related work, and therefore had an overarching mandate. He believed that it was appropriate for the CTD to report regularly on the development-related work that was taking place in other WTO bodies.      
&& The Chairman observed that Members were not in a position to agree to the proposals contained in documents WT/COMTD/W/192 and WT/COMTD/W/202 that had been considered at the present meeting. He said that he would hold informal consultations to see whether any progress could be made. He also encouraged the proponents to consult with other Members.
&& The Representative of Barbados inquired whether discussion on the proposals would continue at the next formal CTD meeting.
&& The Chairman suggested in response that delegations assess the outcome of the informal consultations before looking to the next formal CTD meeting. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions. 
ELECTRONIC COMMERCE
-	Ministerial Decision of 7 December 2013 (WT/MIN(13)/32 - WT/L/907) - Statement by the Chairperson
&& The Chairman said that the CTD was one of the four subsidiary bodies of the General Council that was mandated to implement the WTO's Work Programme on E-Commerce. The most recent contribution of the CTD to the Work Programme was the Workshop on "E‑Commerce, Development and Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises", which was held on 8 and 9 April 2013. The workshop was held in the context of the Ministerial Decision at MC8 to continue to re‑invigorate the development dimension of the Work Programme. The report on the workshop, which was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/198, highlighted that infrastructure problems were a major hurdle for developing countries. Participants in the workshop discussed the need to upgrade power grids to counter the lack of regular electricity supply, difficulties with the physical distribution of products bought online and a general lack of electronic payment systems in developing countries. Another key handicap that was identified was the lack of a reliable access in many developing countries to broadband, high speed cables. Discussions at the workshop highlighted that the main focus of current and future work in this area would need to be on assisting the least-connected countries. 
He said that he was highlighting some of these issues at the present meeting because he believed that this could be useful for Members as they considered the way forward for the CTD in the e-commerce area. In this regard, he drew Members' attention to the Ministerial Decision of 7 December 2013 on the Work Programme on E-Commerce taken at MC9, which was contained in documents WT/MIN(13)/32 and WT/L/907. The Decision indicated, inter alia, that any relevant body of the Work Programme could explore appropriate mechanisms to address the relationship between e-commerce and development in a focused and comprehensive manner. The Decision also indicated that the Work Programme would take forward the issues emerging in the discussions and the evolving application of e-commerce to enhance economic and development opportunities, with special consideration of the situation in developing countries, particularly in least-developed country Members and least-connected countries. The Work Programme would continue to examine opportunities and challenges for access to e-commerce by micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, including small producers and suppliers.
He noted that it was for Members to determine how to take forward the work on e‑commerce in the CTD, and also to determine whether future work in the CTD could build on the workshop that was held in 2013. He encouraged Members wishing to suggest ways to take forward the e-commerce work in the CTD to consider submitting written proposals, as written submissions were more conducive to a focused discussion. Finally, he informed the Committee that, as indicated in the Ministerial Decision of 7 December 2013, the General Council would hold periodic reviews on the Work Programme on E-Commerce based on the reports submitted by the WTO bodies entrusted with the implementation of the Work Programme. A review would take place at the July 2014 session of the General Council.
&& The Representative of the United States said that his delegation supported the Decision taken at MC9 concerning the Work Programme on E-Commerce. An open and competitive trade regime would ultimately foster a strong e-commerce environment for all countries. The US looked forward to working with others in exploring ways to help advance e-commerce trade. 
&& The Representative of the European Union expressed her delegation's support for the Work Programme on E-Commerce. In terms of next steps in the CTD, she indicated that her delegation would welcome concrete proposals from Members, taking inspiration from the workshop that was held under the auspices of the CTD in 2013.  
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's statement and of all interventions.
PREPARATORY PROCESS FOR THE  SECOND UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON LANDLOCKED DEVELOPING COUNTRIES - STATEMENT BY PARAGUAY
&& The Chairman said that this agenda item had been requested by Paraguay, on behalf of the Group of Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs). He invited Paraguay to take the floor. 
&& The Representative of Paraguay, on behalf of the LLDC Group, said that he wished to share with Members the status of the UN's Almaty Programme of Action (PoA) for LLDCs. Launched in 2003, the Almaty PoA had the objective of addressing the specific difficulties of LLDCs and promoting their development. The PoA had a number of components, including components relating to transit and infrastructure creation. He said that a lack of infrastructure, combined with geographical isolation, were key difficulties that added to costs and delays, and therefore hindered LLDCs' participation in international trade. A review of the PoA was scheduled to take place at the Second UN Conference for LLDCs, which would be held in November 2014 in Vienna. Before the conference, a number of preparatory meetings were being organized by the UN Office of the High Representative for the LDCs, LLDCs and Small Island Developing States (UN-OHRLLS). These included intergovernmental meetings, meetings with specialized agencies, and meetings with the private sector. Regional meetings had been held in Addis Ababa, Asunción and Vientiane. Fourteen pre-conference thematic sessions had been organized thus far. He expressed appreciation for the WTO Secretariat's active participation in the process leading up to the conference. 
He went on to say that the preparatory work for the conference began in September 2012, when LLDC Ministers noted the strengths and weaknesses of the PoA and expressed their expectations regarding future work. As part of their assessment, Ministers had suggested that a more holistic approach be taken in the future in order to address the issues of concern to LLDCs, which included infrastructure issues, job creation and poverty reduction. Trade would continue to play a fundamental role in future work. In this regard, he stressed the importance of policies that were designed to add value in production and decrease transport costs and waiting times at border posts. He also stressed the importance that LLDCs attached to foreign investment and to an increased participation in global value chains and in the services sector. On the trade front, he believed that an important step forward had been taken in the WTO with the conclusion of the negotiations at MC9 on the Agreement on Trade Facilitation, which contained an Article on freedom of transit. He hoped that there would be an immediate and effective application of this provision. He added that the LLDCs were seeking effective market access, which would help in their efforts to diversify their production structure. In concluding, he expressed his hope that the international community would continue to support the efforts of LLDCs, and that the outcome document of the Second UN Conference on LLDCs would be an effective tool in addressing the concerns of LLDCs.  
&& The Representative of the United States expressed appreciation to Paraguay and the LLDC Group for the information that had been shared. His delegation broadly supported the elements that had been highlighted, including the hope for the immediate and effective implementation of the provisions of the Agreement on Trade Facilitation. The US looked forward to continuing to work with the LLDCs in pursuing their objectives.
&& The Committee took note of the interventions. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs. He firstly informed the Committee that the Agreement between Cuba and El Salvador had been notified on 27 November 2013 in document WT/COMTD/N/43. The parties had been requested to provide the necessary data to the Secretariat for the preparation of the factual presentation by 24 April 2014. 	With regard to the Agreement between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and India, he said that the Secretariat had sent the draft factual presentation to the parties. Comments had been received from India, but the Secretariat was still waiting to receive comments from ASEAN. 
For a number of other RTAs - namely, RTAs between India and Nepal, India and Afghanistan, and India and Bhutan - the full set of data needed to complete the factual presentations had not been submitted by the parties. The Secretariat was also still waiting to receive some data relating to the accession of Rwanda and Burundi to the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Community Customs Union. He urged the parties to these agreements to provide the data as soon as possible. He went on to say that there remained one RTA notified under the Enabling Clause that had not been ratified by all the parties. This was the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA). Following the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), a factual presentation of an RTA falling in this category would only be drafted after the agreement had been ratified by all the parties. The parties to PICTA were urged to inform the Secretariat as soon as all ratifications were complete.
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's update. 
-	&& Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – communication from China, Egypt and India (WT/COMTD/W/175)
&& The Chairman said that the first sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the GCC Customs Union notification. The sub-item also referred to the communication from China, Egypt and India which was circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that systemic concerns had been raised by some Members, including Egypt, over the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. He noted that a number of delegations had previously expressed the view that the Enabling Clause did not provide the appropriate legal basis to justify the formation of a customs union involving the reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures (NTMs). However, others had argued that the non-prescription of criteria or conditions for the elimination of NTMs did not exclude customs unions among developing countries from the coverage of the Enabling Clause. The view of his delegation was that the CTD was the appropriate forum to consider the questions arising from RTAs with a dual notification. This originated from the CTD's terms of reference, which stipulated that the CTD was the focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development in the WTO. In addition, paragraph 4 of the terms of reference mandated the CTD to consider any questions with regard to either the application or the use of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing country Members, which included questions relating to the invocation of the Enabling Clause to notify customs unions among developing countries. He hoped that Members could have a substantive discussion on the systemic concerns that had been raised. The present sub-item needed to be maintained on the CTD's agenda until a solution was found.   
&& The Representative of India said that his intervention related to the first three sub-items under the present agenda item. He recalled that requests had previously been made by some delegations to remove the three sub-items from the CTD's agenda, as these sub-items had apparently served the purpose of transparency. He indicated his surprise with this reasoning, since the points that had been raised by China, Egypt and India in document WT/COMTD/W/175 remained pertinent and had not been addressed by the Committee. He went on to list a number of points which he believed were necessary for Members to consider. These included the need for an understanding of the legal and procedural implications of dual notifications of RTAs under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. Members needed to consider the roles of the CRTA and the CTD in the consideration of RTAs with a dual notification, and also needed to consider whether a Member could unilaterally notify an RTA under a specific legal provision, without the consent of the other parties. His delegation also wished to explore the implications of a notification of an RTA under the Enabling Clause being retained but without a consideration of the RTA taking place in the CTD on the basis of a factual presentation.
He observed that there were three RTAs that had been notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV - the GCC Customs Union, the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement - and none of these RTAs had as yet been considered by Members under the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for RTAs. Some delegations had made a distinction between the GCC Customs Union and the other two RTAs, and it had been suggested that the GCC Customs Union notification under the Enabling Clause was incorrect. His delegation did not agree with this. In fact, the issues surrounding the three RTAs were similar. Although the GCC Customs Union was a customs union while the other two were not, the TM for RTAs had the same procedures for customs unions and other RTAs. Moreover, these procedures did not cover any of the three RTAs in question, since all three were simultaneously notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV. 
He recalled that some Members had suggested that many of the issues raised in document WT/COMTD/W/175 should be discussed in the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR). In response, he said that the mandate of the NGR was limited and could not capture the entire gamut of systemic and specific concerns arising from dual notifications. Members were also unclear as to the future work schedule of the NGR and it therefore became even more important to discuss the matter in the CTD. He reminded Members that India had made a proposal in the NGR, which he indicated was supported by many developing countries. The proposal was that Members continue with the existing practice of considering RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause in the CTD and RTAs notified under GATT Article XXIV and GATS Article V in the CRTA. For RTAs with a dual notification, the suggestion was that these RTAs be considered in the CTD. There were two reasons for this, the first being that the CTD had a mandate for review and secondly the Enabling Clause was lex specialis. He concluded by requesting that the first three sub-items under the present agenda item be retained on the agenda of the next CTD meeting, since the systemic and specific issues arising from RTAs with a dual notification remained unaddressed. He suggested that informal consultations held by the Chairman could help to resolve the matter.  
&& The Representative of the United States said that there was a divergence of views as to whether the GCC Customs Union was a case of a dual notification. His delegation believed that the GCC Customs Union issue was not an issue of dual notification, and was therefore different from the discussion relating to the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement. The US remained of the view that the GCC Customs Union had been incorrectly notified under the Enabling Clause. This was subsequently corrected, and the understanding of his delegation was that the GCC Customs Union was in the pipeline to be considered in the CRTA in line with the procedures of the RTAs TM. The US considered this issue closed and continued to request that the present sub‑item be removed from the CTD's agenda, as it had served its purpose. Turning to document WT/COMTD/W/175, he said that his delegation had not seen any specific issues relating to the GCC Customs Union. Rather, the paper appeared to be seeking a systemic discussion on RTAs, which was a discussion that was outside the scope of the CTD and belonged in the NGR. He indicated that the US was not open to a CTD process to discuss systemic issues concerning RTAs.  
&& The Representative of China expressed support for the interventions by Egypt and India. His delegation saw similarities between the three RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV, and therefore had similar concerns with the three. He observed that the matter was of significance to developing country Members and to the multilateral trading system. The communication from China, Egypt and India contained in document WT/COMTD/W/175 was designed to help Members enhance their understanding of the systemic and specific issues arising from dual notifications, with a view to facilitating an expeditious solution. It was appropriate for the CTD, as the focal point for development work in the WTO, to have a substantive discussion on the dual notification issue. He said that his delegation wanted the first three sub-items under the presentation agenda item to remain on the CTDs agenda until the systemic problems were addressed. 
&& The Representative of Egypt noted that the US had mentioned that the GCC Customs Union issue was not an issue of dual notification. He said that he did not understand the rationale behind this. He also expressed his surprise with the US' understanding that the GCC Customs Union was in the pipeline to be considered in the CRTA. This was of concern to his delegation, since the discussion in the CTD of the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union, as well as of the dual notifications of the ASEAN-Korea and India-Korea Agreements, had not been exhausted. He indicated that he would inform himself of the situation in the CRTA after the present meeting and requested that the first three sub-items under the present agenda item remain on the CTD's agenda. 
&& The Representative of Nigeria said that his delegation, like others, had systemic concerns with respect to dual notifications. He suggested that it might be useful for Members to have a discussion on the boundaries of the CTD's mandate with respect to issues relating to RTAs. He also indicated his interest in the situation in the CRTA with respect to the GCC Customs Union.
&& The Representative of the European Union expressed disappointment that the same arguments were being repeated on this matter. Her delegation did not see the need to maintain on the CTD's agenda the first three sub-items under the present agenda item, since these sub-items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made. She added that her delegation perceived differences between the GCC Customs Union notification and the notifications concerning the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement. If Members wished to have a systemic discussion on RTAs, the view of her delegation was that the NGR was the appropriate forum. Nevertheless, the EU was open to informal discussions with other delegations to explore how the matter could be resolved. 
&& The Representative of India observed that the discussion in the CTD on the RTAs notified under both the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV had not been exhausted. In this light, he indicated his concern with the US' understanding that the GCC Customs Union was in the pipeline to be considered in the CRTA. 
&& The Representative of China said that informal consultations called by the Chairman might be useful in finding a solution to this matter.
&& The Representative of the United States said that the question of when the NGR would meet to discuss RTA issues was separate and distinct from the question of whether it had jurisdiction on this matter, which the US believed it did. He also indicated that the first three sub‑items had fulfilled their purpose of informing Members of the notifications made, and these sub-items were distinct from the systemic discussion that some delegations wanted to have. The US did not believe that the CTD was the appropriate forum for a discussion on a systemic issue that cut across Committees.
&& The Chairman said that he would hold informal consultations to see whether a way forward could be found on this matter.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.  
-	Notification of the Agreement on Trade in Goods between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and Korea
&& The Chairman said that the second sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement.
&& The Representative of India indicated that the systemic and specific issues concerning the ASEAN-Korea Agreement had not been addressed. He requested that the present sub-item remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The Representative of Korea indicated his delegation's awareness of the sensitivities associated with dual notifications. He urged Members to find a solution as soon as possible and suggested that informal discussions could help to move the process forward.   
&& The Representative of the United States said that his delegation continued to have concerns with the present sub-item being listed on the agenda. This sub-item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made and should already have been removed from the agenda.
&& The Representative of Egypt requested that the present sub-item remain on the CTD's agenda. He noted that some delegations had shared the view in the course of the discussion under the present agenda item that the purpose of the first three sub-items was to inform Members of the notifications made, and that there was no relationship between the sub-items and the systemic concerns. In this regard, he said that he wished to clarify that the problem which existed was that the notifications in question had not been discussed.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Notification of the Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement 	between India and Korea (Goods)
&& The Chairman said that the third sub-item under the present agenda item concerned the notification of the India-Korea Agreement.
&& The Representative of India indicated that the systemic and specific issues concerning the India-Korea Agreement had not been addressed. He requested that the present sub-item remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The Representative of the United States said that his delegation continued to have concerns with the present sub-item being listed on the agenda. This sub-item had fulfilled its purpose of informing Members of the notification made and should already have been removed from the agenda.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
-	Latin American Integration Association - Report to the WTO on instruments signed pursuant to the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, for the period 1 January 2010 – 31 December 2011 (WT/COMTD/82)
-	Latin American Integration Association - Report to the WTO on instruments concluded under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo, for the period 1 January 2012 – 31 December 2012 (WT/COMTD/84)
&& The Chairman said that the two reports by the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) on instruments signed under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo appeared on the CTD's agenda at the request of Uruguay. The first report, contained in document WT/COMTD/82, related to the period from 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2011. The second report, contained in document WT/COMTD/84, concerned the period from 1 January 2012 to 31 December 2012. He invited Uruguay to take the floor.  
&& The Representative of Uruguay said that the first section of the report contained in document WT/COMTD/82 analyzed trends in intraregional trade during the period 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2011, while the second section described the instruments concluded by the LAIA member countries under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo during the same period. Turning to the report contained in document WT/COMTD/84, she said that the first section analyzed trends in intraregional trade during the period 1 January 2012 to 31 December 2012 and the second section described the instruments concluded by the LAIA member countries under the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo during that period. She went on to say that the period covered by the second report was marked by the accession of Panama to the 1980 Treaty of Montevideo. This was a process that had been taking shape since 2009. Panama's accession constituted one of the most notable events during the period and raised the number of LAIA member countries to 13. As a result of its accession, Panama assumed all the rights and obligations deriving from a number of agreements, including the Regional Agreement on the Regional Tariff Preference, Regional Agreement No. 6 on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, Regional Agreement No. 7 on Cooperation and Trade in Goods in the Cultural, Educational and Scientific Areas, Regional Agreement No. 8 for Trade Promotion through the Elimination of Technical Barriers to Trade, Regional Market‑Opening Agreement in Favour of Bolivia, Regional Market‑Opening Agreement in Favour of Ecuador, and Regional Market‑Opening Agreement in Favour of Paraguay.
&& The Representative of the United States said that his delegation did not have any specific questions or comments on the two reports. The US wanted to take the opportunity to note, as it frequently did in the CRTA, that some LAIA agreements had not been notified to the WTO, as was required under the TM for RTAs. He encouraged the parties to these agreements to notify them as soon as possible. 
&& The Committee took note of the two reports and of the interventions. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with a brief update on the preferential trade arrangements (PTAs) that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on PTAs. He firstly informed the Committee that the EU's Emergency Autonomous Trade Preferences for Pakistan would be considered at the 1st Dedicated Session on PTAs, which would be held on 2 April 2014, immediately following the present meeting. With regard to the four other PTAs that had been notified since the establishment of the TM for PTAs - PTAs being implemented by China, India, the Russian Federation and Chinese Taipei - there had been no significant developments since the last report.  In particular, the full set of data required for the preparation of the factual presentations of the four PTAs had not yet been provided to the Secretariat. He urged the notifying Members to provide the data as soon as possible.
&& The Representative of China said that his authorities were working to update the required information and data, which would be provided promptly.
The Committee took note of the interventions. 
REVIEW OF THE TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS - STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRPERSON
&& The Chairman said that the TM for PTAs was being implemented by the CTD, as per the provisions contained in document WT/L/806, which was the General Council Decision of 14 December 2010 which established the Mechanism. Paragraph 26 of the TM for PTAs indicated that the Mechanism would apply on a provisional basis until Members approved its permanent application. The paragraph also indicated that Members would review the Mechanism after three years and if necessary modify the Mechanism in light of the experience gained from its provisional operation. He went on to say that three years had elapsed since the General Council Decision which established the PTAs TM. Members would, therefore, need to consider the question of the review of the Mechanism. Whether enough experience had been gained yet to conduct a review would also be for Members to determine. He informed the Committee that he intended to hold informal consultations to hear views concerning the timing and the nature of a review of the PTAs TM. 
&& The Representative of the European Union said that her delegation looked forward to the Chairman's consultations and to discussing how some momentum could be instilled into the PTAs TM. 
&& The Representative of India indicated that the Chairman's consultations would be useful in addressing issues relating to the functioning of the PTAs TM.   
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's statement and of the interventions. 
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 
-	Ministerial Decision of 7 December 2013 (WT/MIN(13)/44 - WT/L/919) - Statement by the Chairperson
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision of December 2005 on duty‑free and quota-free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006. Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs. Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  As stipulated in the Hong Kong Decision, the CTD had been annually reviewing the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to LDCs and reporting to the General Council for appropriate action. 
He went on to say that he wished to draw Members' attention to the Ministerial Decision of 7 December 2013 taken at MC9 and contained in documents WT/MIN(13)/44 and WT/L/919. The Decision indicated, inter alia, that developed country Members that did not yet provide DFQF market access for at least 97% of products originating from LDCs, defined at the tariff line level, would seek to improve their existing DFQF coverage for such products, so as to provide increasingly greater market access to LDCs, prior to the next Ministerial Conference. The Decision also indicated that developing country Members declaring themselves in a position to do so, would seek to provide DFQF market access for products originating from LDCs, or would seek to improve their existing DFQF coverage for such products, so as to provide increasingly greater market access to LDCs, prior to the next Ministerial Conference. He also pointed out that, according to the Decision, Members were to notify DFQF schemes for LDCs and any other relevant changes pursuant to the TM for PTAs. Furthermore, the CTD was to continue to annually review the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to the LDCs, and report to the General Council for appropriate action. To aid in its review, the Secretariat would, in close coordination with Members, prepare a report on Members’ DFQF market access for LDCs at the tariff line level based on their notifications. He concluded by assuring Members that the CTD would undertake the work specified in the Decision.
&& The Representative of Uganda, on behalf of the LDC Group, said that, although the MC9 Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs was non-binding in nature and contained best endeavor clauses, it was a step in the right direction. At this stage, it was important for Members to implement the Decision. He observed that the Decision was not an end in itself, but rather a means to an end with the view to fulfilling Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, and in line with paragraph 1.11 of the Bali Ministerial Declaration. The LDCs commended those Members that had already attained the 97% mark and encouraged others to do so as well. It was important for preference-granting countries to fulfill the notification requirements and make available the utilization rates in their DFQF schemes. The LDCs had taken note of the notifications made by various developed and developing countries and encouraged Members to provide DFQF market access for all products originating from LDCs in a manner that ensured stability, security and predictability. It was essential that developed countries ensured that products of commercial interest to LDCs were effectively included in their schemes. Developing countries in a position to do so were encouraged to enhance their market access conditions for LDCs. Finally, he stressed the importance of rules of origin in DFQF schemes and called on Members to make their rules of origin transparent, simple and objective, in line with the guidelines agreed to by Ministers at MC9.
&& The Representative of Nepal expressed support for the intervention by Uganda. His delegation appreciated the DFQF initiatives that had already been put in place for LDCs and urged Members to implement the Decisions concerning DFQF market access for LDCs that had been taken by Ministers.    
&& The Committee took note of the Chairman's statement and of the interventions.
ELECTION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Committee elected Ambassador Roderick van Schreven of the Netherlands as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee on LDCs for 2014.
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.

__________


 The sub-items concerning these two reports are presented together in this Note, as Uruguay introduced the two reports in a single intervention. After the intervention by Uruguay, the Chairman opened the floor separately on each report. There were no specific questions or comments on either of the two reports. 









WT/COMTD/M/90

-  PAGE 1 -


WT/COMTD/M/90

-  PAGE 2 -


 

 


RESTRICTED


WT/COMTD/M/90

8 May 2014
(14-2851)
Page:  PAGE  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 1/ NUMPAGES  \* Arabic  \* MERGEFORMAT 15
Committee on Trade and Development
Ninetieth Session
 






