RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/16

30 May 1997

ORGANIZATION

(97-2271)

 

Committee on Trade and Development
Sixteenth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 20 MAY 1997

&& Chairman: H.E. Mr. D. Baichoo (Mauritius)

1. The Committee on Trade and Development adopted the agenda as contained in WTO/AIR/585,
with under "Other Business” one item: Observer status for international intergovernmental organizations.

(i) Agenda Item B: WTO Technical Cooperation and Training Activities as They
Relate to Developing Country Members

- Three-Year Plan for Technical Cooperation: 1997-1999

2. && The Chairman recalled that the Guidelines for Technical Cooperation stipulated that the Three-
Year Plan for Technical Cooperation was to be approved by the Committee. The Committee might
wish to consider today the draft WTO Three-Year Plan for Technical Cooperation covering the
period 1997-99, which the Secretariat had circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/25, and which is
the first of its kind. He suggested that this plan, including its Cover Note, be considered for approval
at this meeting, with the necessary flexibility suggested therein.

3. && The representative of the Secretariat drew attention to a number of examples of technical
assistance. First, technical assistance regarded all the operational Divisions of WTO. The Three-Year
Plan (the Plan) envisaged certain events which were not the sole constituents of technical cooperation
activities. Technical cooperation activities were carried out by the Secretariat every day, with
delegations, seeking advice on various problems. The work had increased after the establishment of
the WTO, because implementation counselling was needed by delegations. He drew attention to thee
examples of this counselling. In the Rules Division, delegations would bring in their proposed legislation
for advice. These consultations were not reflected in the Three-Year Plan. Regarding the tariff
schedules, technical assistance was being provided concerning the revision of the harmonized system
or on issues of renegotiation pursuant to modification or withdrawal of concessions, which was done
by WTO's Market Access Division. The Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the
Settlement of Disputes required that the Secretariat provide technical assistance to developing countries
in case of a dispute, which was usually done by the Legal Division. These were important illustration
of the amount of work which was being carried out by the various Divisions by way of technical
assistance, which were not reflected in the Three-Year Plan. He suggested that delegations take account
of the vast area of technical assistance being provided which was not contained in the Three-Year Plan,
when approving the Plan, which only dealt with seminars and workshops, mostly in the capitals.

Second, one of the objective of the technical cooperation activities was to build a long-lasting and
effective program for WTO Members. Specially in relation to least-developed countries, programs
were conducted and repeated after intervals with a view to building and maintaining awareness of WTO
framework. Third, the Secretariat needed the necessary flexibility in the implementation of its projects.
Since many actors were involved, there was always a risk of changes in timing and in participation,
which needed to be accommodated.

4.&& The representative of the European Communities said that the document was a useful first step,
which could be improved upon. Her delegation realised that it was mainly an indicative document.
She suggested that it be updated, perhaps twice a year and to list the activities which had been confirmed
as well as follow-up given. Some budget aspects needed to be clarified since it was not clear to her
delegation what was meant by "projects at no cost to WTO".

&& The representative of New Zealand endorsed the Three-Year Plan. His government had made
a contribution to the technical cooperation activities and would maintain the funding over the next
three year planning period. It was desirable to maintain a consistent effort in this area. Members’
long-term commitments would reinforce WTO processes, both on the part of donors and of the recipients,
who would be making adjustments to their bureaucracies to adjust to their obligations under the WTO
Agreements. He stressed the importance of flexibility, to accommodate both the recipient government
and the Secretariat, facing competing demands on its staff. Finally, his delegation was interested in
implementation modalities, and in this context, the paper circulated by Switzerland.

6.&& The representative of Switzerland also considered the document to be an important working
document. He understood the constraints which confronted the Secretariat to draw up a detailed Plan,
and as such, his delegation considered it an instrument which could be improved. His delegations
had made suggestions concerning the implementation modalities. He would welcome more detailed
information on the budgetary elements, both as far as the financial aspect was concerned and the
allocation of resources. While in view of the tight deadlines his delegation was prepared to accept
the document, it was understood that it was not the final form of the Three-Year Plan, which his
delegation considered a fundamental tool for technical cooperation by this organization.

7. && The representative of Norway noted with satisfaction the information in this revised version,
in particular paragraph 6 of the cover note, indicating the share of least-developed countries in the
allocation of funds, as well as that on page 23 on trade and environment. He emphasised the importance
of applying due flexibility in the implementation. His delegation would welcome a continued revision
and surveillance of the Plan and on that basis was ready to adopt it as an indicative document.

8.&&  The representative of Morocco was of the view that the Plan embodied the implementation
of the Guidelines. While he considered it a useful first step, the Plan in its present form was not ready
to be adopted and warranted more in-depth reflection on its presentation. For example, the event
involving Morocco, as set out in number 67, was not a WTO, but essentially an UNCTAD event.
He suggested that the Plan indicate, in cases where WTO was no the sole agency involved, what
percentage of each project was WTO financed and what other agencies were involved in what measure.

9. && The representative of the United States considered the Plan a good first step in identifying the
breadth of work undertaken by the WTO and by governments. It provided a good snapshot of the
technical cooperation activities and the finances involved. His government had contributed to technical
assistance programmes for countries in transition, with a view to making WTO as universal as possible.
Some data supplied in connection with training for least developed countries would be of relevance
in the preparation of the High Level Meeting on Least Developed Countries. His delegation would
need more time, as certain elements needed more clarification, in particular in terms of the budget.

10.&& The representative of India said that it was a helpful document, and that his delegation would
revert to it at a later stage.

11.&& The representative of Tanzania welcomed the Plan and noted, referring to number 41 in the
Plan's listing of technical cooperation events, that his delegation understood that this event had not
yet taken place, as discussions were still underway.

12. && The representative of Canada welcomed the Plan as a tool showing how technical assistance
would shape up in the next three years. Like others, his delegation encouraged the Secretariat to update
the Plan on a regular basis, perhaps twice a year. The document was particularly helpful for the
preparation of the High-Level Meeting in October, and he suggested that WTO ensure that other
organizations involved in the High-Level Meeting prepare similar documents with a view to having
a complete picture of all activities available to least developed countries.

13.&& The representative of Bangladesh welcomed the document as a task well accomplished. I was
an indicative document which would be useful to many delegations, including those of the least developed
countries. It would be a constant source of reference for beneficiaries of technical cooperation, for
identification of areas where such technical cooperation could be most usefully effected and, as the
delegations of United States and Canada had pointed out, it would also be a useful source of data for
the High-Level Meeting which could be replicated by other bodies as well. His delegation stressed
the need for a continuous and regular update.

14. && The representative of Trinidad and Tobago expressed the need for a revision of the document,
since there were still some areas of confusion. He noted instances where the paper referred to activities
by the Secretariat where no funding by the WTO was provided, and where the main thrust of the
execution was with another organization, in particular World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).
He noted certain areas, in the section on comments, where activities were subject to approval by the
funding government and he wondered what would happen if approval was not granted. The question
arose because it was not clear to his delegation what the basis was for funding from the regular budget
as opposed to voluntary funds. In referring to number 146 in the Plan, (consultation on accession
of the Russian Federation) he wondered what was meant by technical assistance. He did not consider
such consultations with an acceding government and resulting travel by the Secretariat staff as technical
cooperation in the strictest sense. He hoped that this be clarified in the revised paper. The document
should reflect the existence of the Latin American and Caribbean Group. He wondered whether the
document could reflect the steps which the Secretariat took to ensure quality control in technical assistance
activities. When planning technical assistance activities on a three-year basis, basic reference and basic
training materials were needed, which could have some permanence in the process of delivery of technical
cooperation, over the wide membership of the WTO in the three-year plan period. He did not see
any reference in the document to the creation of such training material. He wondered whether the
use of information technology for distance learning and training would enable the funds available to
the Secretariat to be more effectively utilized. There was a case to be made for the use of information
technology to enable delivery of technical assistance to reach wider audiences at lower costs.

15.&& The representative of Japan welcomed the Plan as a useful document, providing transparency
of WTO technical cooperation as a whole. He emphasised the importance of retaining flexibility in
the implementation of technical assistance.

16. && The representative of Korea, said, in response to the point raised by the delegation of Trinidad
and Tobago on the issue of technical cooperation to acceding countries in particular as regards project 146
(Russian Federation), that he had a different opinion. He had attended many accession working party
meetings and was convinced that acceding governments, irrespective of their economic size, needed
assistance.

17. && The Chairman noted the needs expressed to update the paper on a regular basis, to improve
quality control, to give clarifications, in particular as regards the budgetary elements, certain inputs,
and use of information technology.

18. && The representative of Trinidad and Tobago clarified that his only concern was that funds destined
for technical cooperation should not be used to assist government in their accession process. He was
of the view that there should be a distinction between funds for technical assistance to developing
countries and funds for consultations or travel to acceding governments.

19.&& The representative of Australia noted that in early discussions on the Guidelines, the point had
been made that accession and technical cooperation were separate activities. She suggested in that
context that the Plan clarify the sources of the funding. Secondly, that the Plan indicate where WTO
operated in conjunction with other organization. The Plan was a useful document for transparency
and for the preparations for the High-Level Meeting. There was a need for flexibility.

20.&& The representative from Morocco suggested that a revised document might include a classification
of the projects by certain parameters, such as co-organizing events, accession etc.

21.&& The representative of European Communities supported the view expressed by the delegation
of Morocco that a second draft may be useful, in which the projects would be categorized, perhaps
in the same manner as was done in the Manual and which listed the different Divisions within the WTO
which were involved.

22. && The representative of Egypt welcomed the Plan and supported the point made by the delegation
of Morocco. He also suggested that the Plan indicate how assistance was given to cope with the "Built-in
agenda”. His delegation would revert to the Plan at a later stage.

23. && The representative of the Secretariat said that the Secretariat would circulate an update as soon
as possible, in any case before the next meeting of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD),
which was only planned for 26 September, when the bulk of the 1997 would already have been spent,
and would therefore not be timely. Turning to some of the questions, he said that quality control,
although important, was not appropriately addressed in the Plan, which was an inventory of activities.
He drew attention to project number 148, which envisaged use of new technologies. Cost to the
Secretariat in those items where "no cost to Secretariat” was indicated, meant that the WTO budget
was not involved. Listing only those events which were solely organized by the WTO would shorten
the Plan considerably, as many events were organized in collaboration with others. For example, events
relating to customs evaluation, tariffs, HS system, etc. were done in collaboration with other agencies.
Certain events on investment were done in collaboration with UNCTAD, and those relating to intellectual
property rights with WIPO.

24. && The Chairman requested that comments be submitted in writing to the Secretariat within a
fortnight, following which the Secretariat would revise the Plan, taking into consideration such comments.

25.&& The Committee took note of the Three-Year Plan and of the statements made.
- Manual on Technical Cooperation and Training Activities

26.&& The Chairman outlined the draft Manual on Technical Cooperation and Training which drew
on the Guidelines for technical cooperation adopted in October 1996. The Manual provided a description
of the technical cooperation and training activities available in the WTO, explained how Members could
benefit from such assistance and how requests should be filed to participate in the activities. Since
implementation modalities had not been adopted, they had not yet been fully incorporated into the text.
27.&& The representative of Morecco said that the Manual was shaping up well, although it could
be shorter. While, in certain aspects, it reflected the way technical cooperation was currently carried
out, this might not be the way the Committee wished it to see future technical cooperation.

28. && The representative of Switzerland said that the Manual was an evolving document which should
take into consideration the results of the Committee's discussion on modalities and on the different
types of technical cooperation activities managed by WTO. He wondered wether the Manual would
be available on the Internet or through other information technology channels. Electronic dissemination
would be an advantage, as it would ensure the possibility to constantly update the Manual. It would
be useful if the results of High-Level Meeting on Least-Developed Countries be incorporated into the
final version of the document, as these might have an impact on the Secretariat's technical cooperation
activities. Regarding the issue of funding, on page 22 of the Manual, he recalled that on 18 July 1996,
the General Council had set up a trust fund to collect voluntary contributions for the WTO technical
cooperation activities. The relevant Decision stipulated that activities to be financed by the fund had
to be in conformity with the priorities indicated in the Guidelines established for WTO technical
assistance. He suggested that this element be highlighted under the Manual's heading of funding of
technical cooperation.

29.&&  The representative of Norway said that the Manual was a useful factual presentation of WTO
technical cooperation activities, and welcomed the views of its potential users. His delegation agreed
with the views expressed by the representative of Morocco that the presentation should be as short
as possible in order to enable a broader audience to get a better understanding of the WTO technical
cooperation activities. Nonetheless, he suggested to insert, on page 22, a reference to the open trust
fund which had just been created as well as an indication of the relatively small amount available for
technical cooperation through the regular budget.

30.&& The representative of Hong Kong said that the document would assist government authorities
involved in organizing and planning technical cooperation activities vis-a-vis the WTO. His delegation
agreed with the representatives of Morocco and Norway that the Manual was too long. For example,
the information in box 3 on page 9 might not be relevant for the purpose of the Manual. He suggested
to publish the Manual as a loose-leaf document to make it easier to update and more user friendly.
Perhaps the Three-Year Plan could be incorporated.

31.&& The representative of Trinidad_and Tobago referred to page 10 of the Manual (Modes of
Delivery), and suggested to include a reference to training modules and distance learning with the help
of information technology. The indication of information technology in the Three-Year Programme
under its item 148 was not sufficient. The Internet was not necessarily the best way to deliver technical
assistance. Teleconferencing and the creation of training modules on electronic media such as CD-ROM
and diskettes should also be considered to allow for arepeatable means of delivering technical assistance.

32. && The representative of Egypt recalled that his delegation was among those who had requested
the Manual and was pleased with the result. It would serve as a source of information to various
government entities not familiar with the activities of WTO. Making it available on the Internet would
be an additional helpful means of providing the information. The Manual would also be useful in
preparatory process for the High-Level Meeting as least-developed countries could benefit from the
information it contained in preparing their needs assessments.

33.&& The representative of Ecuador said that the Manual was useful, especially for those governments
seeking to obtain technical assistance, although it could be shorter.

34. && The representative of Switzerland clarified that when he had referred to the Internet, it was
not as a mode of delivery of technical assistance, but as a way of disseminating the information contained
in the Manual. However, using the Internet could encourage participation from other sectors, especially
the private sector, and would ensure larger dissemination of the information on technical assistance
provided by the WTO.

35;&&  The representative of Mongolia said that the document would help new Members and acceding
countries to gain awareness of WTO technical cooperation activities. It would also help countries in
identifying their needs of assistance and in the selection of suitable modes of delivery.

36.&&  The representative of Djibouti said that the least-developed countries, acceding countries and
countries in transition considered the WTO training programs to be crucial. The existing courses which
gave participants a chance to learn about the WTO and enabled them to meet with delegates and
government officials from other countries as well as Secretariat staff, were ideal in their format. He
thanked the Swiss government and the high officials who had received the participants of the course
when they were in Bern.

37. && The Chairman summarized the suggestions made and invited those delegations wishing to submit
comments to do so in writing within afortnight. He recalled that any changes following the finalization
of the implementation modalities would also be incorporated into the document. The Committee took
note of the statements made.

- Implementation modalities

38.&& The Chairman recalled that a note by the Secretariat on this matter, dated 3 February 1997,
had been the basis for the work of the Committee on this item. At the Committee's last meeting, I
had urged delegations who announced their intention to present comments and proposals in writing
to do so at the earliest possible opportunity. As aresult, an informal note by Switzerland was currently
being circulated.

39. && The representative of Switzerland thanked the representative of Djibouti for his positive
impression of the modest Swiss contribution to the trade policy seminar organized by the WTO. Turning
to the implementation modalities, he said that the his authorities’ ideas were set out in a paper based
on the Secretariat paper of 3 February 1997. The Swiss proposal reproduced that paper, but with
suggested changes appearing in bold print. His delegation had tried to take on board comments made
by Members as well as those made by the Secretariat. The major change was a simplification. It had
first been suggested to present the Three-Year Plan in two stages. The first stage would include a
draft on which Members would comment and donors could then have picked projects they wished to
sponsor. During the second stage, the Committee would have accepted the draft. The Swiss proposal
narrowed the procedure down to one stage. The first aim of the Swiss contribution was to ensure that
technical assistance delivered by the WTO Secretariat was in line with the priorities and the objectives
established by the Members. Second, that the WTO technical assistance was delivered in a transparent
way so as to enable Members to follow developments and, if necessary, to contribute by giving
orientation. His delegation hoped that with the modalities proposed, the Committee would manage
to draw on the expertise of the WTO Secretariat.

40.&& The representative of Switzerland drew the attention of the Committee to a number of points
in the proposal. First, it suggested some additional elements with respect to the presentation of the
Three-Year Plan. It should be detailed for the first year, and there should be a description of each
program including the mode of delivery chosen, and its implications on financial and human resources
as well as the source of funding. Interesting ideas had been voiced during the discussion and his
delegation was open to take on board comments made by the representatives of the European
Communities and Morocco to classify the different activities of technical cooperation according to
themes and according to the share taken on by the WTO in the implementation of the activities it carried
out jointly with other organizations. His delegation would modify its proposal according to these and
other comments made during the discussion. As regards the "urgent requests” referred to in
paragraph 4.1(e) of the draft, it was the view of his delegation that these, during the first year, should
only be taken into consideration if they were well founded. However, flexibility was needed and the
wording "bearing in mind the regular program” left a certain room of manoeuvre for the Secretariat
to interpret whether a given request should be followed up or not. He asked a clarification of the last
part of the sentence in paragraph 5(b) of the Secretariat's note whichread “... should include a sufficient
flow of information and a permanent availability of technical expertise and advise”. It was the notion
of "a permanent availability of technical expertise and advise” which was not fully clear to his delegation.

41. && The representative of the Secretariat, in referring to paragraph 4.1(e), clarified that not only
urgent, but also unforseen requests would be accommodated to the extent possible, bearing in mind
the regular programme and its implications for financing and personnel. With reference to
paragraph 5(b), the Secretariat would attempt a rewording. The paragraph meant to indicate that there
would be programs, not on a one-off basis, but ensuring a continuity in the delivery of technical
assistance activities, in particular in the case of the least-developed countries. The paragraph also
intended to refer to improved electronic assistance, which was envisaged in due course and which would
allow WTO to respond more promptly to requests for information and have an efficient two-way
exchange. The Web site which was currently being developed in the WTO with its question and answer
facility served as an example.

42.&& The representative of the European Communities said that, while the Swiss paper was a useful
document, it attempted perhaps too much to micro-manage, and went into too much detail. Some
points raised in the paper, such as coordination with other institutions, were important. In that context
she suggested that, in addition to the World Bank, the Institute for Economic Development as well
as the Vienna Institute which dealt with economies in transition could also be mentioned. Her delegation
would come back to the paper at a later stage.

43.&&  The representative of Canada welcomed the Swiss clarifications and cautioned not to introduce
too much rigidity in the planning process, in particular with reference to some of the suggestions under
paragraph 4.1. Such rigidity would hamper a certain degree of flexibility deemed desirable, which
his delegation hoped was not its intended purpose. As regards the monitoring and follow-up exercise,
which was useful, he suggested to set out from the beginning the expected outcomes of the programmes,
by way of introducing some kind of benchmark against which to evaluate the programmes. His
delegation considered the paper overall a useful framework and emphasised the need to ensure that
the Secretariat would not spent too much time drawing up plans and reporting on them but rather
implement them as faithfully as possible.

44.&& The representative of India said that his delegation found the earlier Secretariat Paper, dated
3 February acceptable. The Swiss paper was currently being examined by his authorities and he would
come back with suggestions in a fortnight together with his delegation's views on the Manual and the
Three-Year Plan.

45. && The representative of Morocco said that his delegation agreed with the Swiss views that a balance
should be struck between flexibility and rigidity. Flexibility could only be achieved if based on specific
points of reference, in the form of detailed rules of the sort suggested by the Swiss delegation.
Implementation of such rules could be done in a more or less flexible manner, depending on the
requirements of the beneficiary government. He was of the view that even more details were required
that those set out in the Swiss paper. Since the WTO was innovating in this area, strict rules of the
game needed to be drafted, with a view to creating a certain tradition.

46. && The representative of Norway welcomed the Swiss contribution as a means to create more
predictability. An extensive work on planning would be justified if this work could generate more
funds, extending the basis for technical assistance. While the paper could perhaps be reworded to
avoid the impression of micromanagement, the paper should present as much predictability as possible
as to how the funds were spent. He hoped that the paper could be finalized without undue delay.

47.&& The representative of Korea said that modalities should also be established for other categories
of projects, suchas those funded by bilateral donors or those mainly implemented by other organizations,
in collaboration with the WTO.

48.&& The representative of Djibouti said that it would be desirable to have more ideas on assessment
and follow-up of technical assistance projects.

49.&& The representative of Colombia said that the Swiss paper, though useful, was perhaps somewhat
too detailed, in particular as regards paragraphs 2 and 4. Her delegation would prefer a more general
document, like the one presented by the Secretariat on 3 February 1997.

50.&& The representative of Trinidad and Tobago would welcome incorporation of most of the "Modes
of Delivery” as set out in the Swiss paper into the Manual on Technical Cooperation and Training
Activities. Sub-paragraph (vi) of paragraph 1 might deal with distance learning. Under paragraph 3,
"coordination with other international institutions", collaboration with the International
Telecommunications Union should be envisaged concerning information technology to increase countries’
capacity to use electronic methods of communication.

51. && The Chairman proposed to instruct the Secretariat to revise its paper taking into consideration
comments made. The Committee so agreed.

(ii) Agenda Item C: Programme of Work for the Autumn

52. && The Chairman recalled that, at its last meeting in March, the Committee had discussed its Work
Programme for 1997. While agreement was reached on the Committee's work programme for the
first half of the year, at least one delegation had said that it was not in a position to take a definite
view at that time on a proposal that in the second half of the year the Committee undertake a review
of the participation of developing countries in world trade. Would the Committee now be in a position
to agree to place on its agenda at its September meeting an item entitled "Review of the participation
of developing countries in world trade”, and if so what guidance did they wish to give to the Secretariat
in preparing background documentation to assist our discussions under this item? Referring to some
statements made at the Committee's last meeting, he further suggested that before the Committee prepare
its report to the General Council at the end of the year, an opportunity be given at the Committee's
meeting in the autumn for delegations to comment on any aspect of another item in the Terms of
Reference(TORs) of the CTD, in particular "Review of the Application of Special Provisions in the
Multilateral Trade Agreements and Related Ministerial Decisions in Favour of Developing Country
Members, in Particular Least-Developed Country Members", which might warrant delegations’ attention.
While delegations should not lose sight of this important item on the agenda, the Committee carried
out a major review of the subject last year and he felt there was no need to repeat that exercise again
until some more time has passed.

53.&& The representative of Morocco suggested that the Chairman hold consultations on this matter
and subsequently inform delegations of their results, by fax. Depending on their outcome a decision
could be taken whether there was a need for the Committee to meet again on this issue. The Chairman
said that he would follow up.
(iii) Item D: High-Level Meeting on Least-Developed Countries

34. && The Chairman said that this item had been placed on the agenda of the Committee's meeting
in order that delegations be kept abreast of preparations for the High-Level Meeting on Least-Developed
Countries and that this meeting seemed a timely occasion to do so. In this context, he recalled that
the Committee on Trade and Development, at its meeting on 17 February had requested the Sub-
Committee to follow up on the preparations initiated by the Committee on Trade and Development,
under the usual guidance of the Committee itself. The Sub-Committee had accordingly taken up the
matter under the leadership of its Chairperson, Ambassador Eveline Herfkens of the Netherlands.
He placed on record his high regard and appreciation for the way in which she had launched the process
and the energy she had brought to the task. He recalled that at its meeting on 18 April, the Sub-
Committee on Least-Developed Countries had decided on the dates for the High-Level Meeting and
that areview meeting be held jointly with UNCTAD at the end of June to carry forward the preparations
for the High-Level Meeting. The date for this review meeting had been set for 26 June. Informal
consultations would need to be held over the next couple of weeks to establish the agenda for the June
meeting. The Secretariat had informed him that preparations for the High-Level Meeting were
progressing well.

55. && The representative of Morocco cautioned against establishing a double-track process. At this
meeting, he would welcome a progress report from the Sub-Committee's Chair on the preparations
for the High-Level Meeting and suggested that the Sub-Committee deal with any matter relating to
the High-Level Meeting, to avoid taking up the work of the Sub-Committee in this Committee, including
the agenda of the joint UNCTAD/WTO June meeting.

56. && The Chairperson of the Sub-Committee, Ambassador Herfkens, recalled that the Sub-Committee,
at its meeting on 18 April, had agreed on the dates of the High-Level Meeting (27-28 October 1997),
on the basic format of the Meeting, which would include Roundtable discussions, both on countries
and on issues, on the need to avoid, if possible, a plenary session, and that the Meeting would be a
common exercise with UNCTAD, ITC, UNDP and the Bretton Woods Institutions. In that context
the Committee had cautioned that the exercise should not be micro-managed by one institution alone
and had decided to organize a joint meeting involving the Geneva-based institutions on 26 June to review
the preparatory process. The informal consultations on the agenda for this June meeting should be
seen in this light. The Director-General of the WTO had sent letters to all 48 least-developed countries,
spelling out the approach of the High-Level Meeting, and transmitting a checklist to assist the least
developed countries in their determination of their needs for trade-related technical assistance. She
recalled that the selection of the least-developed countries which would be "featured" at the High-Level
Meeting itself in the Round tables would be done on the basis of their needs assessment. The checklist,
which had been established in a common effort by all six participating institutions, also provided for
the possibility to request technical assistance to help the LDCs in completing the checklist. Furthermore,
background documents were being drafted by the participating institutions, in particular inventories
of each of the institutions’ trade-related technical assistance projects to the least-developed countries,
a paper on the market-access conditions facing the exports of individual LDCs and a paper on the relevant
use of information technology. Drafts of these papers would be discussed at the next inter-agency
meeting on 29 May at which she intended to be present. She also recalled that, at the Sub-Committees’
April meeting, she had announced the establishment of a trust fund (document WT/COMTD/LLDC/W/6,
dated 1 May refers) and invited delegations to become donors to the trust fund. She also said that,
before the meeting of the IMF/World Bank Development Committee in Washington, the Group of 24,
which was the Group of 77 for the Bretton Woods institutions, had been discussing the High-Level
Meeting, which had prompted telephone calls and letters to her from, in particular, Sub-Sahara African
countries, which were not all least-developed. This had inspired her to hope that the High-Level Meeting
would lead to other initiatives, covering a wider range of developing countries, which would be
benefitting from a similar type of exercise. She was encouraged by such signs of interest and
commitment to the process on the part of the beneficiaries, given that any such initiative could only
be successful, if really demand-driven.

37. && For the sake of transparency and clarification, the Chairman requested the Secretariat to prepare
an informative Note on the state of preparations of the High-Level Meeting for circulation to delegations
as soon as possible.

58. && The representative of Bangladesh welcomed the initiative by the Director-General andconfirmed
that his government had received the letter and checklist. His authorities were confident and indeed
had received signals that key players in global trading system would actively participate in the High-Level
Meeting. His delegation was pleased that the Trust fund had been set up, and hoped that contributions
from donors would be generous. The need for consultants for LDCs’ preparations of needs assessments
was well recognized and he was confident that the selection would be made in appropriate consultation
with the beneficiary countries, or at least be tuned to their requirements. A format for NGO participation
also needed to be worked out, which would ensure that NGOs not be so de-linked from the main event
so as not to be able to benefit from or contribute to the High-Level Meeting. The universality in the
global trading system could not be achieved without the least-developed countries. The High-Level
Meeting was an opportunity to reverse the course of marginalization. It would help make the trading
régime truly global and his delegation was confident to see some new approaches to this at the Meeting.
It would also enable a more thorough integration of technical assistance activities among the various
agencies in order to make the impact more results oriented. He welcomed the increased cooperation
between not only WTO, UNCTAD and ITC but also between these bodies and the Bretton Woods
institutions. The least-developed countries were hoping that increased market access for their products
as well as expanded investments flows would be among the result of the High-Level Meeting. In this
regard, they were also looking to the success of the pilot seminar, organized in June, by UNCTAD.
He wondered if there would not be scope for an effective association in the preparatory process of
the High-Level Meeting with UNIDO. The Denver Summit of the G-7 would no doubt have an important
impact of the Meeting. To that end, the Prime Minister of his country had addressed a letter on behalf
of the LDCs to the leaders of the G7 countries, with the objective to sensitise them as to LDCs'
expectations and aspirations. He had information indicating that some leaders had already reacted
with favourable action. The WTO had emerged over the past three years as an important player in
the global trade field. The Committee and Trade and Development and its Sub-Committee on Least-
developed Countries had a role in injecting a development orientation in WTO's goal and purposes,
which was crucial for all developing countries in general and the LDCs in particular. This would also
assist in generating the desired kind of political commitment to the WTO. The Committee on Trade
and Development would therefore also need to have a significant role in the preparations of WTO's
next Ministerial Meeting next year.

59. &&The representative of Morocco said that he would welcome a copy of the letter sent by the
Director-General to the least-developed countries. The review meeting planned for 26 June would
provide an occasion for the Secretariat to provide delegations the necessary information, with a view
to discussing it at that meeting in the light of information provided by the other participating agencies.
The Chairman recalled that the Committee had requested the Secretariat to prepare an informative note
on the state of the preparations of the High-Level Meeting.

60. && The representative of Egypt said that it had certain questions regarding the budget, which it
would raise with the Secretariat bilaterally, at a later stage.

61.&& The Committee took note of the statements made and commended the Chair of the Sub-Committee,
Ambassador Herfkens for her work.

(iv) Agenda Item E: Information on Regional Trade Agreements Notified to the Committee
on Trade and Development Under the Enabling Clause

62. && The Chairman said that this item had been placed on the agenda at his request. He had been
informed by the Secretariat that the Committee did not have an up-to-date document containing
notifications of Regional Trade Agreements (RTAs) notified under the Enabling Clause. For the sake
of completeness and transparency, he proposed that the Committee instruct the Secretariat to compile
a list of all RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause and to issue the list as a CTD document.

63.&& The representative of the United States was particularly concerned that there had not been self-
notification by those countries which had such regional arrangements and encouraged that this take
place, in addition to the information which the Secretariat would circulate. Since the number of regional
arrangements was increasing, it was important that the principle of transparency be adhered to. His
delegation also encouraged appropriate referral of such regional arrangements to the Committee on
Regional Trade Agreements, as was already the case of other regional arrangements pursuant to other
provisions in the WTO legal system. He had wanted to add this comment as part of the proposed
exercise.

64. && The representative of the European Communities supported the previous statement and insisted
that regional agreements be notified under the Enabling Clause but also that they be examined under
Article XXIV (GATT) or Article V (GATS).

65. && The representative of Venezuela supported the proposal made by the Chairman as it was a way
to increase transparency of regional trade arrangements negotiated under the Enabling clause. However,
he was of the view that discussions delegations had had in the past should not be repeated, in particular,
to cautioned not to take out of the context of this Committee notifications and the review taken place
under the Enabling clause. While any information requested by the Committee on Regional Trade
Committee from this Committee could be provided upon request, it should nevertheless be ensured
that any regional trade arrangements notified under the Enabling Clause should be dealt with by the
Committee on Trade and Development.

66.&& The representative of India supported the information gathering exercise, for transparency
purposes, of all those regional arrangements notified under the Enabling Clause. His delegation
nevertheless did not agree with the suggestions made by the delegations of the United States and the EC
that they be examined by the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements. This should be done by the
Committee on Trade and Development. He invited those countries with any views on this to circulate
them to delegations in non-papers.

67.&& The representative of Ecuador drew the Committee’ s attention to the mandate of the Committee
on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), in particular Article 1(a) which stipulated that the CRTA
carry out the examination of agreements in accordance with the procedures and terms of reference
adopted by the Council for Trade in Goods, the Council for Trade in Services or the CTD, as the case
may be, and thereafter present its report to the relevant body for appropriate action. Therefore it was
up to the CTD to decide what arrangements the CRTA should deal with. He supported the statements
made by the representatives of Venezuela and India.

68. && The representative of Colombia supported the proposal made by the Chairman as well as the
statement made by the representative of Venezuela.

69. && The representative of Singapore supported the Chairman's proposal and suggested that the
Secretariat prepare a short background note as to what the Enabling Clause entailed in terms of regional
trading arrangements. He shared the views expressed by the representatives of Venezuela and India
in that there was a reason for the Enabling Clause and its process which was different from the one
contained under Article XXIV GATT and Article V, GATS.

70. && The representative of Mexico supported the proposals made by the delegations of Venezuela
and India.
71.&&  The representative of the United States clarified that his proposal was not intended to mean
that the CRTA examine all regional trading arrangements notified under the Enabling Clause under
the provisions of Article XXIV (GATT). This was another issue which could be discussed at another
appropriate time. Nevertheless, pursuant to the CRTA's terms of reference, that Committee dealt
with all regional trading agreements, including those which would be notified under the Enabling Clause.
Discussion under the Enabling Clause would of course remain in the CTD but the understanding of
the TORs of the CRTA was such that information on regional trading arrangements notified under
the Enabling Clause should be provided to it. Inevitably, there would be an issue raised by some of
such arrangements which would require examination under the provisions of Article XXIV. The only
basis on which to take such decisions would be a greater measure of transparency than hitherto had
been the case. It was an issue which should be addressed to avoid loosing credibility over the Enabling
Clause and this Committee's ability to deal with arrangements notified thereto.

72. && The Committee took note of the statements made and requested the Secretariat to compile a
list of all regional trading arrangements notified under the Enabling Clause and to issue the list as a
document of the CTD.

(v ) Agenda Item F: Other Business
- "Observer status for international intergovernmental organizations".

23 && The Chairman recalled that following guidance from the General Council, the CTD had granted
observer status to a number of intergovernmental organisations. Document WT/COMTD/W/22 listed
these organisations. As was also noted in that document, some requests for observer status from other
intergovernmental organisations remained pending. On the basis of the General Council guidelines
for observer status for intergovernmental organisations, he had conducted further informal consultations,
and he was now in a position to propose to this Committee that it extend observer status to the African,
Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (ACP) and Southern African Development Community (SADC).
As regards other intergovernmental organizations, his informal consultations were continuing. The
representative of Morocco suggested that the Chairman pursue his informal consultations on this matter
with the Chairs of the other WTO bodies, in particular with the Chairman and the General Council.
The Committee agreed to grant observer status to the ACP and SADC.
