WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/77
2 February 2010


(10-0533)


Committee on Trade and Development
Seventy-Seventh Session


NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 8 DECEMBER 2009

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)


 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869254" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC252869254 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869255" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC252869255 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc252869256" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc252869256 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc252869257" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc252869257 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869258" C.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC252869258 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc252869259" (i)	Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – statement by the Chairman	 PAGEREF _Toc252869259 \h 3
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc252869260" (ii)	Generalized System of Preferences – notification by Switzerland (WT/COMTD/N/7/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _Toc252869260 \h 6
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc252869261" (iii)	Generalized System of Preferences – notification by the United States (WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.7)	 PAGEREF _Toc252869261 \h 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869262" D.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC252869262 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869263" -	general council decision of 14 december 2006 (wt/l/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC252869263 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869264" -	transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements – draft   proposal by brazil, china, india and the united states (job(08)/103/rev.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC252869264 \H 8
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869265" E.	annual review of the implementation of the hong kong decision on duty-free and quota-free market access for least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC252869265 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869266" F.	participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system (wt/comtd/w/172 and wt/comtd/w/172/corr.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC252869266 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869267" G.	technical cooperation and training	 PAGEREF _TOC252869267 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869268" -	preparations for the implementation of the technical assistance and training plan for 2010 – oral information by the secretariat	 PAGEREF _TOC252869268 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869269" H.	draft addendum to the 2009 annual report (wt/comtd/w/171/add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC252869269 \H 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC252869270" I.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC252869270 \H 13


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 77th  Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3479/Rev.1 issued on 1 December 2009. 
The agenda was adopted.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.
It was so agreed.
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with an update on the regional trade agreements (RTAs) notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs.  He firstly recalled that he had indicated at the 76th Session that the Chile-India Agreement could not be considered in 2009, as India had not at the time provided the Secretariat with comments on the draft Factual Presentation.  Comments from India had now been received, and the Secretariat was working to finalize the Factual Presentation on the Chile-India Agreement.  It was envisaged that the Agreement could be considered in a Dedicated Session in the first quarter of 2010, though this remained to be confirmed.  Members would be kept informed of when the Chile-India Agreement would be taken up for consideration.
He also recalled from his earlier interventions that there were three RTAs involving non‑WTO Members that had been notified under the Enabling Clause, and that would need to be considered by the CTD meeting in Dedicated Session.  These were the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA), the India-Bhutan Agreement and the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA).  With regard to PICTA, since the Agreement was apparently still to be ratified by some Parties, the Secretariat believed that it would be best to wait for the Agreement to be in force for all the Parties before preparing the Factual Presentation.  This was in line with the practice being followed in the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA). As for SAFTA and the India‑Bhutan Agreement, the status of data provision by the Parties concerned remained unchanged.  For SAFTA, only data from Bangladesh had been received, while the Secretariat had yet to receive any data concerning the India-Bhutan Agreement.  It was still envisaged that these two Agreements could be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD in May 2010, though this would only be possible if the Parties to the Agreements were able to provide the data soon. 
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union – statement by the Chairman
&& The Chairman recalled that, at the 76th Session, he had outlined a possible way forward that had been conveyed to him regarding Members' consideration of the GCC Customs Union.  In particular, he had informed Members that the Agreement had been re-notified under GATT Article XXIV, and that it would be considered in the CRTA.  The conclusion of that consideration would then be reported to the CTD for informational purposes.  This process for the consideration of the GCC Agreement would be undertaken without prejudice to the rights and obligations of Members under GATT Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause.  On this issue, he said that the CTD would need to wait until the consideration of the Agreement was completed in the CRTA.  The CTD could then revert to the matter in order to be informed of the outcome of the CRTA's consideration. 
He next referred to the request that had been made for an update to the Secretariat's Legal Note on Regional Trade Arrangements under the Enabling Clause – circulated in 2003 as document WT/COMTD/W/114.  The request had been made in the CTD, and had also been communicated to him in writing by China, Egypt, India and Pakistan.  He inquired whether Members were agreeable to having the Secretariat update its Legal Note.
&& The Representative of the United States said that it was not clear to her delegation what the concerned delegations were requesting be updated in the Legal Note, which provided a comparison of the provisions and practices applicable to GATT Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause prior to the establishment of the RTAs Transparency Mechanism (TM).  She observed that the letter the Chairman had received might make clear the scope and content of the proposed update.  In this light, she suggested that the letter be shared with the wider membership for future consideration under a separate agenda item.  She said that the US was not in a position to agree to an update of the Legal Note at this time.  Before being a position to discuss any update of the document, the US would require an explicit understanding from the delegations that had made the request as to why the update was necessary, and what it was intended to reflect.
&& The Representative of the European Union said that his delegation also had certain doubts about the request for the update to the Legal Note. He indicated that the update could, in fact, be found in the RTAs TM.  In light of this, the EU sought further clarification from the concerned delegations as to the need for an update to the Legal Note, since the provisions in the RTAs TM were very clear.
&& The Representative of Australia said that it was premature for the Committee to take a decision on whether to update the Legal Note.  She suggested that the concerned delegations could provide more information on what they were seeking in requesting the update.  A written explanation, perhaps the letter that had been sent to the Chairman, would help the Committee to consider how to move forward on the matter.  
&& The Representative of India said that, according to the RTAs TM, the CRTA would implement the Mechanism for RTAs notified under Article XXIV, while the CTD would do so for RTAs notified under the Enabling Clause.  At the CTD's last meeting, it had been confirmed by the Secretariat that the notification of the GCC Customs Union under the Enabling Clause had not been withdrawn.  Therefore, given that an RTA had been notified under both Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause, the reasons for the request for an update to the Legal Note were evident.  He indicated in particular that the dual notification raised a number of legal questions.  It was not clear, for example, whether an RTA could be notified under two provisions.  The question of whether an RTA notified under the Enabling Clause should be considered in the CTD was also pertinent.  Such questions raised systemic concerns, and his delegation wanted greater clarity.  The Secretariat was, therefore, requested to update its Legal Note before the next CTD meeting.  He also requested that the present item remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The Representative of Japan said that her delegation was among those that sought more information as to why an update to the Legal Note had been requested.  In this light, she suggested that the letter that had been sent to the Chairman be circulated to the membership.  She also inquired whether India's intervention could be shared with Members.  Her delegation believed that continued discussion on this matter would be more appropriate under a separate agenda item, since the discussion was on a systemic issue, and was not limited to the GCC Customs Union notification.   
&& The Representative of Egypt said that it was the dual notification status of the GCC Customs Union that had prompted the request for an update to the Legal Note.  He recalled that it had been explained at the last CTD meeting that there were concerns about the implications of the dual notification, and that a clarification on the respective roles of the CTD and the CRTA in the consideration of RTAs was required.  In light of this, he requested that the present item remain on the CTD's agenda.
&& The Representative of the United States said that her delegation still did not see what was expected of the Secretariat through the request for the update to the Legal Note.  The US did not think that it was appropriate for the Secretariat to address disagreements between Members.  She also pointed out that the Chairman in his statement had indicated that the process to consider the GCC Customs Union would be without prejudice to the rights and obligations of Members under Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause.  She added that her delegation did not see why a decision had to be made at the present meeting on the agenda for the next CTD meeting.  However, on the issue of the appropriate agenda item for a possible continuation of the present discussion, she agreed with Japan that the discussion was no longer limited to the GCC Customs Union.  Therefore, if certain delegations wished to continue the discussion, it should be done through a written communication and a request for a separate agenda item. 
&& The Representative of China said that his delegation had no objection to the compromise that had been reached on the process to consider the GCC Customs Union.  However, China and some other delegations remained concerned with the systemic implications of the dual notification.  It was for this reason that a request had been made for an update to the Legal Note.  The purpose of the request was to allow Members to have a better understanding of the respective roles of the CTD and the CRTA in the consideration of RTAs.  He indicated that China still wished to have the Legal Note updated.
&& The Chairman said that the letter that had been sent to him would be circulated to the membership.  He also observed that discussions on this matter would need to continue at the next meeting. 
&& The Representative of the United States asked for confirmation that the item under which discussion would continue at the next CTD meeting would concern the request by China, Egypt, India and Pakistan for an update to the Secretariat's Legal Note.
The representative of Egypt asked for confirmation that discussion would continue at the next meeting under the present agenda item.
&& The Representative of Pakistan said that his delegation still had concerns with the systemic implications arising from discussions under the present agenda item.  Therefore, he requested that the item remain on the CTD's agenda for its next meeting.  He explained that the delegations that had requested an update to the Legal Note would  have made a written submission if they had wished to have the request considered as a separate agenda item.  They had not done so as yet, since their request had been made in the context of the discussions under the present agenda item.  He added that if some Members were unclear about the scope of the update to the Legal Note that had been requested, the issue could be rephrased in a generic way.  He suggested, for example, that the issue could be framed in terms of the legal criteria determining whether an RTA notified under Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause would be considered in the CTD or in the CRTA.  This would certainly apply to the discussion under the present agenda item, and would also give Members guidance for the future.
&& The Chairman said that consensus could not be reached at the present meeting.  He suggested once again that the CTD revert to the discussion at its next meeting.
The representative of the United States said that the present item was not a standing item on the CTD's agenda.  Since the CTD followed the same rules as those governing the General Council, the correct procedure was for delegations to make a written submission in requesting that an item be placed on the agenda of a meeting.  She suggested that the delegations wanting the update to the Legal Note could request that a separate item be placed on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting.
&& The Representative of Egypt said that he wished to clarify that his delegation had no objection to the procedure that the Chairman had outlined for the consideration of the GCC Customs Union.  However, this procedure in itself did not address the concerns that some Members had with the dual notification.  Since the dual notification was related to the GCC Customs Union, the present item could not be removed from the CTD's agenda until satisfactory legal clarity had been obtained.  He added that, in his view, the procedures were being followed correctly.  In particular, some Members had concerns with regard to the discussions under the present agenda item, and were therefore requesting that the item remain on the CTD's agenda.
The representative of the European Union said that he had not heard any delegation disagree with the way forward on the GCC Customs Union that had been outlined by the Chairman.  Therefore, in his view, there was no need for the CTD to return to the present agenda item at its next meeting.  He appreciated that some Members had systemic concerns with the dual notification, but pointed out that this issue was not specifically restricted to the GCC Customs Union.  The Members that had raised concerns were, however, within their rights to request that a pertinent item be placed on the CTD's agenda.
&& The Representative of Pakistan said that the main concern of some Members at this time was the systemic issue arising out of the dual notification status of the GCC Customs Union.  There was, however, no objection to the procedures that would be followed in the consideration of that agreement.   
&& The Chairman said that Members would not be able to resolve their differences at the present meeting.  He proposed to hold informal consultations to see how the matter could be framed as an item for the CTD's agenda.
The representative of Egypt said that he agreed with the Chairman's proposal.  However, he sought confirmation that the present item would remain on the CTD's agenda until && The Chairman's consultations yielded an outcome.
&& The Chairman said that the content of Members' discussions on this matter should not be pre‑judged.  As he had indicated, he would hold informal consultations.  It was on the basis of the discussions in the informal consultations that an appropriate way forward would be explored.  
It was so agreed.
Generalized System of Preferences – notification by Switzerland (WT/COMTD/N/7/Add.3)
&& The Chairman said that the notification by Switzerland concerning its Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/7/Add.3.  He invited the representative of Switzerland to introduce the notification.
&& The Representative of Switzerland said that the Swiss GSP scheme had been completely revised.  The coverage had been broadened, the preferences had been deepened and the system had been strengthened through its reliance on transparent, objective criteria developed and established at the international level.  At the same time, the scheme maintained its simplicity in order to facilitate an easy application.  Beneficiary countries were selected on the basis of the OECD's Development Assistance Committee (DAC) list.  The list of LDCs was taken from the classification established by the UN's Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).  The DAC and ECOSOC lists were internationally recognized and were applied in the GSP schemes of other countries as well.
In the new Swiss scheme, tariff preferences up to the duty-free level applied to all beneficiary countries.  For industrial products, imports were duty free except with regard to certain textile products, where a 50 per cent tariff reduction applied.  Significant tariff preferences applied to relevant agricultural products.  Processed agricultural products could be imported duty free, and tariff escalation was non-existent.  The scheme granted 100 per cent duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access to LDCs and, on a temporary basis, to countries participating in the Heavily-Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative.  The latter group of countries would benefit from DFQF access to the Swiss market from the so-called "pre-decision" point.  After the "completion" point, the regular GSP preferences would apply. 
Certain products from some developing countries were understood to be competitive in the world market.  Granting tariff preferences for such products hampered the principal idea of the GSP, which was to enable better market access for products from countries which needed these preferences, thereby helping them to strengthen their export economy.  Therefore, the new Swiss GSP scheme included a mechanism to graduate competitive products, which applied when the share of the product in question exceeded 3.25 per cent of total exports of the product in the world market.  This criterion, which had been developed to determine the limitations of export subsidies in the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, was applied in this context because the tariff reduction at the stage of import had a similar effect to an export subsidy on the product in question.  It was, however, applied with care and only in cases where the granting of tariff preferences for a competitive product endangered market access for products from other GSP beneficiary countries.  Furthermore, ex‑post‑analysis needed to show that the withdrawal of tariff preferences did not have detrimental effects on  imports of the product.  Analysis so far had shown that, despite withdrawing tariff preferences at the 8-digit level, the share of imports to Switzerland had actually been rising.  This confirmed that the product in question was competitive. 
So far, the scheme's overall utilization rate had been 70 per cent.  He observed that this number could be higher if all beneficiary countries appointed authorities for the relevant administrative cooperation, and to issue certificates of origin.  On the subject of rules of origin, he said that the EU, Norway and Switzerland applied mutually agreed rules in the GSP context.  These rules were currently being revised with a view to simplifying them.  Finally, he drew Members' attention to an information portal – available at HYPERLINK"http://www.export-to-switzerland.ch"www.export-to-switzerland.ch – which offered relevant information on tariff and non-tariff requirements when exporting to Switzerland under the GSP. 
&& The Representative of Sri Lanka said that there was a provision in the EU's GSP scheme concerning regional cumulation.  He asked whether regional cumulation facilities were offered under the Swiss GSP scheme as well, and how these compared to those contained in the EU's scheme.
&& The Representative of Switzerland invited Sri Lanka to submit the question in writing.  The question would be transmitted to his capital, and a response would be duly provided.
The Committee took note of the notification by Switzerland.    
Generalized System of Preferences – notification by the United States (WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.7)
&& The Chairman said that the notification by the United States concerning its GSP scheme had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.7.  He invited the US representative to introduce the notification.
&& The Representative of the United States said that her delegation was pleased to have the opportunity to present its notification concerning the 2008 Annual Review of the US GSP programme, which had been completed in July 2009.  Efforts to foster the further integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system were a vital part of US trade policy.  US  SEQ CHAPTER \h \r 1efforts spanned a number of fronts, including promoting broad-based multilateral trade reforms conducive to further integration, supporting integration of trade strategies into the development plans of national authorities, and providing significant amounts of capacity-building assistance. 
A longstanding element in US efforts to increase developing country participation in the global trading system was the provision of duty-free access for products from beneficiary developing countries entering the US market.  The US GSP programme, in operation since 1975, was a cornerstone of this effort.  The programme currently provided preferential duty-free treatment for nearly 5,000 products from the 131 designated beneficiary countries and territories.  Duty-free benefits were the only preferential tariff treatment provided under the programme, as the statute did not allow for less than full tariff reduction.  A single, transparent rules of origin regime governed all US imports under the GSP.
In the 2008 Annual Review, the US had designated certain additional products as eligible for duty-free treatment, as outlined in Annex I of the notification.  Additionally, the US had granted waivers to the statutory "competitive need limitations" to ensure continued GSP duty-free benefits for certain products.  These were outlined in Annex II and Annex III of the notification.  Annex IV identified those specific products from specific beneficiary countries for which GSP eligibility was terminated based on a determination that imports from those beneficiary countries could compete effectively in the US market.  Annex V identified those specific products from specific beneficiary countries for which waivers to the statutory "competitive need limitations" had been revoked.  The notification provided the publicly accessible website where the results of the 2008 GSP Annual Review could be accessed.  The notification also informed Members that, in December 2008, the US had designated the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Republic of Kosovo each as a beneficiary developing country for purposes of the GSP programme. 
She said that US trade data at virtually any level of aggregation was freely available in easy‑to-use formats that enabled users to run their own customized queries on product-specific and  country-specific trade – including utilization under preference programmes.  While her delegation recognized the successes of the US GSP programme – which covered over US$31.7 billion in imports in 2008 – it was also committed to continue working to improve the effectiveness of US efforts to integrate developing countries more fully into the global trading system.
&& The Committee took note of the notification by the United States.
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS 
	-	GENERAL COUNCIL DECISION OF 14 DECEMBER 2006 (WT/L/672)
	-	TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS – DRAFT 		PROPOSAL BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND THE UNITED STATES (JOB(08)/103/REV.1)  
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The Council had since extended the deadline to its December 2009 meeting.  He informed the Committee that the proponents of a Transparency Mechanism for PTAs – Brazil, China, India and the US – had circulated their revised draft proposal as document JOB(08)/103/Rev.1.  He invited the proponents to introduce the document.
&& The Representative of Brazil said that the revised draft proposal laid out a procedure for a TM applicable to PTAs under the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – as well as to PTAs providing preferential treatment to the products of LDCs and to any other non-reciprocal preferential arrangements.  After the circulation of the original version of the document in October 2008, several meetings had been held between the proponents and some other Members.  The revised version of the draft proposal incorporated the modifications suggested by these Members.  The proponents, therefore, believed that they had addressed the major concerns that had been raised, including those relating to the technical constraints faced by developing countries in fulfilling PTA notification requirements.  This had been done either by extending some deadlines or by introducing more flexible language in some parts of the text.  Several improvements had also been made regarding the quality and the quantity of the data that were to be made available as part of the notification procedures.  In this regard, he acknowledged the contribution of the Integrated Database Section of the Secretariat in providing suggestions to make the Mechanism more efficient and comprehensive, particularly in the new structure of paragraphs 7 and 15, as well as in Annex I.  Finally, he said that some new language had been introduced in paragraph 22 in order to address the issue of the timing of the implementation of the Mechanism.  He expressed hope that Members could agree on a final text shortly. 
&& The Chairman expressed his appreciation to the proponents for their efforts to take into account the comments and concerns that were raised in the small-group consultations that he had been holding.  Given that the deadline for the CTD to report back to the General Council was the Council's December 2009 meeting, he requested Members to indicate in their interventions whether they could consider agreeing to the revised draft proposal, which was the outcome of a long process of informal consultations.  He also informed Members that copies of the Secretariat's "mock" Factual Presentation (FP) were available at the back of the meeting room.  The "mock" FP – which had initially been distributed at the 76th Session – was meant to help Members in their consideration of the proponents' revised draft proposal.  
&& The Representative of the European Union welcomed the revised draft proposal, but indicated that more time would be needed to consider it in detail.  The EU also had certain specific questions and comments on the document.  For example, she noted that the requirements concerning subsequent notification and reporting in paragraph 15 had been broadened.  Her delegation had previously made the point that excessive annual obligations should not be made on Members, as this would be demanding and impracticable, and would also go beyond the requirements of the RTAs TM.  She recalled that the EU had also signalled on previous occasions its interest in having a look at a "mock" guide of a PTA.  Furthermore, there was a need for clarification on the role and content of the PTAs database that was to be created.  She appreciated the steps that had been taken to re-phrase the language in paragraph 22 on the application and entry into force of the PTAs TM.  She noted that the EU wished to see the RTAs TM and the PTAs TM proceed in parallel, and that the RTAs TM was currently being applied on a provisional basis.   
&& The Representative of El Salvador said that his delegation supported the idea of greater transparency for PTAs.  The interest of his delegation was to have a PTAs TM that was practical and did not involve burdensome obligations on developing countries.  However, his delegation was still studying the revised draft proposal, and was therefore not in a position to agree to it at the present time.  He also expressed appreciation to the Secretariat for the preparation of the "mock" FP.
&& The Representative of Japan said that the draft text appeared to have been improved in many ways.  However, her delegation sought clarification on some technical points, and therefore called on the Chairman to hold an informal consultation soon.
&& The Representative of St. Lucia, on behalf of the ACP Group, said that the ACP countries would need to consult further on the revised draft proposal before being in a position to react to it.
&& The Representative of Chile said that his delegation was interested in participating in any informal consultations that the Chairman would be holding on this matter.  
&& The Chairman noted that the CTD was not yet in a position to agree to the proponents' revised draft proposal.  In his report to the General Council at the Council's December 2009 meeting, he said that he would outline the important progress that had been made on this matter since July 2009.  He proposed to also ask the Council to grant the CTD additional time – until July 2010 – to consider the matter and report back for appropriate action.  He said that he would continue to work with Members in the small-group setting starting from early 2010, and would open the matter up for discussion once again at the next formal meeting of the CTD.  The item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.
It was so agreed.
ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE HONG KONG DECISION ON DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS FOR LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES	
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda for its earlier meetings in 2009.  At the present meeting, the CTD was to undertake its fourth annual review of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision, as mandated in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.  
&& The Representative of the United States said that her delegation, which had a longstanding commitment to transparency, was pleased to participate in the present annual review.  She stressed that the US remained fully committed to implementing the DFQF Decision on the terms agreed to at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference, together with the results of an agreement on the overall negotiations under the Doha Development Agenda (DDA).  Backed by the results of several studies, her delegation strongly believed that the best result for all developing countries – including the LDCs – was an ambitious package that would open new markets worldwide.  As such, the Doha Round was a single undertaking for a good reason, since the best package could be achieved when all contributions were tied together.  The US was also fully committed to implementing the DFQF Decision in a manner that would result in meaningful opportunities for LDC products, coincident with implementing the results of a successful completion of the DDA.  
To ensure meaningful implementation of DFQF market access for LDCs, the US was carefully assessing the existing level of market share of specific LDCs, and the extent to which they were already benefiting from US preference programmes.  The US was already particularly open to Sub-Saharan African (SSA) countries.  In 2008, over 97 per cent of US imports from beneficiary countries of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) entered duty free.  Much of the remainder could be attributed to the fact that the preference was not claimed on otherwise eligible products.  Many SSA LDCs were active users of US preference programmes.  This was also true for Haiti, the only LDC in the western hemisphere.
In its analysis of DFQF implementation, the US was considering how best to ensure that a range of LDCs, including SSA LDCs and Haiti, could continue to have some market access and benefit from US preference programmes.  One area under review was apparel trade.  Recent data on  chapters 61 and 62 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule (HTS) of the US showed that, between 2005 and 2008, US apparel imports from Bangladesh had increased by 48 per cent and from Cambodia by 39 per cent, even though both countries were currently suppliers on a most-favoured-nation (MFN) basis.  During the same period, US imports from AGOA beneficiary countries dropped by 21 per cent and from African LDCs by 9 per cent.  While Bangladesh and Cambodia had gained market share in the US, up 43 per cent and 35 per cent, respectively, Sub-Saharan Africa's market share had dropped by 24 per cent for AGOA beneficiaries and by 12 per cent for AGOA LDCs.
In this regard, the US was continuing to examine the views expressed by beneficiary countries.  For example, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) – most of whose members were AGOA beneficiaries – stated during its testimony on US preferences before the US Congress on 17 November 2009 that Bangladesh had seen its exports to the US increase while SSA exports had declined.  The argument had, therefore, been made that duty-free treatment could not be accorded to Bangladeshi apparel exports if the most significant success story of AGOA – the growth of the garment industry in SSA – was to be maintained.  The US had, however, taken note that Bangladesh and other LDCs had also expressed their views on the US' implementation of DFQF market access, and was continuing to examine all of these interests.  She concluding by reiterating the US' commitment to implement the DFQF Decision in a manner that would result in meaningful opportunities for LDC products, consistent with the commitment made at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  The US was also working to ensure a strong overall market-opening result in the Doha Round that would benefit all LDCs.
&& The Representative of China said that the Fourth Ministerial Conference on the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) was held in Egypt on 8 and 9 November 2009.  Both sides used the opportunity to evaluate the achievements since the Beijing Summit of 2006, and to work out a blueprint for cooperation between China and Africa in the next three years.  At the Conference, the Chinese Premier announced eight measures to strengthen China-Africa cooperation and to support the economic development of Africa.  These measures included the further opening of the Chinese market to African products.  Zero tariff treatment would be phased in for 95 per cent of the products from African LDCs having diplomatic relations with China, starting with 60 per cent of products in 2010.  This action demonstrated China's sincere willingness to implement the Hong Kong Decision within its capacity.
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
PARTICIPATION OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN THE MULTILATERAL TRADING SYSTEM (WT/COMTD/W/172 AND WT/COMTD/W/172/CORR.1)
&& The Chairman said that the CTD had a mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  He recalled that it had been agreed at the 73rd Session that the CTD's discussion under this agenda item would take place at the present meeting, based on a background paper prepared by the Secretariat.  He invited the Secretariat to introduce the paper, which had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/172.  A corrigendum, in English only, had also been issued.
&& The Chief Statistician said that the volume of world merchandise trade almost tripled between 1990 and  2008. Developing economies had multiplied their trade volume by 4.5, which was double the growth registered by developed countries.  In 2008, developing economies as a group represented 38 per cent of global merchandise exports and 27 per cent of commercial services exports. Manufactures represented almost 60 per cent of developing economies' merchandise exports, while fuels represented 27 per cent and agricultural products 8 per cent. Between 2000 and 2008, developing economies' share of global manufactures exports increased by 7 percentage points, while their share of agricultural exports grew by 4 percentage points.  He highlighted the uninterrupted increase in commodity prices which had taken place between 2003 and 2008, and which had been particularly strong for fuels and minerals.  This development had favoured many commodity exporting developing countries.  It had also boosted South-South trade, which grew annually on average by 18 per cent between 2000 and 2008.
The financial and economic crisis that started in September 2008 showed how closely the global economy was linked.  During the first half of 2009, developing economies' exports dropped by an estimated 32 per cent on a year-on-year basis – virtually by the same degree as the exports of the developed countries.  Much of the fall in developing economies' exports was due to the observed 50 per cent decrease in the export value of fuels and mining products, largely caused by a price effect.  Agricultural exports declined by 17 per cent, and manufactures exports by 25 per cent.  While less information was available on commercial services trade, preliminary figures for the first six months of 2009 showed that developing Asian economies' services exports – which accounted for 64 per cent of the total services exports of the developing group in 2008 – had dropped by 17 per cent on a year‑on‑year basis.  Available statistics showed that the impact of the crisis on services had been severe for transportation services, in particular freight transport.  Tourism was another service sector which had been severely hit by the crisis.  Many developing economies – especially small economies where transport and travel exports represented important revenues - had been particularly affected. 
A positive development was that, since March 2009, global trade had been increasing on a month-to-month basis.  Furthermore, since the drop in the value of developing economies' exports had been largely due to a fall in commodity prices, the volume of exports of developing economies had been less affected than was the case for developed countries.  The impact of the trade collapse on economic activity would, therefore, likely be less important for developing economies as a group.  However, he cautioned that experiences differed widely between individual developing economies.  While some had coped well through the crisis, others had shown the extent of their vulnerability.  Among the most vulnerable developing economies were several LDCs. 
&& The Representative of the United States said that the Secretariat paper provided some valuable insights.  Her delegation was particularly appreciative of the statistics provided in the Annex which addressed improvements in trade facilitation by developing economies, as well as the trading environment that these economies faced.  She indicated that the US had some substantive comments on the paper, which the Secretariat was requested to review and address in a revision.  Beginning on page 8, she noted that the Secretariat paper attempted to measure integration and trade openness through a trade-to-GDP ratio measurement.  The US was surprised and concerned that the Secretariat had used this methodology, given its significant flaws.  It was not a good indicator of trade openness, since many factors other than trade policy could influence a country’s exports and imports.  While footnote 7 acknowledged caution in interpreting the results of this methodology, it did not go far enough in explaining the limitations of the approach.  Her delegation would provide specific edits to the Secretariat with regard to footnote 7.  
She said that the US also had specific comments on the Annex to the Secretariat paper.  While appreciating the information provided in the first paragraph of the Annex – namely that developed countries had reduced their tariffs by 46 per cent since the end of the Uruguay Round – she observed that there was no information on the percentage reduction in tariffs by developing economies.  Since a recent Secretariat report prepared for the Sub-Committee on LDCs highlighted that LDC exports to some major developing economies were expanding, the Secretariat was requested to expand the paper to include information on the percentage reduction in developing economies' tariffs.  She added that it would be useful if the revised paper could clarify that the references were to applied tariffs.  
She went on to say that paragraphs 3 and 6 of the Annex referred to agriculture, textiles, and clothing as "highly protected sectors" and "sectors with high tariffs", respectively.  This labelling appeared subjective.  Her delegation requested that the text be modified to refer only to the "agricultural, textiles and clothing" sectors.  Paragraph 4 of the Annex also referred to "highly protected sectors", and stated that LDCs had good preferential margins in those sectors due to the more rapid implementation of DFQF treatment for LDCs relative to preferential treatment for non‑LDC developing economies.  The US questioned the accuracy of this statement, as LDCs could have a preference margin even without DFQF – for example, under GSP programmes – and would benefit from additional preferential treatment given to all developing economies.
&& The Representative of the European Union expressed appreciation for the Secretariat paper.  She indicated that the Annex on the trading environment for developing economies, including the information provided on the domestic environment, was particularly interesting.  Her delegation had taken note of the strong performance of developing economies – particularly Asian economies – in terms of both exports and imports.  Note had also been taken of the rapid rise in South-South trade.  In this regard, she observed that the EU was interested to see how the Global System of Trade Preferences (GSTP) – for which the modalities for negotiations had been recently announced – would further boost South-South trade, especially outside Asia. 
&& The Chief Statistician said that the Secretariat had taken note of Members' comments.  While the Secretariat was aware of the shortcomings of the trade-to-GDP ratio as an indicator of trade openness, efforts would be made to be more specific in the revision to the document that would be issued.
&& The Committee took note of the Secretariat paper and of all interventions.    
TECHNICAL COOPERATION AND TRAINING
-	PREPARATIONS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING PLAN FOR 2010 – ORAL INFORMATION BY THE SECRETARIAT
&& The Chairman invited the Secretariat to provide information on the preparations being made to implement the Technical Assistance and Training Plan for 2010.
&& The Director of the Institute for Training and Technical Cooperation (ITTC) said that the focus in the first quarter of 2010 would be on national activities.  In this regard, letters had been sent to Members inviting them to submit their requests.  He said that, in the course of 2010, three-month Regional Trade Policy Courses (RTPCs) would be held in Singapore for the Asia-Pacific region, in Colombia for Latin America, and in Benin and Swaziland for French and English-speaking Africa, respectively.  After 2010, the Asia-Pacific RTPC would be held in a new venue, which was yet to be identified. Regions not yet covered by the RTPCs – those constituting the Arab countries, the Caribbean countries, and the Central and Eastern Europe, Central Asia and the Caucus (CEECAC) countries – would benefit from Short Regional Trade Policy Courses (SRTPCs).  The Secretariat would also be approaching Members regarding the hosting of other regional activities.  Attention would be given during the year to the updating of WTO reference centres, especially in LDCs.  In this regard, he invited delegations to consult with their capitals on specific needs.  He thanked donors for the resources that had been provided for the internship programmes, and indicated that efforts would be made to continue to strengthen these programmes. 
He recalled the concept of progressive learning which now guided the WTO's approach to training.  This approach put the emphasis on e-training as a tool to offer introductory-level courses, after which beneficiaries could advance their learning by participating in RTPCs at the intermediate level, and in advanced Geneva-based courses.  In this regard, he informed the Committee that the concerns of some countries with constraints relating to internet access would be addressed through the development of CD-ROMs.  Finally, he said that the WTO's cooperation with universities was continuing.  In this regard, he thanked Members for their support for the WTO Chairs Programme (WCP).  In order to better respond to the demand from Members, the number of beneficiary institutions under the WCP had been increased from 12 to 14.  He said that he would regularly brief the Committee on the status of implementation of the Technical Assistance and Training Plan.
&& The Committee took note of the intervention by the Director of the ITTC. 
DRAFT ADDENDUM TO THE 2009 ANNUAL REPORT (WT/COMTD/W/171/ADD.1)
&& The Chairman said that the CTD's 2009 annual report, which was adopted by the General Council at its November meeting, was contained in document WT/COMTD/70.  The draft addendum to the CTD's 2009 annual report – contained in document WT/COMTD/W/171/Add.1 – was the document under consideration at the present meeting.  The document reflected the work undertaken by the Committee since the circulation of the 2009 annual report.  He observed that the document contained a number of square brackets relating to items under consideration at the present meeting.  As part of the process of adopting the addendum, the square brackets would be removed, and the discussion that took place at the present meeting would be appropriately reflected.  Once adopted, the addendum would be forwarded to the General Council for consideration at the Council's December meeting.  He opened the floor for any comments on the draft addendum.
&& The Representative of the United States said that, if changes were to be made to reflect the discussion at the present meeting, her delegation wished to request that the addendum be circulated and considered by Members for adoption on an ad referendum basis.   
&& The Committee adopted the addendum to its 2009 annual report on an ad referendum basis.    
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business". 
The meeting was adjourned.
__________
 In English only.
 The addendum was issued as document WT/COMTD/70/Add.1.

WT/COMTD/M/77 Page  PAGE 12



	WT/COMTD/M/77 	Page  PAGE 7



 

 

 

 



