RESTRICTED

WORLD TRADE WT/COMTD/M/8

4 September 1996

ORGANIZATION

(96-3454)

Committee on Trade and Development
Eighth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 12 JULY 1996

Chairman: Mr. Nacer Benjelloun-Touimi (Morocco)

A. Adoption of the Agenda

1.&& The Committee adopted the agenda as contained in WTO/AIR/370. The Chairman said that
he would present a progress report on the study requested from the Secretariat on the participation
of developing countries in world trade. He also invited the Committee to identify issues for review
at its September and October meetings. In addition, he would present a proposal on an increased
participation of least-developed countries in this Committee and in the Sub-Committee on Least-
Developed Countries. The Committee agreed that the same international organizations which were
invited to this meeting in their capacity as observers would be invited to its next meeting.

B. && The Implementation of Uruguay Round Provisions in Favour of Developing Countries

2.&& The Chairman recalled that after informal consultations, the Committee had decided that the
review of the implementation of Uruguay Round provisions in favour of developing country Members
should be one of the priorities of its work programme for this year, with a view to making an input
to the Singapore Ministerial Conference. It was his intention to discuss this issue at the next meeting
of the Committee; it should then have before it the following background material. First, the replies
received from the Chairpersons of the subsidiary bodies of the General Council responsible for monitoring
the implementation of provisions in favour of developing countries. He intended to request the Secretariat
to prepare a note organizing this material in a user-friendly manner, to be distributed in due course.
Second, Secretariat document WT/COMTD/W/10, which listed all the provisions in favour of developing
countries in the WTO Agreement. And third, any contribution which delegations wished to make on
their experience with the implementation of provisions, since some of the provisions in favour of
developing countries were triggered only if specific requests were made. A well structured debate
should enable the Committee to evaluate the extent to which, and how, the different provisions were
applied in favour of, or were invoked by, developing countries since the WTO's entry into force.
This would assist it in drawing up appropriate recommendations to Ministers on this matter.

3 && The representative of Tanzania said that the Committee was now at the cutting edge of matters
related to trade and development. It was appropriate at this stage to conduct a thorough review of
the provisions established in favour of developing countries. Referring to provisions allowing for
preferential time-frames for compliance, he said that good-will from the international community was
needed: technical assistance and the recognition that certain countries would not be able to discharge
their obligations within the provided time frames were important elements. Furthermore, a
comprehensive review of technical assistance measures and other support measures as documented
in WT/COMTD/W/10, and in the annexes to the Questionnaire sent to Members in May of this year,
was essential. He welcomed the Chairman's intention to invite Member countries to share their
experiences and to request the Secretariat to compile other available information. This would show
to what extent domestic, multilateral and other support measures aimed at enhancing trade opportunities
and safeguarding the interests of developing countries had resulted in a tangible effect. The integration
of developing countries into the multilateral trading system would be enhanced by the adoption by
developed countries of appropriate domestic and international support measures. He deplored any
narrow interpretation of the remit of the WTO. An unequivocal commitment to assist developing
countries in their efforts to achieve economic growth and development would be desirable. Unless
developed countries assisted developing countries in overcoming their supply-side constraints, for example
through the diversification and strengthening of their export structures and markets, it would be difficult
for them to take advantage of the opportunities presented by the Uruguay Round. The development
of their services industry as well as trade promotion should also be given priority. Food-aid and technical
and financial assistance to improve agricultural productivity and infra-structure, had been less than
adequate and had done little to cushion the possible negative effects of the agricultural reform programme
on net-food importing developing countries. The Uruguay Round decisions recognised interlinkages
and the need for coherence in global economic policy-making. Consequently the WTO could not be
absolved from front-lineresponsibility. Ensuring economic growth and economic development required
adequate and timely flows of concessional and non-concessional financial and real investmentresources.
Further efforts were needed to address debt problems, particularly of the least-developed countries.
There was little time to lose if there was to be a solid and forceful input into the Singapore Ministerial
meeting, which had to provide the political impetus to honour commitments with a view to enabling
developing and least-developed countries to seize available trading opportunities.

4.&& The Committee took note of the statements made.
C. Provisions of Guidelines for WTO Technical Cooperation
3s The Chairman recalled the discussion which the Committee had had at its previous meeting
on this subject, in particular the statements made by the Heads of UNCTAD and the ITC, by the
Chairman of the General Council and by the Director-General of the WTO. Delegations's views had
ranged from general proposals on the main direction to be followed in WTO technical cooperation
activities, to specific proposals in relation to the modalities of its execution, its financing and its priorities.
At that meeting, the Committee had agreed that he come forward with acheck-list of the ideas expressed,
with a view to structuring its future discussions. This had subsequently been circulated as an Informal
Note by the Chairman and contained a check-list of points related to guidelines for WTO technical
cooperation. It included a framework for consideration of action to be taken as well as certain specific
matters to be addressed. It had become clear from the Committee's previous meetings that least-
developed countries were singled out by many delegations as requiring particular attention. At the
more operational level, the Committee still needed to determine the priority to be allocated to the various
modes of delivery of technical cooperation. The Committee also had before it a non-paper from the
delegation of Switzerland, elaborating its intervention made at the Committee's previous meeting, as
well as a_ status report on technical cooperation activities contained in document
WT/COMTD/W/14/Add.1. This report elaborated on an earlier version. He noted that a number
of replies had been received from Members to the Questionnaire which he had sent in May of this
year to ascertain the overall needs for assistance in trade-related matters and he encouraged other
Members to provide their comments before the summer break, since a critical mass of replies was
needed before an authoritative picture could be drawn.

6. && The representative of Switzerland introduced his delegation’ s non-paper which outlined its views
on the guidelines for technical cooperation. His delegation was of the view that the WTO regular budget
should finance priority technical cooperation activities. In future, the share of the regular budget
allocated to finance these activities should be at least the same as present. However, consideration
should be given to the contribution of additional resources which could come from international financial
institutions or other donors and could be channelled into a global trust fund. It would be necessary
to define the rules for the allocation of the funds available and set up a machinery for control by
Members, to be developed in cooperation between the Committee on Trade and Development and the
Budget Committee and adopted by the General Council. Such a trust fund would be managed by the
WTO Secretariat in accordance with technical guidelines elaborated by the Committee on Trade and
Development and the administrative modalities defined by the Budget Committee. The evaluation of
technical cooperation on the basis of appropriate criteria coincided with what had been designated as
"modes of delivery” in the Chairman's check-list on guidelines for technical cooperation. The guidelines
for WTO technical cooperation activities as contained in the General Council's Decision of 31 January
1995 should also apply to technical assistance in favour of countries in transition at a low level of
development, as well as to technical assistance for accession negotiations. It would therefore be desirable
for his Committee to submit its guidelines on technical cooperation to the General Council with the
recommendation that their scope be broadened to include these two areas. It was appropriate and timely
for the Committee to set clear priorities for principles, objectives and operational directions for technical
cooperation. His delegation's non-paper had identified some priorities, and in that context, he sought
clarification on some of the points in the Chairman's check-list related to guidelines for WTO technical
cooperation; in particular on the objective of reinforcing institutional and human capacities within
government and the private sector. How did it relate to government/private sector relations and how
would it take into account activities by the ITC? What was meant by the provision of trade policy
courses at the national level? Experience had shown that there was merit in organizing these courses
at the regional level. The development of training capabilities at the national and regional levels for
purposes of training local officials, the engagement of local/regional experts, and links with national
and international academic and research institutions deserved special consideration by Members. The
Swiss delegation was of the view that, as was already done in some other international organizations,
programming should be done over a three-year period instead of a two-year period. The proposed
annual report would keep Members abreast of developments as regards the implementation of
programmes. His delegation stood ready to work within the Committee to determine priorities and
guidelines.

7. && The representative of Pakistan welcomed the Swiss proposal. He regretted the exclusion of
certain developing countries from the priorities established in the Chairman's proposed check-list of
points related to guidelines for WTO technical cooperation. He proposed that, in addition to the priority
countries defined in the check-list, second priority be given low-income developing countries, whose
economies were separated by a very tenuous line from those of the least-developed.

8.&& The representative of Korea said that the Chairman's check-list could provide a basis for
identifying priorities. He proposed that the term "Global Fund", as used in the section on Funding
be replaced by another term so as to avoid any confusion with a similarly designated fund in the ITC.
He suggested that a new technical assistance programme jointly operated by WTO, UNCTAD and
ITC be considered as it would help to secure the best use of resources. He supported the Swiss proposal
to extend technical assistance to developing countries involved in accession negotiations.

9.&& The representative of New Zealand supported the idea that trade policy courses be conducted
in targeted countries. Ensuring follow-up on individual programmes and an assessment of their
effectiveness was an important element for her government, and she would welcome additional
information on this item of the check-list. She also supported the idea of international coordination,
in particular the dissemination of detailed information on programmes of different agencies. She
suggested that the Committee on Trade and Development not only establish priorities for the technical
cooperation activities of the WTO but also their objectives. She supported the structure of the check-list.

10.&& The representative of Sri Lanka was concerned that establishing priorities on the basis of general
rather than individual economic criteria, as had been done in Section III of the check-list, ignored realities
and did not take into account the urgent need for technical assistance by low-income developing countries,
such as his. Further reflection on this issue was necessary.

11.&& The representative of India suggested that capacity building, access to information, responsiveness
to specific demands of Members, focus on the development dimension of trade, and avoidance of
duplication be added to the check-list as additional principles and objectives. Its operational directions
should include the improvement of research capabilities to meet challenges deriving from an increasingly
open economy, improvement of access to information on trade related technical cooperation capacities
and programmes of bilateral and multilateral agencies that provide such assistance, and the provision
of information to the private sector (possibly in cooperation with ITC). His delegation was most
interested in the provision of an on-line databank. He supported New Zealand's suggestion that trade
policy courses should be given preferably on a regional basis and suggested that local or regional experts
be involved in such courses and other technical assistance activities of the WTO. The need to avoid
duplication should be specified in the check-list in its section on international coordination. His
authorities were still reflecting on the implications of the proposals made under the section headed
Management (II.5). A shorter format of the check-list was perhaps more appropriate and effective
for transmission to Ministers. He was also of the view that the criteria for granting technical assistance
to developing countries still merited more reflection and that low income countries such as his should
benefit from the technical assistance programmes of the WTO.

12.&& The representative of Norway said that the present practice of directing technical assistance
to core issues and to the most needy countries should be maintained and even extended. His authorities
supported the Chairman's check-list in principle and there was no need to make it more comprehensive.
Any changes should only be made on the basis of the informal proposal made by the delegation of
Switzerland, which he supported to a large extent, in particular with respect to the establishment of
afund. Such a fund, even if it was not of a global nature, would be sufficient. His delegation also
supported the priorities identified in the Chairman's check-list, but he wondered how they related to
the principle of keeping a geographical balance.

13.&& The representative of Japan said that technical cooperation should be based on self-help, and
that this should be made clear in the principles and objectives of the Chairman's check-list. It was
not clear how technical cooperation provided by a rules-based organization such as the WTO could
contribute to a balanced relationship between trade and development. Technical cooperation activities
should aim at reinforcing the institutional and human capacities of the recipient country at the government
level and he suggested that the reference to private sector in that context be deleted. He sought
clarification of ways in which full use of WTO provisions, particularly as regards the provision of
market access information, could be ensured through WTO technical cooperation. He was of the view
that the modes of delivery were necessarily linked to the desired objectives and suggested that recipient
countries be allowed to determine the appropriate linkage between mode of delivery and objective.
He suggested that on-line databanks on domestic rules in member countries be linked with UNCTAD
Trade Points. An annual programme and annual reporting obligations would enhance transparency.
Funds allocated under the regular WTO budget should in general cover essential trade-related technical
cooperation activities. Extra-budgetary resources, provided by individual Members and institutions,
should be used to finance projects and activities falling within the competence of the WTO. He also
sought clarification on the legal implications of a global fund. While his delegation supported the
suggestion in the check-list that priority be given to least-developed countries, additional priority areas
should also be identified. Compliance with notification obligations was generally perceived as a priority
area for technical assistance to developing countries. He welcomed the Swiss non-paper as a useful
contribution. However, he stressed the need to avoid duplication with work done by UNCTAD as
regards technical cooperation to countries acceding to WTO.

14. && The representative of El Salvador said that avoiding duplication of work undertaken by other
organizations should be included as one of the principles and objectives in the Chairman's check-list.
She welcomed the Swiss suggestion to enhance training capacities at the national and regional level,
necessary to reinforce national efforts and she recognized the need for a closer coordination with
organizations suchas UNCTAD, WIPO and ITC. If comprehensive trade policy courses were to remain
effective, such courses should be held annually in all three working languages. Annual programmes
and - reports would be more effective and enhance transparency. While she agreed that priority be
given to least-developed countries, low-income developing countries should nevertheless be ranked
right behind as beneficiaries of technical cooperation. Commenting on the Swiss suggestion to extend
technical assistance to acceding governments, she recalled that the January 1995 decision of the General
Council clearly limited activities financed from the regular budget to WTO Members and said that
her delegation could not agree to using funds from the regular budget for such assistance.

15.&& The representative of Trinidad and Tobago was not sure that comprehensive trade policy courses
in Geneva were cost-effective. He noted that the check-list referred to on-line databanks and training
materials based on information technology, as well as practical training programmes. Given the access
to information technology, directors and trainers could operate regionally delivering packages devised
in cooperation with UNCTAD and the ITC with a view to increasing the participation of developing
countries in the WTO framework. Such packages could also be used in other regions avoiding
duplication and enhancing cost-effectiveness. He agreed that least-developed countries be given priority;
low-income countries should, however, not be ignored. He requested that the statement made by the
representative of Tanzania be made available to Members.

16.&& The representative of Canada had doubts whether WTO technical assistance could be extended
to reinforce capacities in the private sector. Financing of on-line databanks should not be the
responsibility of the WTO exclusively, given the possibilities resulting from a close cooperation with
other international organizations. He wondered if the item headed "participation in WTO deliberations
and negotiations” in the Chairman's check-list was meant to cover the cost of delegates’ travel or rather
up-stream assistance to enhance the comprehension of issues under negotiation; he could only agree
to the latter. He agreed that priority be accorded to least-developed countries, particularly those in
Africa. While he welcomed the Swiss efforts to advance discussions on the subject, he was cautious
not to make unequivocal commitments on financing. Even though his government had no intention
of reducing its contribution, there were many considerations to take into account, including those of
overhead costs involved in the use of trust funds, as referred to in a note issued by the General Council
in document WT/BFA/W/3.

17. && The representative of Egypt said that there was merit in closely linking the guidelines on technical
cooperation to provisions for technical assistance in the various Uruguay Round agreements. The
guidelines should be more detailed in this respect. An annual programme and an annual assessment
would facilitate adaptation of technical cooperation activities to the needs of countries as well as
discussions with the Budget Committee. The Committee on Trade and Development should have a
stronger role in monitoring the guidelines and in ensuring follow-up of programmes. Since the private
sector was one of the main users and beneficiaries of technical assistance in learning about the WTO
agreements it was important to reinforce the sector's institutional and human capacities. She asked
a clarification on ways to increase the participation of recipient countries in WTO negotiations and
deliberations. Activities financed from the regular WTO budget should not be based on a hierarchy
of needs. Any programme based on such a selective approach should be financed from extra budgetary
sources.

18. && The representative of Thailand, speaking on behalf of ASEAN countries, said that they supported
the initiative of having regional trade policy courses and would welcome more information on it. He
inquired how the practical training programmes, including internships in the WTO Secretariat and Geneva
based Missions would be carried out. He agreed with the time-framework for reviews. ASEAN would
like more information on the Global Fund and would explore the idea of cost-sharing with WTO.
He accepted that priority be given to least-developed countries, although this should not preclude
priorities in specific areas of particular interest to developing countries. Commenting on the check-list,
he suggested that a shorter paper would more readily catch the attention of Ministers.

19.&& The representative of the European Communities said that the guidelines should be based on
basic principles and not go beyond matters falling within the competence of the WTO. WTO assistance
should not only relate to the implementation of Uruguay Round obligations, but should also assist
developing countries in making better use of the provisions in the various agreements with a view to
increasing their participation in the multilateral trading system. Coordination with other institutions
providing technical assistance was necessary, as it could prevent duplication of functions and improve
efficiency. His delegation would reflect further on the Swiss proposal for a global fund. In that context
he recalled that the European Communities had made a extra-budgetary contribution. Determining
the needs for assistance was an immediate priority. His delegation was of the view that essential activities
should be financed from the regular budget of the WTO. Technical assistance should be limited to
the government sector in areas such as drafting of legislation and compliance with notification obligations.
The involvement of private sector professional organisations would, for instance, be useful when
explaining the results of the Uruguay Round. He had doubts about a role for the WTO in setting up
acentral inventory of programmes, since coordination effectively resulted from contacts between different
agencies. There was merit in exploring possibilities of extending the WTO technical assistance activities
to acceding governments.

20. &&The representative of Madagascar said that, while the extensive use of information technology
was anticipated in the check-list, it should be borne in mind that many developing countries, especially
those in Africa, had very little knowledge of information technology and the use of sophisticated
equipment. Unless this issue was addressed, the guidelines risked being of limited relevance to a majority
of developing countries. He had taken note of the document issued by the ITC on its role in the area
of technical assistance in particular with respect to the private sector. The WTO had a more appropriate
role to play in reinforcing skills and capacities in the public sector. Technical assistance programmes
should be tailor-made to meet the requirements identified by each country. Active involvement of
beneficiaries in identifying needs should not only assist donors in identifying the most appropriate use
of funds, but should also facilitate the raising of extra-budgetary contributions. Funding from regular
budget sources should be allocated to priority areas identified in the check-list.

21. && The representative of Tanzania noted that the needs of least-developed countries were such
that they were receiving assistance not only from developed but also from other developing countries.
While he recognized the interests of other developing countries, realities had to be recognised in
determining priorities for technical cooperation activities. He accepted the overall structure of the
check-list, although he would regret any interpretation which would exclude the WTO from providing
technical assistance to least-developed countries to develop, strengthen and diversify their production
and export bases, as laid down in the Ministerial Decision on Least-Developed Countries, since a
restrictive interpretation of the mandate of the WTO would not adequately address the need for capacity
building. He suggested that in certain cases the WTO needed to play a proactive role. Seminars and
training relating to compliance alone did not relate to fundamental development problems. Even if
capacity building would be perceived as exceeding the WTO mandate and its competence, little result
would be attained without it.

22.&& The representative of Venezuela requested clarification on whether the information technology
envisaged in the check-list was destined for developing countries. It should be borne in mind that a
majority of these countries lacked the requisite know-how to set up advanced systems such as the Internet.
She welcomed a close coordination of activities with UNCTAD, ITC and WIPO. There was a role
for the ITC in providing technical cooperation to the private-sector in administering WTO agreements.
Referring to the comment made by the representative of Tanzania on the merits of assistance provided
by other developing countries, she said that such assistance would permit the best use of the limited
resources. She recognized the merits of, and would welcome additional information on, a Global Fund
as suggested by the delegation of Switzerland; such initiatives enabled an exchange of views and a
sharing of knowledge, and consequently paved the way for an expansion of the scope of cooperation
programmes. She also wondered how funding could be secured for the provision of technical assistance
to countries involved in accession negotiations.

23. && The representative of Peru said that the check-list on guidelines for WTO technical cooperation
should reflect a certain flexibility as well as the need for demand-driven technical cooperation. Links
with the private sector already existed in the framework of technical assistance programmes, and this
should be recorded in the check-list. He agreed with the representative of India that technical assistance
should be provided to enhance a countries’ research capabilities. A specific reference should be included
to the role of the Committee on Trade and Development in monitoring the execution of programmes
on a biennial basis. He regretted that the document did not specify that all developing countries would
be recipients of technical assistance. He did not agree with the representative of Venezuela that the
check-list should make reference to South/South cooperation. He said that even programmes financed
from extra-budgetary sources should conform to the guidelines contained in the check-list and be
consistent with the overall programme. He supported the structure of the check-list.

24. && The representative of Senegal welcomed the emphasis put onreinforcing human and institutional
capacities in both the public and private sector as listed as one of the principles and objectives in the
check-list. She was pleased that priorities would be identified, and programmes put into operation
with the close cooperation of beneficiaries. She suggested to include the preparation of model legislation
in the operational directives. While specific mention of reinforcing export capacities to support national
development strategies might seem redundant, it was a highly visible objective which had an overriding
importance. Emphasis should be put on the use of local expertise and she suggested that local experts
be put on rosters and receive relevant WTO documentation. Maintaining lines of communication with
beneficiaries was vital for the evaluation of the effectiveness of programmes and the necessary follow-up.
She agreed with the Swiss suggestion that the share of the budget allocated for technical assistance
should be at least the same as the present level. She questioned statements which raised expectations
beyond the range of available resources. Even if there were certain elements which would be targeted
to groups of countries, national country programmes remained imperative.

25.  && The representative of Australia said that the Committee should identify measurable targets against
which it could monitor and evaluate WTO technical cooperation activities. Her delegation was of the
view that this could be done on the basis of replies by beneficiaries to the Questionnaire soliciting
Member's assessment of their needs for technical assistance. It was prepared to accept biennial planning
and reviews as it saw merit in a longer-term focus. A concise check-list could serve not only as a
basis for further consideration and elaboration in the Committee, but also as a basis for a strong and
clear statement on WTO technical assistance to the Singapore Ministerial Meeting.

26. && The representative of Uganda said that without practical measures for technical assistance, the
marginalisation of the least-developed countries would persist. Assistance by the WTO should make
a demonstrable contribution to export diversification, and further the integration of least-developed
countries into the multilateral trading system. He stressed the importance of the private sector in
developing countries, and welcomed efforts to extend WTO technical cooperation activities to it. Core
technical assistance activities should be funded by the regular budget which should keep pace with
any expansion of such activities. Evaluation enabled the insertion of necessary improvements in future
programmes. He hoped that the WTO would continue to give priority to African countries in its technical
assistance programme.

27.&& The representative of Cote d'Ivoire said that seminars conducted in the beneficiary country
enabled participation of representatives from all areas of the administration concerned with different
WTO agreements. She welcomed additional information on the purpose of specialized advisory services.
A national report from the body responsible for monitoring technical assistance could take stock, make
suggestions and recommendations so that the programme could be redesigned to take account of peculiar
circumstances. By giving priority to Africa, the WTO was in line with the international community:
improved performance by Africa would yield a dividend to the international community.

28.&& The representative of Pakistan said that while he did not dispute the fact that least-developed
countries had been marginalized, and that they should be given priority in any technical cooperation
programme, it should also be recognized that the demands arising from WTO agreements had
marginalized low-income developing countries as well.

29. && The representative of Egypt agreed with the main thrust of the Swiss paper and said that legal
assistance in the implementation of the Uruguay Round commitments was a priority as was an
intensification of the efforts to enhance the legal expertise necessary for the WTO dispute settlement
process. She could not agree to the suggestion in the Swiss non-paper that technical assistance be
extended to countries other than developing countries. The Committee on Trade and Development
had a responsibility to monitor provisions relating to technical assistance in the various Uruguay Round
agreements and to assess the degree of their implementation. Provisions relating to technical assistance
in these agreements had been negotiated by the developing countries with a view to achieving a balance
of rights and obligations in the WTO. She suggested that guidelines to the Ministers be presented in
the form of an executive summary. The Committee could address them at subsequent meetings. The
Chairman said that he intended to hold further discussions on modalities to monitor provisions relating
to technical assistance after the Singapore Ministerial.

30.&& The representative of Switzerland welcomed the comments on his delegation's non-paper. He
emphasised the need for precision in the guidelines in anticipation of the implementation phase ahead.
His government was of the view that priority be given to training efforts, enhancing local training
capacities, reinforcing human and institutional capacities, and to the provision and use of on-line
information technology. Experience had shown that cost-sharing increased the cost-benefit ratio of
technical assistance, since it aligned the assistance given closer to the needs of recipients. While the
guidelines on technical assistance could be extended to assistance given to countries-in-transition, this
did not prejudge funding. In case a trust fund was set up, it could also be used to fund assistance
to acceding governments. He drew attention to the priority given in the Swiss non-paper to legal
assistance to implement the Uruguay Round agreements and to the training of officials in WTO matters,
and saw no reason why such assistance could not be extended to non-members.

31.&& As requested by the representative of Norway, a representative of the Secretariat said that an
amount in the range of CHF 950,000 had been allocated in the recent past for the training activities
of the WTO. The figure sometimes went beyond CHF 1,000,000 depending on whether trade policy
courses were provided in the Spanish language, where the additional costs reflected interpretation
services. Around CHF 700,000 was also earmarked each year for seminars and technical assistance
missions. He further recalled that two extra-budgetary contributions were made this year by Norway
and by the European Communities.

32);&& The Chairman clarified that, while the Committee on Trade and Development was not responsible
for the allocation of resources for WTO's technical cooperation activities, it had the capacity to influence
the disbursement of these funds. Commenting on several points made by delegations in the discussion
he said that, while the WTO would best serve in the areas of its competence, the need to do so in close
cooperation with other relevant instances, as was recognised in the check-list, would result in broader
development efforts including those related to capacity building. In response to the statement by the
representative from Cote d'Ivoire, he said that a national report would be part of the follow-up to the
Questionnaire. Turning to the various comments made on countries-in-transition, he said that these
countries were, in fact, beneficiaries of technical assistance provided by the WTO. However, the
Committee on Trade and Development addressed the issue of assistance to developing countries. He
would not want to dilute the priority to least-developed countries and countries in Africa. In response
to acomment from the representative of Venezuela on information technology he said that, while the
WTO was not in a position to provide finance for the purchase of technical equipment to assist countries
in working with information technology, ongoing discussions were being held with international
organizations and financial institutions with the capacity to provide the necessary funding. Initially
the technology could be made available on a regional basis. He proposed to submit a revised version
of the check-list for consideration by the Committee at it's September meeting, based on the outcome
of today's discussion and comments received from delegations. He suggested that the Committee take
note of the statements made and invited written comments or suggestions on the check-list from
delegations.

33. The Committee so agreed.

D. Other Business
34.&& The Chairman said that based of the outline agreed at the Committee's June meeting, the
Secretariat was preparing the study on the participation of developing counties in world trade and that
he intended to circulate it before the summer break. He hoped that this study would serve as the basis
for discussions at the Committee's September meeting. He suggested that the agenda of the September
meeting would also include discussions on the implementation of Uruguay Round commitments and
on guidelines for technical cooperation. The Chairman reminded delegations that the Sub-Committee
on Least-Developed Countries would meet on 13 September to discuss measures which could assist
their integration into the multilateral trading system. He proposed that these measures be forwarded
to Ministers for their consideration at Singapore. He planned to develop, in consultation with Members,
a comprehensive and integrated action plan to improve the commercial situation facing least-developed
countries. He would also attempt to identify ways to assist least-developed countries which were seeking
accession to WTO. The dialogue with other international institutions, which had started at the seventh
session would be continued at the Committee's meeting planned for 23 September, when the Chairman
of the Joint IMF/World Bank Development Committee, who was also the Finance Minister of Morocco,
would address the Committee on Trade and Development. The Director-General of the WTO also
intended to be present at that meeting. He also noted that he hoped to use the Fund created by Norway
to finance the travel to Geneva of representatives of least-developed countries who were based in other
European cities. The purpose of this initiative was to encourage a high level participation by least-
developed countries in the forthcoming meeting of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries,
where the action plan to increase their participation in the multilateral trading system would be
considered. Their participation in the meeting would also give them greater exposure to the WTO
and to the work being undertaken by the Committee on Trade and Development. A series of briefings
on the WTO would be organized by the Secretariat at that occasion.
