

Committee on Trade and Development
Twentieth Session

NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 23 APRIL 1998

&&  Chairman: H.E. Mr. I. A. Chowdhury (Bangladesh)

A. Adoption of the Agenda

1.&&  The Committee adopted the agenda contained in WTO/AIR/813, with, under "Other
Business", the request by UNDP for observer status in the Committee on Trade and Development.

B. Election of Officers: Chairperson of the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries

2. &&  The Chairman said that the rules of procedure of the Committee on Trade and Development
stipulated that it should elect a Chairperson for the Sub-Committee on Least-Developed Countries
among the representatives of tts Members. Accordingly, he had held informal consultations on the
issue with a number of delegations. Those consultations had resulted in a consensus around the
nomination of Ambassador Hans Henrik Bruun from Denmark for that office. He therefore suggested
that the Committee approved his nomination as Chairman of the Sub-Committee.

3. Tt was so agreed.

C. Other Business
- Request for Observer status by the United Nations Development Programme

4.&&  The Chairman said that in a communication to the Director-General, dated 23 March 1998,
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) had requested observer status in the Committee
on Trade and Development. The communication had been circulated to delegations in document
WT/COMTD/W/42 dated 14 April 1998. UNDP already had observer status in the Committee on
Trade and Environment, and was one of the co-organizers of the High-Level Meeting on Least-
Developed Countries and was one of the six partners to the Integrated Framework for Trade-Related
Technical Assistance to the Least-Developed Countries which had been endorsed by the Executive
Board of UNDP. In that context, UNDP, in close collaboration with the other five agencies,
continued to play a very active role in the follow-up actions to the High-Level Meeting in the area of
designing and implementing trade-related technical assistance. He proposed that the Committee
responded favourably to UNDP's request for observer status in the Committee on Trade and
Development.

5. &&  Tt was so agreed.
