WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/67
31 January 2008


(08-0454)


Committee on Trade and Development
Sixty-Seventh Session


NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 4 DECEMBER 2007

Chairman:  H.E. Mr. Shree B.C. Servansing (Mauritius)

 TOC \o "1-5" \h \z \u  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381184" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC189381184 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381185" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC189381185 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc189381186" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc189381186 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc189381187" (ii)	Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement	 PAGEREF _Toc189381187 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381188" C.	declining terms of trade for primary commodities, and its implication to trade and development of primary commodity exporting countries	 PAGEREF _TOC189381188 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381189" -	presentation by nestlé	 PAGEREF _TOC189381189 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381190" D.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC189381190 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381191" -	communication from brazil on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381191 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381192" -	communication from china on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.2)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381192 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381193" -	communication from india on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381193 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381194" -	communication from pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381194 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381195" -	communication from the european communities – responses to questions submitted by brazil, china, india and pakistan on the revised generalized system of preferences scheme of the european communities (WT/COMTD/57/Add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381195 \H 6
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381196" -	communication from the united states on the notification by china of the amendment to the first agreement on trade negotiations among developing member countries of the economic and social commission for asia and the pacific (bangkok agreement) (WT/COMTD/62/Add.1)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381196 \H 7
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381197" -	generalized system of preferences – notification by the united states (WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.5)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381197 \H 9
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381198" -	procedures in the ctd to consider newly-notified regional trade agreements – statement by the chairman	 PAGEREF _TOC189381198 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381199" E.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements (WT/L/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381199 \H 10
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381200" F.	paragraph 51 of the doha declaration on identifying and debating developmental aspects of the negotiations, in order to help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected (WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381200 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381201" G.	annual review of the implementation of the hong kong decision on duty-free and quota-free market access for least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC189381201 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381202" H.	participation of developing countries in the multilateral trading system (WT/COMTD/W/162)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381202 \H 12
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381203" I.	draft annual report 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/163)	 PAGEREF _TOC189381203 \H 14
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC189381204" J.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC189381204 \H 15


ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 67th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3121/Rev.1 issued on 29 November 2007. 
The agenda was adopted.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that at previous sessions of the CTD, Members agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Common Fund for Commodities (CFC), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of the requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Développement
&& The Chairman said that at previous meetings, the Committee had had before it a number of requests for observer status.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.  
It was so agreed.
DECLINING TERMS OF TRADE FOR PRIMARY COMMODITIES, AND ITS IMPLICATION TO TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRIMARY COMMODITY EXPORTING COUNTRIES
	-	PRESENTATION BY NESTLÉ
&& The Chairman recalled that the Committee had agreed at its 64th Session that the Secretariat would explore the possibility of inviting a relevant private sector organization to make a presentation to the CTD.  In this regard, he had informed the Committee at its 65th Session that the Secretariat had established contact with a number of private sector organizations.  He was now pleased to inform Members that Nestlé – one of the organizations the Secretariat had established contact with – had agreed to make a presentation on its work and experiences with commodities.  He introduced Mr. Herbert Oberhänsli, Assistant Vice President and Head of Economics & International Relations at Nestlé.
&& The representative of Nestlé said that the origins of Nestlé could be traced back to 1866.  Switzerland at the time was the poorest country in Europe, with the cheapest labour and an infant mortality rate of 30 per cent – a figure well above the current mortality rates in the poorest developing countries.  American investment in Switzerland in that year led to the establishment of the company, which initially focused on milk products.  Thanks to relatively low levels of protectionism in neighboring European countries, the company was able to export much of its output.  Soon after, the company began investing in other countries.  The first investment in a developing country was in Brazil in 1922, which served as the link to Nestlé's diversification into coffee products.  At present, Nestlé purchased between 12 to 14 per cent of world coffee production, and the same percentage of world cocoa production.  The company also purchased about 2 per cent of worldwide milk production.  He informed the Committee that Nestlé was working with 310,000 farmers across the world, who supplied the company with milk.  The biggest suppliers were in Pakistan and India, where about 100,000 farmers were linked to the company. 
He said that the company was continuously exploring ways to improve quality for the consumer, which also helped to improve the outlook for farmers.  One of the initiatives of the company was to pay farmers more for milk with a lower bacteriological status.  A team from Nestlé was assisting farmers to increase the quality of their milk in this regard.  In the area of cocoa production, he cited Nestlé's "Chocolat Dégustation" as an example of a high-quality product.  Another example of a high-quality Nestlé product was "Nespresso", which was roasted and ground coffee placed in a sealed capsule.  He explained that in order to be able to differentiate the taste of coffee, it was firstly necessary to help farmers improve the quality of their output.  With appropriate assistance, farmers could charge a higher price for their better quality output.  He said that it was also necessary for Nestlé to improve its industrial processing of the farmers' output.  In this regard, he emphasized the complexity of coffee as a substance.  Nestlé had found that roasted coffee contained over 600 different flavours. It was, therefore, important to stop thinking of coffee simply as a commodity.  There was still a huge potential to develop differentiated coffee products and bring new and innovative forms of coffee to markets worldwide.  He acknowledged, however, that trade barriers of various kinds continued to hinder the movement of goods across borders.  He highlighted in particular the existence of certain types of non-tariff measures, including requirements relating to product standards.  
With regard to the current high prices of certain commodities, he believed that this situation could not last, at least partly because expected productivity increases would eventually be translated into price decreases.  He also believed that commodity price volatility would not lessen in the foreseeable future.  In this regard, he suggested that issues concerning earnings stabilization should be seriously considered at the global level.  He explained that in a situation where prices fell, the normal response in order to raise prices would be to reduce supply.  However, in poorer countries in need of income, supply was often increased, causing prices to fall even lower.  An earnings stabilization programme could help to stabilize prices in such circumstances.
He next turned to discuss water, which he suggested was perhaps the most valuable of all commodities.  He said that the rapid rise in water consumption for agricultural purposes that was being observed in some parts of the world was at least partly due to the heavy subsidization of water.  According to one estimate, complete liberalization of the water market would reduce water consumption for agriculture by about 10 per cent.  He also indicated that there were large areas of rain-fed agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa that were currently under-utilized, and suggested that, along with a decrease of water subsidies in some parts of the world, increased agricultural production in Sub-Saharan Africa could potentially open up trading opportunities for countries in that region.  He emphasized the need for care to be taken in the worldwide usage of water. 
In conclusion, he said that Nestlé was very much in favour of liberalizing the agricultural sector and agricultural trade.  The company also had little sympathy for heavily subsidized biofuel production, since high biofuel production was causing food prices to rise, with serious negative effects for consumers.  He believed that agricultural liberalization would provide more opportunities for differentiation between commodity-based products on the basis of quality. 
&& The Chairman opened the floor for questions and comments.
&& The representative of Pakistan asked whether the Nestlé representative could provide  information on the company's initiatives to increase the quality of various commodities, and how this impacted on farmers.
&& The representative of the European Communities said that imports of powdered milk had a number of positive effects for the importing country, including notably the greater availability of cheaper milk for consumers.  At the same time, he observed that in some cases the competition provided by imports of powdered milk could have a negative impact on local milk producers.  He asked whether Nestlé had addressed this issue.
&& The representative of Egypt asked the Nestlé representative for his views on the extent to which there was scope for farmers in developing countries to add value in their production. 
&& The representative of Cuba wondered whether the experiences of a company such as Nestlé were useful for the CTD's discussion on commodities, in particular since these experiences were extremely difficult to reproduce in developing countries.  He suggested that it might be more useful for the CTD to hear from companies with more relevant experience.  With regard to the Nestlé representative's comments on infant mortality in developing countries today, he said that his delegation was very familiar with the actual figures.  He indicated that 500 children under five years of age died every day in Africa. In Latin America and the Caribbean, infant mortality was on average 27 per thousand born.  In some countries in that region, the infant mortality was more than 60 per thousand.  Referring to some well-known paradoxes highlighted in the literature on commodities, he observed that many cocoa producers in Africa did not even know what a bar of chocolate looked like.  Furthermore, while producers of coffee were suffering due to low prices on global markets, a cup of coffee in industrialized countries remained relatively highly priced.  He remarked that it was mainly the enterprises that processed and packaged commodity-based products that were gaining, and asked what could be done to help farmers under these circumstances.
&& The Chairman said that he had informed the Committee at its 65th Session of the companies that the Secretariat had established contact with.  Suggestions from Members of other companies that the CTD could possibly hear from were welcome.  He asked whether the Nestlé representative could elaborate on his views concerning the future direction of commodity prices, particularly in light of the current international focus on the environment and the need for clean energy sources.  
&& The representative of Nestlé said that there were a number of factors that could impact on the prices of commodities.  The extent of subsidization of any particular commodity was one important factor.  The increasing prosperity of some developing countries, which translated into higher demand for commodities, was another factor, as were issues surrounding productivity.  He also referred to his earlier comments regarding biofuels, and emphasized that a true environmental approach must take a holistic view.  For example, Nestlé considered that the issues surrounding water usage had not as yet been fully addressed at the international level.  With regard to the comments made by the representative of Cuba, he explained that the main message he had wanted to get across in quoting an infant mortality figure for Switzerland was that the country had been very poor in the 1860s, and had benefited from investment and from open markets in neighboring countries.  He agreed with the representative of Cuba that it was difficult to replicate Nestlé's initiatives, since the company always tried to do things differently.  This did not, however, mean that others could not benefit from opportunities in the global food market.  There was always place for new ideas and new ways of presenting products to consumers.
He next addressed the question of what the private sector could do to help farmers in developing countries.  He said that it was firstly important to invest in the countries concerned and to buy the products of the local farmers.  Helping farmers increase their productivity and the quality of their products was another important aspect.  It was along these lines that Nestlé and other private sector institutions could contribute.  Nestlé had factories in about 80 countries worldwide, and its agricultural advisors were in direct contact with farmers.  He believed that there was scope for farmers to increase value in their production, but suggested that farmers would likely only benefit from this if there was recognition from consumers of that added value.  He informed the Committee that Nestlé was now producing more than 50 per cent of basic soluble coffee in developing countries.  This was then exported in bulk to various destinations and blended according to local tastes.  He noted that tariff escalation remained an issue in this regard, and that the elimination of tariff escalation would allow more production to take place in developing countries.  On the subject of initiatives by Nestlé to increase quality, he referred to the examples he had provided earlier concerning milk and coffee production, and added that while the final goal of quality improvement was to satisfy consumers, both Nestlé and the farmers could benefit in the process.  Finally, on the question from the EC representative, he said he agreed that imports of powdered milk could negatively impact local producers.  While Nestlé had set up milk factories for local production and consumption in several countries, he explained that it was not possible to establish a factory if the local market was too small. Generally, however, it was estimated that only about 10 per cent of Nestlé's finished products crossed borders.  
&& The Committee took note of the presentation by Nestlé, and of all interventions.
&& The Chairman said that he wished to gain a better idea from Members as to how the CTD  could continue to add value in its discussion on commodities.  He proposed to consult informally with some delegations, and report back to the Committee at its next meeting.
It was so agreed.  
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
&&-	COMMUNICATION FROM BRAZIL ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.1)
&&-	COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.2)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM INDIA ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.3)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.4)
&& -	COMMUNICATION FROM THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES – RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND PAKISTAN ON THE REVISED GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES SCHEME OF THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES (WT/COMTD/57/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman recalled that the EC had notified its revised Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme at the 57th Session of the CTD.  Communications raising questions on the EC's revised GSP scheme had been received from Brazil, China, India and Pakistan and were circulated in documents WT/COMTD/57/Add.1 to Add.4, respectively.  The EC's responses to the questions were circulated in document WT/COMTD/57/Add.5.  It had been agreed at the last CTD meeting that he would continue with his informal consultations on this matter and would report back to the Committee.  In this regard, he reported that his consultations had allowed some progress to be made on the matter, but it also appeared that more consultations, and more time, would be required before this item could be taken off the CTD's agenda.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor. 
&& The representative of Brazil said that the relevant authorities in Brazil were still in the process of reviewing the information that had been provided by the EC.  A preliminary consideration of the information had, however, indicated that it did not respond to Brazil's needs.  He requested that this item remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting. 
&& The representative of Pakistan said that her delegation was still waiting for responses from the EC to the second set of questions from Pakistan that had been submitted in November 2006.  Her delegation would be in a better position to consider how to move forward on this matter once the responses were provided.  
&& The representative of the European Communities said that his delegation was in the process of finalizing its responses to the second set of questions from Pakistan.  He also indicated that his delegation had done all it could to address the concerns raised by Brazil, and had already provided what it believed were satisfactory responses.   
&& The Chairman said that he would continue with his informal consultations, and would report back to the CTD at the next meeting. The item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.  
It was so agreed.
-	COMMUNICATION FROM THE UNITED STATES ON THE NOTIFICATION BY CHINA OF THE AMENDMENT TO THE FIRST AGREEMENT ON TRADE NEGOTIATIONS AMONG DEVELOPING MEMBER COUNTRIES OF THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMISSION FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC (BANGKOK AGREEMENT) (WT/COMTD/62/ADD.1)
&& The Chairman recalled that China, on behalf of the Participating States of the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), had introduced a notification at the 65th Session of the CTD concerning the Amendment to the First Agreement on Trade Negotiations Among Developing Members Countries of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (Bangkok Agreement).  A communication from the United States raising questions on the notification had subsequently been circulated in document WT/COMTD/62/Add.1.  He invited the US representative to introduce the communication.   
&& The representative of the United States thanked the parties to the agreement for the information that had been provided on APTA.  She welcomed the notification and the opportunity to discuss the amendments to the agreement.  She said that her delegation had submitted questions on APTA in order to enable a meaningful discussion of the agreement.  Her delegation sought clarification on the coverage and margins of preferences, among other issues.  She requested that this item remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting, pending replies from the parties to the agreement.  Her delegation trusted that the replies would be circulated as a CTD document.
&& The representative of China, on behalf of the Participating States of APTA, said that the documents concerning the notification had been circulated in July 2007, but that no WTO Member had made comments on the notification until its formal consideration by the CTD at the 65th Session.  At that meeting, the US delegation had indicated that it would submit written questions on the notification.  He, however, observed that the questions from the US had only been received five working days before the present meeting.  Therefore, while the Participating States of APTA thanked the US for the questions – which aimed at clarifying some of the provisions of the agreement – he said that only preliminary responses could be provided at the present meeting.  Written answers would follow.
In response to the question by the US concerning the authority under which the Bangkok Agreement was originally notified, he said that the Bangkok Agreement was notified to the GATT on 2 November 1976, in line with the obligations of Contracting Parties under Part IV of GATT, in particular the principles and objectives contained in Article XXXVI and the commitments reflected in Article XXXVII:4.  A Decision – contained in document L/4653 – was taken in this regard on 14 March 1978.  The agreement was subsequently considered as notified under the Enabling Clause of 1979, which had a provision similar to Article XXXVII:4 of GATT.  With regard to the question concerning the Participating States' rationale for notifying APTA under the Enabling Clause – in particular in light of the notification of the Korea-Chile Free Trade Agreement (FTA) under GATT Article XXIV – he said that WTO rules did not prevent a developing country from notifying an agreement under Article XXIV.  He indicated that the representative of Korea would shortly provide a more detailed response on this point.
He next turned to the questions concerning the percentage of trade and tariff lines that were covered by the new consolidated tariff list, and the actual utilization rates for APTA preferences.  He explained that the concessions agreed under the new consolidated list had only been effective since 1 September 2006, and that the short time that had elapsed since then was insufficient to obtain a definitive picture of the implementation of the concessions.  APTA Participating States were still consulting and coordinating on issues concerning trade coverage and utilization rates, and data were not available at present for all Participating States.  In response to the question concerning the average margin of preference (MOP) provided by APTA members under the agreement, he said that Bangladesh's average MOP on its concessions after the conclusion of the Third Round of negotiations was 14.1 per cent.  For the other Participating States – China, India, Korea and Sri Lanka – the average MOP on general concessions were 26.7 per cent, 23.9 per cent, 35.4 per cent and 14 per cent respectively.  The average MOP on the special concessions offered by these four countries to LDC Participating States were 77.9 per cent, 39.7 per cent, 64.6 per cent and 12 per cent respectively.  The average MOP for all Participating States on general concessions was 26.8 per cent, while the average MOP for Participating States' special concessions to LDCs was 58.8 percent.     
With regard to the questions concerning the preservation of preference margins, he said that APTA Ministers had agreed at the second meeting of the APTA Ministerial Council to launch the Fourth Round of negotiations on tariff reduction.  However, APTA Participating States would not be required to renegotiate concessions in the event of a successful completion of the Doha Round, as the tariff concessions were offered on a MOP basis to the applied tariff rate on the date of importation.  There was, therefore, no linkage between these concessions and the outcome of the Doha Round.  He added that APTA Participating States were not required to renegotiate their concessions to one another when any of the parties entered into other reciprocal preferential arrangements.  Article 14 of the agreement made specific reference to this point.
On the question concerning the extent to which concessions provided in the revised agreement could overlap with concessions provided through other reciprocal preferential arrangements involving APTA parties, he said that each agreement was different, and the commitments provided under each were independent.  With regard to the questions concerning non‑tariff barriers, he confirmed that no initiatives had been taken up to now within the APTA framework to negotiate non-tariff measures.  No lists of such measures had, therefore, been exchanged by APTA Participating States.  Moving on to the questions concerning provisions for new APTA members, he referred to Article 30 of the agreement, which stated that APTA was open for accession by any developing country member of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP).  The agreement did not contain provisions for accession by other developing countries outside the ESCAP region.  He also informed the Committee that no countries were currently in the process of accession, though a number – approximately ten, according to information provided by ESCAP – had demonstrated interest in this regard.  Finally, he expressed his hope that the information provided would help WTO Members to better understand APTA, and that the CTD's consideration of the notification could be concluded soon.
&& The representative of Korea highlighted that APTA was not a new agreement.  Rather, it was an amendment to the existing Bangkok Agreement, which had already been recognized by WTO Members as a regional trade agreement (RTA) notified under the Enabling Clause.  As an original member of the Bangkok Agreement, Korea had been participating in the agreement since its establishment in 1976.  It was the understanding of his delegation that the amendment of the agreement did not require any change in the status of its member countries.  He added that there was no provision in the WTO Agreements that prevented developing country Members of the WTO from using either GATT Article XXIV or the Enabling Clause as the basis for their RTA notifications.  His delegation, therefore, did not see any legal conflict in notifying the Korea-Chile FTA under GATT Article XXIV while maintaining membership in APTA.  If Members sought any further clarification, his delegation was willing to provide its responses in written form.
&& The Chairman inquired whether the US delegation was satisfied with the responses that had been provided by China and Korea, or whether it would like the item to remain on the CTD's agenda until written responses were submitted.   
&& The representative of the United States expressed her appreciation for the responses that had been provided by China and Korea.  She requested that the item remain on the CTD's agenda until her delegation had time to consider the responses in written form.  In view of the level of transparency that had been demonstrated by the notifying Members, she believed that the CTD's consideration of the APTA notification could be completed quickly.    
&& The Chairman proposed that this item remain on the agenda for the next CTD meeting, pending receipt of written responses from the APTA Participating States.  
It was so agreed.
-	GENERALIZED SYSTEM OF PREFERENCES – NOTIFICATION BY THE UNITED STATES (WT/COMTD/N/1/ADD.5)
&& The Chairman said that the notification by the US concerning its GSP scheme was circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/1/Add.5.  He invited the US representative to introduce the communication.
&& The representative of the United States said that her delegation was pleased to have the opportunity to present its notification concerning the 2006 Annual Review of the US GSP programme, which had been completed in June 2007.  Efforts to foster the further integration of developing countries into the multilateral trading system were a vital part of US trade policy.  SEQ CHAPTER \h \r 1 US efforts spanned a number of fronts, including promoting broad-based multilateral trade reforms conducive to further integration, supporting integration of trade strategies into the development plans of national authorities, and providing significant amounts of capacity-building assistance.  A longstanding element in US efforts to increase developing country participation in the global trading system was the provision of duty-free access for products from beneficiary developing countries entering the US  market.  The US GSP programme, in operation since 1975, was a cornerstone of that effort. 
She said that the US GSP programme provided preferential duty-free treatment for approximately 3,400 products from the 131 currently designated beneficiary countries and territories.  As the statute did not allow less than full tariff reductions, duty-free benefits were the only preferential tariff treatment provided under the GSP programme.  An additional 1,400 articles received duty-free treatment when supplied by least-developed, beneficiary developing countries (LDBDCs).  There were 43 LDBDCs currently eligible for GSP benefits.  She also noted that a single, transparent rule-of-origin regime governed all US imports under the GSP.  In the 2006 review, the US granted waivers to the statutory "competitive need limitations" to ensure continued GSP duty-free benefits to certain products.  These were noted in Annex I and Annex II of the notification.  Annexes III and IV of the review identified those specific products from specific beneficiary countries for which GSP eligibility was terminated or revoked based on a determination that imports from those beneficiary countries could compete effectively in the US market.  The review also yielded decisions on products being redesignated as eligible for duty-free treatment under the GSP programme, which could be found in Annex V.  
She informed the Committee that the notification also provided the publicly accessible website where the results of the 2006 GSP Annual Review could be viewed.  She highlighted that US trade data at virtually any level of aggregation was freely available in easy-to-use formats. This enabled users to run their own customized queries on product and country specific trade – including utilization under preference programmes.  She closed by saying that while her delegation recognized the successes of the US GSP programme – which covered over US$32 billion in imports in 2006, an increase of 22 per cent over 2005 – it was also committed to continue working to improve the effectiveness of US efforts to integrate developing countries more fully into the global trading system.
&& The Committee took note of the notification by the US.
-	PROCEDURES IN THE CTD TO CONSIDER NEWLY-NOTIFIED REGIONAL TRADE AGREEMENTS – STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN
&& The Chairman said that the General Council had adopted on 14 December 2006 a decision – contained in document WT/L/671 – establishing, on a provisional basis, a "Transparency Mechanism for Regional Trade Agreements".  The CTD had been instructed to implement the Transparency Mechanism for agreements falling under paragraph 2(c) of the Enabling Clause.  In this regard, he informed the Committee that a submission concerning a newly-notified RTA under the Enabling Clause had been received.  The notification related to the agreement between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Republic of Turkey.  It had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/23, using the notification format that the CTD adopted at its 62nd Session.  This followed the procedure being used in the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA). 
He informed Members that the Secretariat would prepare a factual presentation of the Egypt‑Turkey RTA once the required data was received from the notifying Members. The RTA would be considered in dedicated session of the CTD, essentially following the same procedures used by the CRTA in its consideration of RTAs.  These included the requirement for Members to transmit written questions or comments at least six weeks before the meeting, and the distribution of these questions/comments – together with replies – at least three working days before the meeting.  The consideration of the RTA would be normally concluded in a period not exceeding one year after the date of notification, which in this case was 5 October 2007.  He also proposed that all future submissions concerning newly-notified RTAs under the Enabling Clause be considered by the CTD following these procedures.
It was so agreed.  	
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS (WT/L/672)
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements" – contained in document WT/L/672 – invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  At its July 2007 meeting, the Council had extended the deadline to its December 2007 meeting.  He recalled that the Committee at its 65th Session had considered a "non-paper" by the proponents – Brazil and India – which was circulated in document JOB(07)/142.  A number of Members had made comments on various aspects of the non-paper, and he had suggested that the proponents start thinking about revising and updating its content.  He informed the Committee that since that meeting, he had consulted informally with a number of Members on the basis of a more complete draft text prepared by Brazil and India.  While this had allowed important progress to be made on the matter, he  believed that more time and more work – in both formal and informal settings – would be required before the CTD could come to a decision.  He inquired whether the proponents wished to take the floor at this point.
&& The representative of Brazil confirmed the accuracy of the Chairman's report on the status of the matter, and also agreed that more time was required before the CTD could come to a decision.  He requested that this item remain on the agenda for the CTD's next meeting.   
&& The representative of India associated himself with the intervention by Brazil.  His delegation looked forward to working with Members to establish an appropriate transparency mechanism in the WTO for the consideration of preferential trade arrangements.  
&& The Chairman said that he would need to report to the General Council at its December 2007 meeting on the status of the CTD's consideration of this matter.  He said that he would inform the Council of the important progress that had been made to date, and would essentially provide the Council with the same information that had been  provided to the Committee at the present meeting.  He proposed to also ask the Council to grant the CTD additional time – until July 2008 – to consider the matter and report back for appropriate action.  He said that he would also continue with his informal consultations in early 2008, and would open the matter up for discussion once again at the next formal meeting of the CTD.  The item would, therefore, remain on the CTD's agenda.
It was so agreed.
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED (WT/COMTD/W/143/REV.3)
&& The Chairman said that, under this agenda item, the Committee had since its 54th Session been undertaking a review of the developmental aspects of the negotiations based on a periodically updated background paper prepared by the Secretariat.  It had been agreed at the last meeting that discussion would continue under this agenda item at the present meeting, based on the third revision of the Secretariat paper, contained in document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.3.  He inquired whether any Member wished to take the floor.
No Member took the floor. 
&& The Chairman noted that no Member had taken the floor, which had also been the case at the last CTD meeting when this item was on the agenda.  He, therefore, proposed that the item be taken off the CTD's agenda for the time being.  It would be put back on the agenda upon request by any Member. 
It was so agreed.
ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE HONG KONG DECISION ON DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS FOR LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda for its earlier meetings in 2007.  Written communications from the US and Canada had been considered by the Committee.  He said that, at the present meeting, the CTD was to undertake its second annual review of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision, as mandated in Annex F of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration. 
&& The representative of Bangladesh expressed appreciation for the developed countries that had already provided DFQF market access to LDCs and fulfilled their obligations under the Hong Kong Decision.  The LDCs continued to be engaged with those countries on other relevant issues, including the simplification of rules of origin.  He also appreciated the willingness of some developing countries to provide DFQF market access to LDCs, and called on developing countries to provide further market access to LDCs.
He noted that some developed countries were currently involved in domestic procedures to ascertain their ability to implement the Hong Kong mandate, and expressed understanding that domestic procedures were complicated in all countries.  He said that the LDCs appreciated the sincere efforts made by the US Government in this regard.  He informed the Committee that, in reply to a request from the United States Trade Representative (USTR) for written comments on DFQF market access, the LDC Group in Geneva had submitted comments electronically in March 2007.  The USTR had then asked the United States International Trade Commission (USITC) to conduct a study and to provide advice to the USTR "as to the probable economic effect of providing DFQF treatment for imports of LDCs on (i) industries in the United States producing like or directly competitive products and (ii) consumers".  Following a separate notice for submission of comments, the LDC Group had made a submission to the USITC in April 2007.  He noted that the USITC had submitted the report to the USTR in August 2007, and that the report was still confidential.  && The LDCs were interested in learning of the content of the report. 
He referred to his recent meeting with the US Ambassador, and said that both sides were working together to find a way to operationalize the 97 per cent commitment.  He said that the US Ambassador had indicated that 97 per cent was the minimum benchmark, and could be extended to 100 per cent depending on the country and product.  It had also been agreed that the Hong Kong Decision should be implemented in such a way as to provide meaningful market access to all LDCs, as had been the intention of Ministers at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference.  He expressed the interest of the LDCs in general, and Bangladesh in particular, to engage more proactively with developed countries on the DFQF issue, particularly in light of the discussion that had taken place at the last informal meeting of the Trade Negotiations Committee.
&& The representative the United States said that the last communication by the US under the CTD's agenda item concerning the Hong Kong Decision contained the most recent information on US efforts to implement the Decision.  The US intended to implement the Decision with the results of the Doha Round.  
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
PARTICIPATION OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES IN THE MULTILATERAL TRADING SYSTEM (WT/COMTD/W/162)
&& The Chairman said that the CTD had a mandate to keep under continuous review the participation of developing country Members in the multilateral trading system.  He recalled that it had been agreed at the 65th Session that the CTD's discussion under this agenda item would take place at the present meeting, based on a background paper prepared by the Secretariat.  He invited the Secretariat to briefly introduce the paper, which had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/162.
&& The Chief Statistician said that the global economic recovery in recent years, in particular in the period from 2003 to 2006, was reflected in higher GDP growth for developing countries as a group, as well as in a strong trade performance.  The period was marked by higher prices for primary products, especially fuels and minerals, which was a driver for developing country merchandise exports.  At the same time, the higher prices also impacted positively on the demand for imports of primary products by developing countries.  This was not only due to the fact that many developing countries were net importers of fuels and minerals, but was also because the higher export revenues of fuel exporters increased their capacity to import.  With regard to manufactured exports, he observed that their continuing strong growth was most noticeable in Asia, and particularly in China.  He went on to say that the share of the five largest developing country exporters in world merchandise exports had increased between 2000 and 2006, while the share of the 50 smallest exporters had decreased over the same period. 
He informed the Committee that developing countries as a group had experienced a merchandise trade surplus in the period under analysis.  The trend towards an overall surplus in the merchandise trade balance of developing countries had been observed since 1999.  The trend could also be observed in each individual developing region.  The Middle East and Africa, which tended to specialize in oil and mineral exports, were at present showing the biggest trade surpluses. He observed, however, that the trade balance positions of individual developing countries differed depending on their export specialization.  For example, an oil exporter like the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had a trade surplus of 65 per cent of GDP in 2006, while Jordan registered a 44 per cent trade deficit. 
He said that services trade had grown less rapidly than goods trade in the period under analysis, due mainly to price factors.  He explained that services trade was less affected by cyclical changes in prices than some categories of goods.  He added that the share of developing countries in commercial services exports was less than their share in merchandise exports.  In particular, the share of developing countries in world merchandise exports presently stood at 36 per cent, while their share in services exports was 26 per cent.  Over the period under analysis, however, the share of developing countries in world commercial services exports had increased, with developing Asia registering the largest increase.  An increase in the export share of developing countries had also been observed for each identified category of commercial services.  He informed the Committee that Korea was the largest developing country exporter of transport services, while China was the largest exporter of travel services.  In the "other commercial services" category, India was the leading exporter, based mainly on its strength in software services and other business services.
He referred Members to the relevant tables in the Secretariat paper for information on the merchandise and services trade of particular countries.  He concluded by saying that while the last few years had been favourable to developing country exports, part of this positive trend was due to cyclical factors affecting primary products in particular.  There was a risk that an eventual downturn in the cycle could impact negatively on the participation of developing countries in global trade. 
&& The Chairman opened the floor for questions and comments. 
&& The representative of the European Communities expressed appreciation for the Secretariat paper, though observed that the necessity of limiting the analysis to only a few years might not always allow the full picture to emerge.  Structural changes, in particular, required a broader analysis.  He noted that the paper highlighted an increased participation of developing countries in world trade, which was a positive sign.  He also remarked that Africa – with only 9 per cent of exports remaining within the region in 2006 – was not very integrated in terms of trade flows. Contrasting the figures for Africa with those for developing Asia – where 37 per cent of exports remained within the region – he  emphasized the potential benefits for African countries that could arise from further regional integration.  He noted that LDC agricultural exports accounted for only 2 per cent of world agricultural trade.  He also observed that there was a concentration of LDC exports in three sectors, namely fuels and minerals, clothing and agriculture, which accounted respectively for 60 per cent, 16 per cent and 14 per cent of total LDC exports.  This concentration highlighted the need for these countries to diversify their exports, as well as the need for other trading nations to address the exporting concerns of LDCs.  He noted that rising fuel prices were a concern to several developing countries.  He also noted the potential of tourism as a driver of growth in developing countries.  He observed how many developing countries had moved away from traditional exports such as textiles and clothing, and into areas such as office and telecommunications equipment, which he believed was a positive development.  Finally, he remarked that the experiences of certain developing countries had shown that WTO membership could help developing countries in their efforts to increase their participation in world trade.  
&& The representative of Pakistan expressed concern that between 2000 and 2006 the export share of the 50 smallest trading nations had decreased.  She also inquired on the data sources for services trade used by the Secretariat, in particular since such data for developing countries were known to be relatively scarce.
&& The Chief Statistician said that the Secretariat would in the next version of the paper try to separate structural factors from cyclical factors, though this was not always easy to do.  On the issue of the participation of LDCs in agricultural trade, he said that the next review of market access for LDC products by the Sub-Committee on LDCs would focus on LDCs' agricultural trade.  With regard to the sources for data on trade in commercial services, he explained that the Secretariat mainly relied on figures for total exports and total imports from countries' balance of payments statistics.  While these figures gave a reasonable idea of the flows of services, he recognized that they did not provide the full picture.  Generally speaking, existing data on services trade were weaker than data on merchandise trade.  In this regard, the Secretariat was working closely with other international institutions in order to develop a more complete framework for the reporting of trade in services.
&& The representative of China said that the Secretariat paper described many positive aspects of the trade of developing countries, but provided very little description of the challenges faced by developing countries in the global trading system.  For example, developing countries had problems dealing with requirements relating to sanitary and phytosanitary measures and technical barriers to trade, and generally faced challenges in overcoming supply side constraints.  He suggested that a future version of the Secretariat paper could include a description of such issues in order to give a more comprehensive picture of the participation of developing countries in global trade.  
&& The Committee took note of the Secretariat paper and of all interventions.
DRAFT ANNUAL REPORT 2007 (WT/COMTD/W/163)
&& The Chairman said that the CTD's draft annual report for 2007 was contained in document WT/COMTD/W/163.  The document contained the annual reports of the CTD in Regular Session, the CTD in Dedicated Session and the Sub-Committee on LDCs, as well as the CTD's report of its work on Aid for Trade.  He observed that the draft report contained a number of square brackets relating to items under consideration at the present meeting, as well as the most recent meeting of the Dedicated Session on Small Economies.  As part of the process of adopting the report, the square brackets would be removed, and the discussion that took place at the present meeting would be appropriately reflected in the report.  He informed the Committee that the report, when adopted, would be forwarded to the General Council for review at its meeting of 18 December 2007.  He opened the floor for any comments on the draft report.
&& The representative of the European Communities suggested that paragraph 14 of the draft report, which concerned the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs, should include a reference to Japan's 2007 notification under the Enabling Clause of enhanced DFQF market access to LDCs.
&& The representative of China said that he wished to propose two revisions in paragraph 8 of the draft report.  He firstly pointed out that the notification concerning the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement had been made by China on behalf of the Participating States of APTA, and suggested that this should be appropriately reflected in paragraph 8.  Second, he observed that preliminary responses had been provided by China and Korea at the present meeting to the questions raised by the US on APTA.  He believed that this fact should also be reflected in the CTD's report.
&& The representative of Japan, with regard to the comment by the EC representative on paragraph 14 of the draft report, observed that Japan's notification of enhanced DFQF market access for LDCs was referred to in the section concerning notifications of market access for developing and least-developed countries.  He wondered, however, whether it would also be appropriate to refer to Japan's notification in the section concerning the Hong Kong Decision on DFQF market access for LDCs.
&& The Chairman said that the suggested amendments to the draft report would be incorporated in the CTD's final report.  He proposed that the Committee adopt the report with these amendments.
&& The Committee adopted its annual report for 2007.  
OTHER BUSINESS 
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned.

__________


 The report was issued as document WT/COMTD/64.

WT/COMTD/M/67 Page  PAGE 2



	WT/COMTD/M/67 	Page  PAGE 15



 

 

 

 



