WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION
RESTRICTED

WT/COMTD/M/80 
21 December 2010

(10-6846)


Committee on Trade and Development
Eightieth Session




NOTE ON THE MEETING OF 4 OCTOBER 2010

Chairman:  H. E. Mr. Erwidodo (Indonesia)



 TOC \O "1-5" \H \Z \U  HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604535" A.	adoption of the agenda	 PAGEREF _TOC280604535 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604536" B.	observers	 PAGEREF _TOC280604536 \H 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc280604537" (i)	Request for attendance of ad hoc observers	 PAGEREF _Toc280604537 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \l "_Toc280604538" (ii)	Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement	 PAGEREF _Toc280604538 \h 2
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604539" C.	notifications under the enabling clause	 PAGEREF _TOC280604539 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604540" - 	gulf cooperation council (gcc) notification of customs union – communication from china, egypt and india (wt/comtd/w/175)	 PAGEREF _TOC280604540 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604541" -	notification of the agreement on trade in goods between the association of southeast asian nations (asean) and korea	 PAGEREF _TOC280604541 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604542" -	notification of the comprehensive economic partnership agreement between india and korea (goods)	 PAGEREF _TOC280604542 \H 3
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604543" D.	decision on transparency for preferential trade arrangements	 PAGEREF _TOC280604543 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604544" -	general council decision of 14 december 2006 (wt/l/672)	 PAGEREF _TOC280604544 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604545" -	transparency mechanism for preferential trade arrangements - draft   proposal by brazil, china, india and the united states (job(08)/103/rev.3)	 PAGEREF _TOC280604545 \H 11
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604546" E.	review of steps taken to provide duty-free and quota-free market access to least-developed countries	 PAGEREF _TOC280604546 \H 13
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604547" F.	paragraph 51 of the doha declaration on identifying and debating developmental aspects of the negotiations, in order to help achieve the objective of having sustainable development appropriately reflected (wt/comtd/w/143/rev.4)	 PAGEREF _TOC280604547 \H 15
 HYPERLINK \L "_TOC280604548" G.	other business	 PAGEREF _TOC280604548 \H 17





ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
&& The Chairman said that the draft agenda for the 80th Session of the Committee on Trade and Development (CTD) was contained in document WTO/AIR/3616/Rev.1 circulated on 30 September 2010.  Drawing Members' attention to agenda item D concerning the Decision on Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements (PTAs), he said that important progress had been made on the negotiations concerning the Transparency Mechanism (TM) for PTAs.  This progress, which had been the outcome of a small-group informal consultation that had been held just one working day before the present meeting, had allowed the proponents – Brazil, China, India and the United States – to circulate a third revision of their draft proposal.  It was this third revision, circulated in document JOB(08)/103/Rev.3, that was the appropriate one for consideration under agenda item D, and not the previous version of the document – JOB(08)/103/Rev.2 – which appeared on the draft agenda for the 80th Session. 
The agenda was adopted.
OBSERVERS
Request for attendance of ad hoc observers
&& The Chairman recalled that, at previous sessions of the CTD, Members had agreed to invite a number of intergovernmental organizations on an ad hoc, meeting-by-meeting basis.  These included the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO), the Inter‑Arab Investment Guarantee Corporation, the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), the African Union (AU), the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the South Centre, the Pacific Islands Forum, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO).  He said that, following the decision taken at the previous meeting of the Committee, the organizations had been invited to the present meeting.  He proposed that the organizations be invited to the next formal meeting of the CTD.
It was so agreed.
Further consideration of requests for observer status by the League of Arab States, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie, the Common Fund for Commodities, the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries (OAPEC) and the Groupe de la Banque Africaine de Developpement
&& The Chairman said that the positions of delegations were on the record.  He said that if there was no change in positions to extend observer status to any of those applicants, then the Committee would take note and would revert to those requests at the next meeting.
It was so agreed. 
NOTIFICATIONS UNDER THE ENABLING CLAUSE
-	GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL (GCC) NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMS UNION – COMMUNICATION FROM CHINA, EGYPT AND INDIA (WT/COMTD/W/175)
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE AGREEMENT ON TRADE IN GOODS BETWEEN THE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN) AND KOREA
-	NOTIFICATION OF THE COMPREHENSIVE ECONOMIC PARTNERSHIP AGREEMENT BETWEEN INDIA AND KOREA (GOODS)
&& The Chairman said that he wished to provide Members with an update on the regional trade agreements (RTAs) notified under the Enabling Clause that were to be considered in the CTD's Dedicated Sessions on RTAs.  He recalled that he had previously informed Members of two notifications of RTAs under the Enabling Clause that had been made in 2010.  These notifications concerned the India-MERCOSUR Agreement and the India-Afghanistan Agreement.  With regard to the provision of the necessary data by the parties which would allow the Secretariat to prepare the factual presentations on these two agreements, he reported that the Secretariat had still not received complete data from the parties.  It was envisaged that the two agreements could be considered in a Dedicated Session of the CTD in 2011, though this would depend on when the Secretariat received the data.  He urged the concerned parties to provide the data as soon as possible.
With regard to the three RTAs involving non-WTO Members that had been previously notified under the Enabling Clause, he said that in line with the procedures of the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements (CRTA), the consideration of the Pacific Island Countries Trade Agreement (PICTA) and the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) would need to wait until all the parties had ratified them.  As for the India-Bhutan Agreement, no data had yet been received from the parties.  He once again urged the concerned parties to provide the data as soon as possible. 
Turning to more recent notifications of RTAs under the Enabling Clause, he said that the notification of the India-Nepal Agreement had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/34, while the notification of the Agreement between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and India had been circulated in document WT/COMTD/N/35.  The Secretariat had requested the parties to the India-Nepal Agreement to provide the data necessary to prepare the factual presentation by 20 December 2010.  As for the ASEAN-India Agreement, it was his understanding that the Agreement had not yet been ratified by all the parties.  A request for data would be sent once the Secretariat received confirmation that all the parties had ratified the Agreement.  In this regard, he urged the ASEAN countries to let the Secretariat know about the status of their ratification as soon as possible, so as to allow the Secretariat to begin the process of drafting the factual presentation.  He continued by saying that two other RTAs which had recently been notified under the Enabling Clause were the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement.  These notifications, along with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Customs Union notification, appeared as sub-items under the present agenda item.  He, therefore, proposed to move on to the three sub-items.
In the context of the GCC Customs Union notification, he recalled that divergent views had been expressed by delegations on how to proceed, given in particular that the Agreement had been notified under the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.  The informal consultations that he had held on this matter had been useful in allowing a better understanding of the positions of delegations.  However, he noted that the GCC Customs Union was no longer the only RTA that had been notified  under the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV.  For one thing, the goods component of the ASEAN-Korea Agreement had also been notified under both provisions.  In this case, ASEAN had notified the Agreement under the Enabling Clause in document WT/COMTD/N/33, while Korea had notified it under Article XXIV in document WT/REG287/N/1.  More recently, the goods component of the India-Korea Agreement had also been notified under both provisions, with Korea notifying under Article XXIV in document WT/REG286/N/1 and India notifying under the Enabling Clause in document WT/COMTD/N/36.  He concluded by noting that China, Egypt and India had submitted a communication articulating their concerns on dual notifications in the context of the GCC Customs Union notification.  This communication, circulated in document WT/COMTD/W/175, was titled "Systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the Gulf Cooperation Council Customs Union".  He invited the proponents to introduce their communication. 
&& The representative of India said that the issue concerning the notification of the GCC Customs Union had engaged the attention of Members in successive CTD meetings since May 2008.  He recalled that some developed Members had raised the issue of the GCC Customs Union notification under "Other Business" at the 69th, 70th, 71st and 72nd sessions of the CTD held between May and December 2008.  Subsequently, the sub-item "Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) notification of Customs Union" had been introduced at the request of a developed Member at the 73rd Session held in March 2009.  He also recalled that some developed Members had not favoured moving forward with the process of reviewing the GCC Customs Union in the CTD until further clarification had been sought on the legal justification for such a procedure.
Although discussions on possible ways forward had taken place between some Members, both bilaterally and plurilaterally, no option had yet been found in the CTD that was acceptable to all Members.  Nevertheless, discussions had been useful in highlighting concerns which were both systemic and specific to the GCC notification.  The systemic concerns impinged on the Enabling Clause, the mandate and Terms of Reference (TORs) of the CTD, and the TM for RTAs.  The specific concerns emanated not only from suggestions from some Members regarding the consideration of the GCC Customs Union in a certain procedural way, but also from the notification, re-notification and withdrawal of notifications, as well as efforts to deny developing countries the right to notify under the Enabling Clause.  What was sought was an early resolution of the issue so that the process of enhancing transparency for all RTAs could keep advancing.  
He said that the TM for RTAs, in its present form, did not provide procedures for RTAs with a dual notification.  Since the Chairman of the Negotiating Group on Rules (NGR) had planned to commence his work on the review of the TM for RTAs, which was under provisional application, he indicated that one option could be for Members to wait until the NGR completed its work.  However, in the interim, he believed that a more efficient option was for Members to decide in the CTD on how to deal with RTAs with a dual notification.  He clarified that the CTD's decision would be without prejudice to the final outcome of the NGR process of review of the TM for RTAs on transparency-related issues.  
He recalled that some delegations had suggested that the concerns voiced by a number of developing Members should be discussed in the NGR.  He noted in this regard that the NGR had a mandate on transparency.  The Doha Declaration, in paragraph 29, mandated negotiations aimed at "clarifying and improving disciplines and procedures under the existing WTO provisions applying to regional trade agreements".  Paragraph 29 further added that "The negotiations shall take into account the developmental aspects of regional trade agreements".  He cautioned that not all concerns raised in the communication from China, Egypt and India could be addressed in the NGR.  In addition, the issue had acquired added urgency since there had already been at least two other cases of dual notifications – those concerning the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement – which were a vindication of the systemic concerns that had been raised.  
He said that the communication under consideration represented a constructive effort to list some systemic and specific concerns that needed to be addressed in order to facilitate a resolution of the issue.  He added that the CTD Chairman had asserted at the 69th Session in May 2008 that the GCC Customs Union had been scheduled for factual consideration at a dedicated session of the CTD in October 2008.  Since no subsequent decision had been taken in the CTD to interrupt that process, it was clear as to where the consideration of the GCC Customs Union should take place.
&& The representative of Egypt recalled that during the informal consultations called by the CTD Chairman, his delegation had raised several systemic concerns about the dual notification of the GCC Customs Union, and had raised questions on the implications, both from a legal and a procedural standpoint.  However, he noted with regret that the discussions had not brought a resolution to the matter at hand.  They had only further validated the systemic concerns raised in connection to the GCC Customs Union and its dual notification.
He said that the joint submission by China, Egypt and India gave an account of the systemic and specific issues that needed to be discussed in the CTD when considering the GCC Agreement.  The systemic issues had been grouped into three broad categories, which addressed the legal and procedural implications arising from the GCC dual notification in the context of the Enabling Clause, the mandate and TORs of the CTD, and the TM for RTAs.  Another group of systemic issues with cross-cutting implications had also been listed in more detail in the submission. 
He indicated that the issue of "process" figured prominently in the context of the GCC Customs Union and had gained relevance in light of the developments surrounding the consideration of this RTA in the CTD in the past two years.  He pointed in particular to the concerns raised by some developed Members when this agreement was notified exclusively on the basis of the Enabling Clause, which had led to the submission of another notification under Article XXIV of the GATT.  He said that it had not been the practice to contest the legal basis on which developing Members notified their RTAs, especially when doing so in fulfilment of their transparency commitments.  Furthermore, the undertaking to challenge the legal basis of the GCC Customs Union notification under the Enabling Clause should have been made on the basis of a factual presentation considered in the CTD. 
He also recalled that some Members had argued that the Enabling Clause nullified customs unions, which entailed provisions for the reduction or elimination of non-tariff measures.  In his view, to concede to such interpretations would not only have far-reaching legal ramifications but would impinge upon the scope of application of the Enabling Clause.  The matter could clearly not be resolved by any such propositions, as the CTD's TORs mandated it to consider any questions arising from the application of the Enabling Clause and to report to the General Council for appropriate action.  The decision to interpret or determine the scope of the Enabling Clause therefore lay with the General Council, and was not subject to alternate interpretations made in the CTD. 
He added that the GCC Agreement not only established a precedent for dual notifications, as seen from the growing list of dual notifications on the agenda.  It also raised a unique predicament, wherein a Member's accession commitments to notify the Agreement on the basis of Article XXIV was to have precedence over the rights of other Members to notify the same agreement on the basis of the Enabling Clause.  This systemic concern impinged upon the CTD's prerogatives in considering RTAs between developing countries, and also raised procedural inconsistencies as far as the application of the TM for RTAs was concerned. 
It was evident that the TM for RTAs provided no procedures for the consideration of RTAs with a dual notification.  As such, and until the time that a review of the provisional application of the TM had been carried out, the consideration of the GCC notification under the Enabling Clause needed to proceed in the CTD.  This systemic issue could not be resolved by a mere indication that a dual notification should be dealt with by the CRTA.  If an RTA notified under the Enabling Clause was to be considered by the CRTA, it needed to be done according to the procedures and TORs provided by the CTD to the CRTA.  Such TORs were of particular importance, given that the TM for RTAs did not provide for any procedures for the consideration of RTAs with dual notifications.  Finally, he requested that all systemic concerns be prominently addressed while considering the GCC Customs Union dual notification issue.  His delegation looked forward to discussing these issues, as well as their procedural and legal implications, under the present agenda item.
&& The representative of China associated himself with the statements made by India and Egypt.  He recalled that the GCC issue had been discussed, either under the agenda item "Other Business" or under the agenda item "notifications under the Enabling Clause" for more than two years.  He said that there was no intention of prolonging the discussion on this matter and make the GCC issue a standing item on the CTD's agenda.  On the contrary, tireless efforts were being made to find a satisfactory solution so as to appropriately address legitimate concerns, especially regarding the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification.  The purpose of the communication by China, Egypt and India was to help Members to enhance their understanding of the systemic and specific issues arising out of the dual notification of the GCC, with a view to facilitating the achievement of an expeditious resolution.
He stressed that the rights of developing Members under the Enabling Clause needed to be respected.  In this regard, he said that the Enabling Clause was one of the effective tools available to  developing Members to allow them to better integrate into the multilateral trading system and to achieve development goals.  Article 2(c) of the Enabling Clause was being increasingly used by developing Members to foster sound relationships and to engage in trade liberalization with each other, a trend that needed to be encouraged.  In whatever way the GCC issue was ultimately resolved, he said that there should be no negative impact on the rights of developing Members under the Enabling Clause.  He added that the central role of the CTD in development-related issues needed to be maintained and strengthened.  In line with its TORs, the CTD served as a focal point for the consideration and coordination of work on development. The Committee also considered any questions which might arise with regard to either the application or the use of special provisions in the Multilateral Trade Agreements and related Ministerial Decisions in favour of developing Members.  He said that the GCC issue, as a development issue concerning the application of the Enabling Clause, was certainly within the competence of the CTD.  China understood that the CTD needed to consult with relevant bodies in the WTO, but it did not deem acceptable for the CTD to pass its duty on to other WTO bodies.  Finally, he highlighted the importance and urgency of resolving the GCC issue, particularly in view of the presence of two other cases of dual notifications on the agenda for the present meeting.  He called for an acceleration of the work of the Committee so as to provide utmost clarity on both the legal and procedural aspects in relation to these and future notifications of RTAs.  
&& The representative of the United States said that, based on an initial review of the submission by China, Egypt and India, his delegation did not see any specific issues related to the GCC Customs Union notification.  He expressed concern that the GCC Customs Union was being discussed at all, as the GCC item had been dealt with according to procedures and the matter had been resolved.  In the view of his delegation, it was evident that the recent discussions in the CTD and the submission by China, Egypt and India did not concern the GCC Customs Union, and that it was a procedural inaccuracy to continue to list the present sub-item on the agenda in its current form.  Rather, the discussion was systemic in nature, and outside the scope of agenda item C.  The US was willing to hear Members' concerns on systemic issues, but not under the present sub-item.  He also noted that any specific discussions on the rules for RTAs ultimately belonged in the NGR, and not in the CTD or any other Committee. 
&& The representative of the European Union noted with concern that the sub-item relating to the GCC Customs Union notification remained on the CTD's agenda.  He said that Saudi Arabia had re‑notified the Agreement under Article XXIV of the GATT and that the GCC Customs Union was now being considered in the CRTA.  This had been announced by the CTD Chairman at the meeting of 8 December 2009.  The EU, therefore, requested that the present sub-item be removed from the agenda of the CTD.  The recent communication from China, Egypt and India confirmed that some Members insisted on maintaining the present sub-item on the CTD's agenda merely to address their systemic concerns in the CTD.  The EU was ready to discuss the implications of a dual notification of a given agreement under two different legal provisions.  However, any systemic discussion on the clarification of rules governing RTAs – including the scope of the Enabling Clause and GATT Article XXIV – needed to take place in the NGR, where the TM for RTAs had been negotiated and where any subsequent reviews would take place.  The EU looked forward to a discussion on the communication from China, Egypt and India in the NGR.  
&& The representative of Australia said that her delegation would be considering the communication by China, Egypt and India in more detail and might provide further comments in due course.  However, an initial review of the document had led to the conclusion that it related primarily to systemic issues arising from dual notifications.  Australia was of the view that these issues needed to be considered in the NGR, particularly because their resolution would have implications for work in both the CTD and the CRTA.  Australia did not consider the CTD as an appropriate forum to reach decisions that would affect the CTD and other Committees, even on an interim basis.  To the extent that the systemic issues might be considered in the CTD, her delegation wished to see them captured under a more appropriate agenda item, so as to enable effective preparation for discussions.
&& The representative of Japan said that his delegation would need some time to consider the submission by China, Egypt and India.  He said that notification issues should be dealt with in accordance with the TM for RTAs, and should therefore be discussed in the NGR.
&& The representative of Thailand, on behalf of ASEAN, specified that his comments would be preliminary in nature, as the communication from China, Egypt and India was still being analyzed in capitals.  He said that ASEAN welcomed the communication, which sought further clarification on a number of important systemic issues.  The ASEAN countries shared the proponents' view that some of these issues needed to be discussed and clarified.  He cited in particular the legal and procedural implications of the dual notification, as well as the roles of the CTD and the CRTA.  ASEAN reserved the right to comment at a later stage on the appropriate forum to discuss the issue of dual notifications and its implications, although it was of the view that the CTD was the most appropriate forum to discuss development-related issues, including the implementation of special and differential treatment (S&D) provisions and the Enabling Clause.  Finally, he indicated that ASEAN would welcome the opportunity to participate in any informal consultations on this issue. 
&& The representative of India said that the communication under consideration referred to both systemic and specific issues.  He explained that the main specific issue regarding the GCC Customs Union was how to consider the customs union.  This was an issue that had eluded consensus in the CTD for over two years.  India felt that unless this specific issue was resolved, the present sub-item had to remain on the CTD's agenda.  On the suggestion that the NGR would be a more appropriate forum to discuss such matters, he reiterated that the NGR had a mandate on transparency in accordance with paragraph 29 and it indeed considered some systemic issues.  However, a careful reading of the communication would indicate that several systemic issues fell outside the purview of the NGR.  Therefore, the CTD was the best forum to discuss the issues that had been raised. 
&& The representative of Egypt, referring to the request by some delegations to rename the sub‑item under discussion, said that the dual notification precedent had been created by the GCC Customs Union.  In this light, he did not understand the insistence on dropping the reference to the GCC Agreement, since a valid notification under the Enabling Clause had been made.  If any Member wished to have an agenda item concerning systemic issues arising out of dual notifications more generally, they could do so in line with the rules of procedure of the CTD.  In response to some delegations' views that the communication that had been submitted was not specific to the GCC Customs Union, he said that the numerous issues raised had been categorized in the communication in order to help Members better understand the proponents' concerns and the specific issues relating to the GCC Agreement.  Finally, on the best forum for discussion of this matter, he suggested that if there continued to be disagreement on the CTD's mandate and its TORs, clarification should be sought from the General Council. 
&& The representative of China said that there were certainly some systemic implications of the GCC Customs Unions notification.  However, there were also several specific issues contained in the communication under consideration.  How the accession commitments of a Member would impact on the right of other Members within an RTA was a legitimate concern.  He also pointed to the importance of clarifying the relative roles of the CTD and CRTA in the consideration of an RTA.  China saw merit in continuing discussions on these issues in the CTD under the present sub-item.
&& The representative of Canada said that the communication from China, Egypt and India was currently under consideration in his capital.  Canada reserved the right to make comments on it in the future.
&& The Chairman noted that there was no agreement on how to proceed with the dual notification issue.  He said that he wished to remind Members that at the 76th Session of the CTD held on 12 October 2009, the previous Chairman of the CTD had reported to the Committee what had been conveyed to him on a possible way forward on the GCC Customs Union.  The previous Chairman had firstly informed the Committee that the Agreement had been re-notified under GATT Article XXIV and that his understanding now was that the GCC Agreement would be considered in the CRTA in accordance with the provisions of the TM for RTAs, and that the conclusion of this consideration would be reported to the CTD for informational purposes.  The previous Chairman had also clarified that the process for the consideration of the GCC Agreement would be undertaken without prejudice to the rights and obligations of Members under GATT Article XXIV and the Enabling Clause.  On the basis of this way forward, the previous Chairman had proposed that the sub-item concerning the GCC notification be taken off the CTD's agenda and that the CTD revert to this issue once the CRTA had concluded its examination.  
&& The Chairman said that, in the discussion that followed, Members did not seem to disagree with the compromise that had been reached between the parties on the way that the GCC notification should be considered, but did not agree to taking the item off the CTD's agenda.  In a certain way, the issue had got linked to the request for updating the Secretariat's Legal Note on Regional Trade Arrangements under the Enabling Clause, since some Members felt that the systemic issue related to dual notifications needed to be clarified first.  He said that the best way forward would be for Members to reflect on this matter further, after considering the submission by China, Egypt and India in more detail.  He suggested that he could then call an open-ended informal meeting of the CTD. 
&& The representative of India said that his delegation was agreeable to the Chairman holding an open-ended informal meeting.  At the same time, India wished to put on record that the possibilities for consideration of the GCC Customs Union mentioned by the previous Chairman of the CTD were only possibilities, and that no decision had been taken.  Therefore, he asked that this issue also be addressed in the open-ended session. 
&& The representative of the United States said that his delegation was open to further discussion on this issue.  However, he wished to reiterate that the US had not agreed to accept a standing agenda item on this issue, nor would it in the future.  
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation was open to the idea of having an open‑ended informal meeting.  He was aware that at the 76th Session a possible way forward had been presented to the previous CTD Chairman.  However, some Members had continued to state that there were systemic concerns over this possible way forward.  It was for this reason that the present sub‑item  remained on the CTD's agenda.  As both systemic and specific issues with regard to the GCC Agreement remained outstanding, Egypt wished to see the present sub-item maintained on the CTD's agenda. 
&& The Chairman said that his reference to the proceedings of the 76th Session of the CTD reflected his interpretation, which was based on the minutes of the meeting.  He suggested that a distinction be made between the specific issues relating to the GCC Customs Union, and the dual notification issue, which went beyond the GCC Agreement per se.  If China, Egypt and India wished to have an agenda item relating to their communication, he asked whether the item could carry the same name as the title of their communication. 
&& The representative of Angola suggested that it might be better for the Chairman to hold informal consultations on whether the present sub-item should remain on the CTD's agenda, or whether it should be replaced with another agenda item.
&& The representative of Australia expressed concern with the Chairman's proposal for the title of the agenda item.  She said that the systemic issues went beyond the GCC notification, and did not relate specifically to it.  Accordingly, any agenda item that linked the systemic issues specifically to the GCC notification would be problematic for Australia. 
&& The representative of India pointed out that the communication under consideration had been prepared to facilitate a resolution of the issue, and not to replace it as an agenda item.  A decision needed to be taken on how to consider the GCC Customs Union.  Therefore, until this issue was resolved, India did not see any reason for the present sub-item to be removed from the CTD's agenda. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation wished to see the same sub-item appear on the agenda of the next CTD meeting.  While the submission under consideration contained specific issues relating to the GCC notification, he did not believe it was possible to separate what was systemic in nature to what was specific.  He recognized that there had been a number of dual notifications since the GCC notification, but there were also issues specific to the GCC notification that needed to be addressed. 
&& The representative of the United States expressed appreciation for the Chairman's reference to the minutes of the 76th Session.  He said that it was clear that there had been no disagreement on having the CRTA consider the GCC Customs Union.  While the US could take under consideration an agenda item referencing the systemic concerns tied to dual notifications, it could not agree to the reference to "specific" issues related to the GCC.  He added that he would need to consult with his capital for further guidance.  He also reiterated that the communication under consideration appeared to only address systemic concerns, and that the GCC Customs Union notification had already been dealt with according to procedures.
&& The representative of the European Union said that there had been no disagreement at the 76th Session on the way forward in the consideration of the GCC Customs Union, which entailed having the Agreement considered in the CRTA.  While his delegation was open to participating in an informal open-ended meeting, he indicated that it had a problem with keeping any reference to the GCC notification on the CTD's agenda. 
&& The representative of China said that his delegation's position remained unchanged.  Since the issues concerning the GCC notification had not been resolved in the CTD, China wished to maintain the present sub-item on the CTD's agenda.  Furthermore, China could not accept that the sub-item be replaced by an agenda item with the same title as the communication under consideration.  On the suggestion to separate the systemic concerns from the specific issues, he doubted that it would be feasible, since the issues were interlinked.  He indicated, however, that China was open to further discussion in informal consultations. 
&& The representative of Ecuador believed that it was important to maintain the present sub-item on the CTD's agenda.  His delegation had looked at the communication from China, Egypt and India, and felt that some important elements had been highlighted.  While a more in-depth analysis of the submission was being undertaken in his capital, he indicated that his delegation recognized the logic and the foundations of the ideas contained in the submission.  The present discussion highlighted the fact that there were issues that needed to be clarified, in particular with regard to the mandates of the CTD and the NGR, and with regard to any implications for developing Members' rights under the Enabling Clause.  His delegation looked forward to working to clarify these matters in formal and informal meetings.
&& The Chairman said that, having listened to the various interventions, he would start his informal consultations in a small-group format.
&& The representatives of Brazil, Korea and Canada expressed their delegations' interest to participate in the small-group informal consultations. 
&& The Chairman said that any other delegations that wished to participate in the small-group consultations could let the Secretariat know.
&& The representative of India said that he wished to make an intervention regarding the India‑Korea Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA).  He informed the Committee that the CEPA covered trade in goods – including rules of origin, origin procedures, trade facilitation and customs cooperation – trade in services, investment, and bilateral cooperation in such areas as competition policy, intellectual property rights, energy, information and telecommunication technology, and audio-visual production.  With regard to the notification of the CEPA, he said that India had notified the goods part of the Agreement under paragraph 4(a) of the Enabling Clause and the services part under Article V:7(a) of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).  Documents WT/COMTD/N/36 and S/C/N/570 dated 29 September 2010 referred to this notification.  He added that the Agreement had been earlier notified by Korea in documents WT/REG286/N/1 and S/C/N/558 dated 1 July 2010, and wished to clarify in this regard that that Korea's notification under GATT Article XXIV had been done unilaterally and without India's concurrence.  As a developing country Member of the WTO, India had exercised its right to notify the CEPA under the Enabling Clause.
He remarked that several of the systemic issues that were raised in the discussion on the GCC Customs Union notification were relevant to the India-Korea CEPA as well.  The increasing number of dual notifications highlighted the urgency that Members needed to accord in deciding how such RTAs should be considered.  India was hopeful that an early decision on procedures for the consideration of the GCC Customs Union would pave the way for the consideration of the India‑Korea CEPA. 
&& The representative of Korea said that his delegation was of the view that it was desirable for the parties to an RTA to notify the Agreement together, and in the same forum.  However, legally speaking, Members' obligations under the WTO Agreements were to notify, but not necessarily to notify together.  In particular, Korea's interpretation of GATT Article XXIV was that a Member might choose to notify its RTA separately from other parties to the same RTA.  He said that Korea had tried to come to an agreement with the other parties to the ASEAN-Korea Agreement and the India-Korea Agreement on where to notify the RTAs, but had failed.  If the parties to an RTA did not agree on certain issues regarding notification, they were left with two options – either to notify separately, or not to notify at all.  Since Korea took its notification obligations seriously, it had decided to notify separately.  However, Korea did not want the dual notification issue to become controversial either in the CTD or in the CRTA.  His delegation hoped that the concerns arising from dual notifications would be resolved in the appropriate forum, for example the NGR, through close consultations among Members. 
&& The representative of Egypt said that his delegation wanted the CTD to proceed with the factual consideration of the RTAs that had been notified under the Enabling Clause.  However, he noted that a new systemic issue had been voiced by Korea regarding which party to an RTA should notify it.  If the Chairman was to hold any informal consultations other than the ones on the GCC notification, his delegation wished to participate in them. 
&& The representative of the United States reiterated that any systemic issues on the rules for RTAs would have to be discussed in the NGR. 
&& The representative of China asked for clarification from the Chairman or the Secretariat on how the consideration of RTAs with a dual notification would take place. 
&& The Chairman said that these questions would be addressed in the informal consultations that he would be holding. 
&& The Committee took note of all interventions.
DECISION ON TRANSPARENCY FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS
	-	GENERAL COUNCIL DECISION OF 14 DECEMBER 2006 (WT/L/672)
	-	TRANSPARENCY MECHANISM FOR PREFERENTIAL TRADE ARRANGEMENTS - DRAFT 		PROPOSAL BY BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA AND THE UNITED STATES (JOB(08)/103/REV.3)
&& The Chairman said that the 14 December 2006 General Council Decision on "Transparency for Preferential Trade Arrangements", contained in document WT/L/672, had invited the CTD to consider transparency for preferential arrangements under paragraph 2 of the Enabling Clause – other than RTAs – and report back within six months for appropriate action by the General Council.  The General Council had since extended the deadline to its December 2010 meeting.  He recalled that at the General Council meeting in July 2010, he had reported on the important progress that had been made in the small-group consultations that he had been holding.  He had conveyed his optimism that the CTD would shortly be in a position to transmit to the General Council a proposed text on a TM for PTAs.  He now wished to inform Members that further progress had been made on this matter just one working day before the present meeting.  In particular, as an outcome to a small-group consultation that he had held, the proponents – Brazil, China, India and the US – had circulated a third revision to their draft proposal – contained in document JOB(08)/103/Rev.3. 
&& The representative of Brazil, on behalf of the proponents, expressed satisfaction with the conclusion of the negotiations on the TM for PTAs.  He said that an agreement had been reached in principle three years after Brazil and India had jointly tabled a non-paper, circulated in document JOB(07)/142, calling for the establishment of a TM for PTAs.  China and the US had subsequently joined as co-sponsors.  He thanked all the delegations that had constructively participated in the drafting process or had contributed comments and suggestions, and conveyed his appreciation for the efforts of the Chairman.  He also acknowledged the support and assistance provided by the Secretariat. 
He said that the purpose of the Mechanism was to enhance Members' understanding of PTAs, and to increase the transparency of the many existing PTAs, by laying out certain procedural requirements.  Although there were several similarities between the provisional TM for RTAs and the TM for PTAs, he noted that RTAs and PTAs had substantive differences.  They were different in their nature, given that one was reciprocal and the other was unilateral, as well as in their legal basis.  In particular, one was based on GATT Article XXIV and Article 2(c) of the Enabling Clause, while the other was based on Articles 2(a), (b) and (d) of the Enabling Clause as well as on additional provisions.  The two types of arrangements were also different in their operation and in other aspects, which entailed different notification and reporting obligations.  In the text under consideration, he highlighted that the notification and reporting requirements had been specified so as to keep the burden on the notifying Members to a minimum, without reducing the necessary level of ambition of the TM.  The text also took into account the concerns of developing countries, and especially the beneficiaries of PTAs, in relation to particular technical constraints, as well as in relation to requests for adequate participation in the consideration process.  He added that the text reflected suggestions and inputs received from a large number of delegations in both small-group and open-ended meetings.  The proponents believed that the text was ready to be approved by the CTD and subsequently submitted to the General Council for adoption.
&& The representative of the United States supported Brazil's comments.  He thanked the Chairman for his leadership in the informal consultation process, as well as Members for their constructive engagement.  In addition to the other proponents, he made specific reference in this regard to the EU, the ACP Group, El Salvador and Barbados.  The US supported the conclusion of the work on the TM for PTAs in time for the upcoming General Council meeting of 21 October, where it was hoped that the TM for PTAs could be adopted. 
&& The representative of India joined Brazil and the US in thanking the Members that had participated in the small-group meetings.  He remarked that the growing size of the small-group meetings spoke of the kind of appeal that the PTAs TM had for Members.  India looked forward to an early adoption of the text under consideration.
&& The representative of China supported the interventions of the previous speakers, and expressed optimism that the mandate given to the CTD could be fulfilled in time for the next meeting of the General Council. 
&& The representative of the European Union expressed appreciation for the successful conclusion of the small-group informal consultations called by the Chairman, in which the EU had been actively engaged.  He also thanked the co-sponsors for having constructively engaged with Members and for having shown flexibility when needed.  He said that part of the package which was being presented to the membership concerned paragraph 26 of document JOB(08)/103/Rev.3, which had appeared as paragraph 27 in the previous revision of the document.  A compromise had been brokered by the Chairman on the reference to the TM for RTAs, which had disappeared from the third revision of the text.  The compromise was clear and simple.  In particular, the EU and all co-sponsors individually would, at the time when the TM for PTAs was adopted in the General Council, make the following statement for the record:  "Delegation X recalls that during the negotiations on the TM for PTAs, it was considered that a decision on its permanent application would take into account the status of the TM for RTAs".  While considerable flexibility had been demonstrated on all sides, the EU had had to come a long way before being able to accept the final text.  In order for the package to not unravel, he said that his delegation trusted that the statements by the co-sponsors and by the EU at the General Council would be noted by the membership and would not give rise to debate or counter‑statements. 
Finally, he reminded Members that, as of 1 December 2009, the Lisbon Treaty had entered into force.  In light of the Treaty, the EU was still considering the full implications as to its internal constitutional procedures.  While his delegation sincerely hoped to conclude internal procedures before the 21 October meeting of the General Council, he noted that there may not be enough time to conclude the necessary internal procedures before this date. 
&& The representative of Chinese Taipei highlighted the importance of establishing a TM for PTAs.  He expressed his delegation's wish that the CTD could agree to a text which could be forwarded to the General Council in due time.  Chinese Taipei remained committed to working closely with the Chairman to that end.
&& The representative of Japan said that the TM for PTAs would play an important role in enhancing transparency.  Japan welcomed the current revised text and supported the adoption of the Mechanism by the General Council. 
&& The representative of El Salvador said that delegations had showed the right determination to compromise in order to find a solution.  El Salvador supported the adoption of the TM for PTAs by the General Council.  The Mechanism would allow the WTO, and in particular the CTD, to consider issues relating to transparency in PTAs in a practical way. 
&& The representative of Canada expressed his support for the TM for PTAs.  He said that Canada sought clarification as to whether changes to the Harmonized System that did not affect tariffs were to be notified under the Mechanism. 
&& The representative of Brazil, in response to the intervention by Canada, said that many questions would have to be answered as the Mechanism began to be implemented.  However, he felt that a case such as the one described by Canada would not have to be notified under the Mechanism. 
&& The representative of Saint Lucia, on behalf of the ACP Group, expressed his appreciation for the constructive approach that had been adopted to finding solutions to the concerns that had been raised by some delegations.  He looked forward to an expeditious adoption of the PTAs TM.
&& The representative of Venezuela said that she would need to hear back from her capital on the text under consideration.  She hoped to have satisfactory results before the General Council meeting of 21 October.
&& The representative of New Zealand said that her delegation would endorse the text to be adopted by the General Council. 
&& The Chairman said that it was clear that the text as contained in document JOB(08)/103/Rev.3 could be approved by the CTD.  He said that the text would now be issued as a formal CTD document, and would be transmitted to the General Council in time for its meeting of 21 October.
It was so agreed.
REVIEW OF STEPS TAKEN TO PROVIDE DUTY-FREE AND QUOTA-FREE MARKET ACCESS TO LEAST-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
&& The Chairman said that an item concerning the Hong Kong Decision on duty-free and quota‑free (DFQF) market access for LDCs had been on the CTD's agenda since early 2006.  Under this item, delegations had provided information on the steps they were taking, or had already taken, to provide DFQF market access to LDCs.  Written communications by some Members had also been considered.  The CTD had to date undertaken four of its mandated annual reviews of the implementation of the Hong Kong Decision.
&& The representative of India said that he wished to provide an update on India's Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for LDCs.  Taking into consideration the exhortations made in the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration, India was the first developing country to announce a comprehensive DFQF scheme for preferential market access for all LDCs.  The DFTP Scheme for the LDCs had been announced by the Indian Prime Minister on the occasion of the India-Africa Forum Summit in April 2008.  The scheme covered all 49 LDCs, including LDCs outside the African continent and LDCs that were not WTO Members.  Utmost care had been taken to ensure that the DFTP Scheme was not a mere token measure, but one which provided effective and substantial market access to products of export interest to LDCs.  
The Scheme was comprehensive, simple and non-reciprocal.  It provided preferential market access on tariff lines that comprised 92.5 per cent of global exports of all LDCs.  Products of immediate interest to LDCs which were covered under the DFTP Scheme included cotton, cocoa, aluminium ores, copper ores, cashew nuts, cane-sugar, ready-made garments, fish fillets and non‑industrial diamonds.  Only 6 per cent of lines were in the exclusion list of the Scheme.  The rules of origin stipulated a change in tariff heading plus 30 per cent domestic value addition.  The Scheme was procedurally simple to operate and required individual LDCs to submit a letter of intent and the list of agencies or officials authorized to issue the certificate of origin.  To date, 25 LDCs had submitted letters of intent, of which 18 had submitted details of agencies which would be responsible for issuing certificates of origin.  
India would in due course carry out additional outreach activities in order to disseminate the benefits of the Scheme for LDCs.  India was also ready to dovetail the Scheme with other technical assistance activities that it provided to LDCs.  For example, the Centre for WTO Studies in New Delhi would be organizing a two-week capacity building programme on WTO issues for trade ministry officials from all LDCs.  The course would be funded by the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme.  India urged the remaining LDCs to finalize their internal processes and to intimate to India their willingness to benefit from the Scheme.  Given India's large market and the demand for products of interest to LDCs, his delegation was confident that the Scheme would play a key role in ensuring that the share of LDCs in India's imports grew at an accelerated pace.
&& The representative of Brazil said that Brazil had decided in December 2009 to grant DFQF access for products from LDCs.  Brazil's programme would initially cover 80 per cent of tariff lines and would be subsequently expanded in successive instalments until 100 per cent of tariff lines were covered.  For this purpose, Brazil had created an inter-ministerial working group that had been meeting on a regular basis to discuss the implementation of the programme.  The two main issues under discussion were the legal instrument that would be used to incorporate the programme in Brazil's legal system, and the expansion of the scheme beyond 80 per cent of tariff lines right from the start.  Since more detailed discussions would be required, Brazil had not yet announced the implementation of the programme.  The CTD would be kept informed of the progress made in the inter-ministerial working group and of the eventual implementation of the scheme.
&& The representative of Zambia, on behalf of the LDC Group, thanked delegations for the updates that had been provided on their preferential schemes for LDCs.  She said that there was no doubt that the enhancement of market access was a critical step in the integration of LDCs into the global economy, and in this light thanked those Members that were providing enhanced market access for products originating from LDCs.  She recalled that during the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference, a commitment had been made for Members to notify on an annual basis the implementation of the schemes adopted under Decision 36 contained in Annex F for the CTD to annually review the steps taken to provide DFQF market access to the LDCs and to report to the General Council for appropriate action.  While the LDCs welcomed and appreciated the steps that had been taken by several Members to enhance market access for products originating from LDCs, she noted that there was still more work to be done by the developed countries and developing countries in a position to do so to fully and effectively implement the decision, including the simplification and transparency of rules of origin.  The LDC Group noted with concern that very limited information since the last CTD meeting had been given by delegations on the steps taken.  The LDCs called upon Members to live up to the spirit and letter of the mandate in the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration.
She went on to say that the LDC Group looked forward to engaging constructively with Members on the outstanding issues relating to DFQF market access and rules of origin.  She also highlighted the need for appropriate technical assistance and capacity building support to LDCs.  To this end, the LDC Group appreciated the contributions made by various cooperating partners to the Doha Development Agenda Global Trust Fund, the Enhanced Integrated Framework and other bilateral arrangements targeted at enhancing the capacities of LDCs.
&& The representative of China said that, as of 1 July 2010, China was granting zero-tariff treatment on 4,762 tariff lines for products imported from the 33 LDCs that had completed the exchange of letters for that purpose.  A further eight LDCs would enjoy the same treatment once the exchange of letters was completed.  The relevant information could be found on the website of the Chinese Ministry of Finance:   HYPERLINK "www.mof.gov.cn" www.mof.gov.cn.  China had identified the tariff lines in question together with its LDC partners, targeting the items on which LDCs had demonstrated actual and potential export capacity.  The tariff lines accounted for 98.2 per cent of all LDCs' exports to China in value terms in 2008.  China intended to continue to expand the scope of preferences to the LDCs with the aim of achieving the final objective of including 95 per cent of tariff lines under zero-tariff treatment. 
&& The representative of the European Union said that the European Commission had been working since 2005 on a more development-friendly, horizontal approach to the EU's rules of origin.  The new template for developing countries would be the rules of origin that would apply from 1 January 2011 to the EU's Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) scheme.  The new rules of origin would be more relaxed than the previous ones, especially for LDCs.  In the context of the Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs), he said that rules of origin were negotiated individually for each EPA.  These encouraged the intra-regional processing of trade.  For example, a Caribbean baker could source flour from around the region and still export at preferential rate to the EU.  The EU was ready to have experts from Brussels give further explanations, if Members so wished. 
&& The Committee took note of all the interventions. 
PARAGRAPH 51 OF THE DOHA DECLARATION ON IDENTIFYING AND DEBATING DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF THE NEGOTIATIONS, IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVE OF HAVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT APPROPRIATELY REFLECTED (WT/COMTD/W/143/REV.4)
&& The Chairman said that Members had agreed earlier in 2010 that the Secretariat would update its paper on the Developmental Aspects of the Doha Round of Negotiations.  The update had now been completed, and had been circulated as document WT/COMTD/W/143/Rev.4.  He said that Members had in the past recognized the value of the paper.  In this regard, an update was welcome in order to reflect developments in the negotiations since the last revision of the paper in May 2007.  
&& The representative of the United States thanked the Secretariat for its work in presenting the state of play of the negotiations and the various positions of Members in a succinct and balanced manner.  The Secretariat paper was a useful document which showed the degree to which development considerations permeated all aspects of the WTO's work.  He said that he wished to make a few points about the US' objectives in the Doha Round, and the US' views on the process.  He began by noting that the US was committed to achieving new market opening in the Doha Round that would generate new trade flows for all countries.  This was how trade could best contribute to long‑term economic growth and development.  The US strongly believed that new commitments that expanded open markets and promoted the rule of law were not anti-development.  For the Doha Round to be a true development round, and to meet the Doha mandate, the outcome would have to deliver meaningful benefits in terms of new market opening and economic opportunities.  The US had been continually engaged with Members in various configurations, and would continue to do so to ensure a strong conclusion of the Round that resulted in the new economic growth necessary to spur development, particularly in the poorest countries.
He went on to say that the Secretariat paper rightly put the benefits of substantial tariff reductions and liberalization foremost in its discussions of the possible gains to developing countries.  In the US' view, the core contribution to development in the Doha Round would come through global market-opening and the creation of new trade flows.  However, there were some clarifications and corrections that were deemed necessary in the Secretariat document. 
While the US appreciated the Secretariat's initiative to try to quantify the specific benefits that could be accomplished through the Round, he cautioned that this was not possible at this time, given in particular the large number of unknowns in the ultimate results of the Round.  For example, in the studies cited in the paper, there was no accounting of how the flexibilities currently under discussion in the draft agriculture and non-agricultural market access (NAMA) negotiating texts would affect overall market opening in these areas.  The US agreed with the basic premise that the potential gains from the results of the Round could be significant, if Members built upon what was currently on the table.  However, due to data methodology issues, in particular in the study by the Peterson Institute for International Economics, the US did not believe that it was accurate or appropriate to include dollar-figure estimates from this study in a Secretariat document.  He, therefore, requested that the specific data drawn from this study in paragraphs 31 and 51 be deleted. 
With respect to the agriculture section of the paper, he noted that paragraph 13 stated that for most issues the modalities could be considered "stable".  This could be read to imply that most of the agriculture negotiating text was agreed, which was not an accurate reflection of the status of the negotiations.  The US believed that the discussion of the status of the negotiations should remain factual rather than speculative, and that this sentence needed to be deleted.  The discussion in the Secretariat’s paper of the issues currently under review in the negotiating sessions provided sufficient status of the negotiating text.  With respect to the second sentence of paragraph 28, for accuracy and clarity purposes, the US requested that the quotation from the Hong Kong Declaration be expanded.  In particular, it was requested that the sentence should be modified to read:  "All Members involved have emphasized that they remain committed to finding a solution that addresses the issue of cotton 'ambitiously, expeditiously and specifically, … in relation to all trade-distorting policies affecting the sector in all three pillars of market access, domestic support and export competition', consistent with the commitments made at the Hong Kong Ministerial Conference in December 2005".
In the NAMA section of the report, the US requested that the phrase "included possible landing zones in some areas" be deleted from the second sentence of paragraph 38, since the reference to "laid out possible modalities" was a more accurate description.  Pointing to the third sentence of paragraph 39, he believed that there was a typo, and that one reference to "developing countries" needed to be changed to "developed countries".  With respect to the first sentence of paragraph 40, the US requested that the text "progress made" be replaced with "current status".  Given the draft nature of the modalities, the US found the reference to progress to be too forward leaning.  
&& The representative of Zambia, on behalf of the LDC Group said that the Secretariat paper provided a precise overview of the negotiations, highlighting the areas of interest to developing countries and LDCs and the possible gains in the various negotiating areas.  The issues highlighted by the Secretariat with regard to the possible gains for LDCs, if a development-oriented Round was concluded, were not new.  It was precisely because of these reasons that the LDCs continued to call for the conclusion of the Round and for an early implementation of some pressing issues, including decisions relating to DFQF market access, the simplification of rules of origin, an immediate and lasting solution to the issue of cotton, and the conclusion of the modalities for the special treatment of LDCs in the services negotiations.  There could be no sustainable development for LDCs if the issues of interest to them, as highlighted in the Secretariat paper, were not dealt with effectively.  In this light, she said that the conclusion of the Round should not be delayed any further.
&& The Chairman requested Members to submit comments on the Secretariat paper in writing. The Secretariat would then prepare a revision to the document. He proposed that the Committee take note of all interventions.  
It was so agreed.
OTHER BUSINESS
No matter was raised under "Other Business".
The meeting was adjourned. 


__________
 && As the Chairman indicated at the beginning of the meeting, the appropriate document for consideration under this item was JOB(08)/103/Rev.3, and not the Rev.2 version which appeared on the draft agenda.
 The text was circulated in document WT/COMTD/71.

WT/COMTD/M/80  Page  PAGE 4



	WT/COMTD/M/80  	Page  PAGE 3



 

 

 

 



